CODE OF ORDINANCES 
CITY OF 
DENISON, TEXAS 
____________ 
Adopted: November 20, 1989 
Effective: November 20, 1989 
____________ 
Published in 1989 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF DENISON, TEXAS 
(2013) 
____________ 
Jared Johnson 
Mayor 
____________ 
David Spindle 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Michael Baecht 
Ken Brawley 
Janet Gott 
Matt Hanley 
Bill Malvern, Sr. 
City Council 
____________ 
Robert Hanna 
City Manager 
____________ 
Cheryl Green 
Interim City Attorney Secretary 
____________ 
Carrie Hart 
City Secretary 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF DENISON, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Ben Munson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dorothy Wilson 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Dena Fox 
Dixie Lee Medford 
Dan Mooney 
Richard Riggins 
Nolie Wilson 
City Council 
____________ 
Larry Cruise 
City Manager 
____________ 
Tom Akins 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Barbara D. Forrest 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Denison, Texas of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1965 Code, as supplemented through June 6, 1988, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1965 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2 and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date periodically. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Successfully keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, and Ron McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Tom Akins, City Attorney, Barbara D. Forrest, City Clerk, and the other members of the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NUMBER 3185 
An Ordinance of the City Council of the City of Denison, Texas, Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Denison, Texas; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing A Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; And Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Denison, Texas: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled, "Code of Ordinances, City of Denison, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 28, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 7, 1989, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000) for violations of all such rules, ordinances and police regulations that govern fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, nor exceeding five hundred dollars ($500) for all other violations. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City Council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisance, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 7, 1989, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective from and after the date of its passage. 
    Section 8. It is hereby officially found and determined that the meeting at which this Ordinance was passed and approved was open to the public as required by law, and that public notice of the time, place, and purpose of said meeting was given, as required by Article 6252-17, Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, as amended. 
And it is so Ordered. 
On motion by Councilwoman Medford, seconded by Councilman Wilson, the above and foregoing Ordinance was passed and approved on this the 20th day of November, 1989, by the following vote: 
Ayes: All councilmembers present voted aye. Noes: Abstentions:  
At regular meeting, November 20, 1989. 
/s/ DOROTHY WILSON, MAYOR PRO TEM 
  _____ 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Barbara D. Forrest, City Clerk 
  _____ 
APPROVED: 
/s/ Thomas C. Akins, City Attorney 
  _____ 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. Supp. No. 56 4562  5-20-10 Include 56 4563  6- 7-10 Include 56 4564  6- 7-10 Include 56 4567  6-21-10 Include 56 4569  8- 2-10 Include 56 4582 12-13-10 Include 56 4584 12-13-10 Omit 56 Supp. No. 57 4590  1-17-11 Include 57 4603  7-18-11 Include 57 4604  7-18-11 Include 57 4610  8-15-11 Include 57 4612  9- 6-11 Include 57 4617 10- 3-11 Include 57 4616 10- 3-11 Omit 57 Supp. No. 58 4624 10-17-11 Include 58 4628 12-12-11 Omit 58 4629 12-12-11 Include 58 4631  1-17-12 Include 58 4632  1-17-12 Include 58 Supp. No. 59 11-21-11 Include 59 4643  3- 5-12 Include 59 4650  4-16-12 Include 59 4651  4-16-12 Include 59 Supp. No. 60 4665 10-15-12 Include 60 Supp. No. 61 4678  2-18-13 Include 61 4679  2-18-13 Omit 61 4681  2-18-13 Include 61 4682  3-18-13 Omit 61 4685  3-18-13 Include 61 Supp. No. 62 4686  4-15-13 Include 62 4701  6-17-13 Include 62 4716 11-18-13 Include 62 4717 11-18-13 Include 62 4718 11-18-13 Include 62 4728  2- 3-14 Include 62 4733  2-17-14 Include 62 4736  3- 3-14 Include 62 Supp. No. 63 4740  4-21-14 Include 63 4744  5-19-14 Include 63 4745  6- 2-14 Include 63 4753  9- 2-14 Include 63 4759 10- 6-14 Omit 63 Supp. No. 64 4773  3-16-15 Include 64 4774  3-16-15 Include 64 4775  3-16-15 Include 64 Supp. No. 65 4781  4-16-15 Include 65 4800 12-14-15 Include 65 4802 12-14-15 Include 65 4804  1- 4-16 Include 65 Supp. No. 66 4809  4-18-16 Include 66 4813  5-16-16 Include 66 4815  6- 6-16 Include 66 4817  6-20-16 Include 66 4818  7-18-16 Include 66 4820  7-18-16 Include 66 4821  7-18-16 Include 66 4827  8- 1-16 Include 66 4830  8- 1-16 Include 66 4833  9- 6-16 Include 66 4838  9-19-16 Include 66 4841 10- 3-16 Include 66 Supp. No. 67 4697  5-20-13 Include 67 4857  2- 6-17 Include 67 4861  4- 3-17 Include 67 4862  4- 3-17 Include 67 4863  4-17-17 Include 67 4866  5- 1-17 Include 67 4868  5- 1-17 Include 67 4869  5- 1-17 Include 67 4870  5- 1-17 Include 67 4872  5- 1-17 Include 67 4874  5-15-17 Include 67 4876  5-15-17 Include 67 4879  6- 5-17 Include 67 4881  6-19-17 Include 67 4882  6-19-17 Include 67 4883  6-19-17 Include 67 4887  8- 7-17 Include 68 4890  8- 7-17 Include 68 4891  8- 7-17 Include 68 4892  8- 7-17 Include 68 4893  8- 7-17 Include 68 4894  8- 7-17 Include 68 4895  8-21-17 Include 68 4896  8-21-17 Include 68 4897  8-21-17 Include 68 4901  9- 5-17 Include 68 4902  9-18-17 Include 68 4911 10- 2-17 Include 68 4921 12-11-17 Include 68 4924 12-11-17 Include 68 4888  8- 7-17 Include 69 4926  1-16-18 Include 69 4928  2- 5-18 Include 69 4929  2- 5-18 Include 69 4930  2- 5-18 Include 69 4931  2-19-18 Include 69 4937  3-19-18 Include 69 4946  5- 7-18 Include 69 4953  7-16-18 Include 69 4958  8- 6-18 Include 69 4959  8-20-18 Include 69 4964  9-17-18 Include 69 4967 10- 1-18 Include 69 4971 10- 1-18 Include 69 4972 11- 5-18 Include 69 4974 12-10-18 Include 69 4975 12-10-18 Include 69 4976 12-10-18 Include 69  
CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the City of Denison Home Rule Charter adopted at an election held on April 1, 1975, as officially declared by Ord. No. 1857, adopted April 7, 1975. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Amendments have been included and are indicated by a history note immediately following the amended section. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.01. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the City of Denison, Grayson County, Texas, residing within its corporate limits as heretofore or hereafter established, are hereby constituted and shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the "City of Denison", hereinafter referred to as the "city", with such powers, privileges, rights, duties, and immunities as are herein provided. 
Sec. 1.02. - General powers. 
    The city shall have all the powers granted to cities by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, together with all of the implied powers necessary to carry into execution such granted powers. The city may use a corporate seal; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may cooperate with the government of the State of Texas or any agency or political subdivision thereof or with the federal government or agency thereof to accomplish any lawful purpose for the advancement of the interest, welfare, health, morals, comfort, safety, and convenience of the city and its inhabitants; may acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any municipal purpose in fee simple or in any lesser interest or estate by purchase, gift, devise, lease, or condemnation and, subject to the provisions of this charter and the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage, improve, and control such property as may now or hereafter be owned by it; may pass ordinances and enact such regulations as may be expedient for the maintenance of the good government, order, and peace of the city and the welfare, health, morals, comfort, safety, and convenience of its inhabitants. The powers hereby conferred upon the city shall include, but are not restricted to, the powers enumerated in Chapter 147, Page 307, Acts of the Thirty-third Legislature of the State of Texas, Regular Session, 1913, as heretofore or hereafter amended, all of which are hereby adopted. In addition to the powers enumerated herein and subject only to the limitations imposed by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas and by this charter, the city shall have, without the necessity of expressed enumeration in this charter, each and every power which by virtue of Article XI, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Texas, the people of the city are empowered by election to grant or to confer upon the city by expressly and specifically granting and enumerating the same herein. All such powers, whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised and enforced in the manner prescribed in this charter, or when not prescribed herein, in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance of the council. 
Sec. 1.03. - Form of government. 
    The municipal government provided by this charter shall be and shall be known as "Council-Manager Government." Pursuant to the provisions of and subject only to the limitations imposed by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas and by this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in and exercised by an elective council, hereinafter referred to as "the council", which shall enact legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and appoint the city manager who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city. 
Sec. 1.04. - Streets and public property. 
    The city shall have exclusive dominion, control, and jurisdiction in, upon, over, and under the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, public squares, and public ways within the corporate limits of the city and in, upon, over, and under all public property of the city. With respect to each and every public street, sidewalk, alley, highway, public square, public park, or other public way within the corporate limits of the city, the city shall have the power to establish, maintain, improve, alter, abandon, or vacate the same, to regulate, establish, or change the grade thereof, to control and regulate the use thereof, and to abate and remove in a summary manner any encroachment thereon. 
Sec. 1.05. - Street development and improvement. 
    The city shall have the power to develop and improve, or cause to be developed and improved, any and all public streets, sidewalks, alleys, highways, and other public ways within the corporate limits of the city by laying out, opening, narrowing, widening, straightening, extending, lighting, and establishing building lines along the same; by purchasing, condemning, and taking property therefor; by filling, grading, raising, lowering, paving, repaving, and repairing the same in a permanent manner; and by constructing, reconstructing, altering, repairing, and realigning curbs, gutters, drains, sidewalks, culverts, and other appurtenances and incidentals in connection with such development and improvement herein authorized, or any combination or part thereof. The cost of such development and improvement may be paid partly or entirely by assessments levied as a lien against the property abutting thereon and against the owners thereof, and such assessments may be levied in any amount and under any procedure not prohibited by the Laws of the State of Texas; provided, that no assessment shall be made against such land or owners in excess of the enhancement in value of such property occasioned by such improvement. 
    If improvements be ordered constructed in any part of any such area used or occupied by the tracks or facilities of any railway or public utility, the city council shall have the power to assess the whole cost of improvements in such area and the added costs of improvements in areas adjacent thereto made necessary by such use or occupancy against such railway or public utility, and shall have power by ordinance to provide for the enforcement of such assessment. 
    As an alternate and cumulative method of developing, improving, and paving any and all public streets, sidewalks, alleys, highways, and other public ways within its corporate limits, the city shall have the power and authority to proceed in accordance with Chapter 106, Page 489, Acts of the Fortieth Legislature of the State of Texas, First Called Session, 1927, the same being compiled as Article 1105b of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, as heretofore or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 1.06. - Change of boundaries and annexation of territory. 
    The council shall have the power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of the city and to provide for the alteration and extension of said boundary limits, the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to the city, and the detachment or disannexation of territory, with or without the consent of the owners and inhabitants of the territory annexed, detached, or disannexed, in any manner not inconsistent with the procedural rules prescribed by Chapter 447, Article 1, Acts of the Fifty-eighth Legislature of the State of Texas, Regular Session, 1963, the same being the Municipal Annexation Act, compiled as Article 970a of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, as heretofore or hereafter amended. Upon the final passage of any ordinance annexing territory, the corporate limits of the city shall thereafter include the territory annexed; and when any additional territory has been annexed, the same shall be a part of the city and the property situated therein shall bear its pro rata part of the taxes levied by the city, and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all of the rights and privileges of all citizens and shall be bound by the acts and ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the city. Upon the final passage of any ordinance detaching or disannexing territory from the city, the corporate limits of the city shall be reduced by the territory detached or disannexed. 
ARTICLE II. - THE COUNCIL 

Sec. 2.01. - Number, selection, and term of office. 
    The council shall be composed of seven (7) persons, each of whom, unless sooner removed under the provisions of this charter or the Laws of the State of Texas, shall serve for a term of three (3) years, except that for elections prior to the regular elections to be held on the first Saturday in April, 1987, the council shall be elected and serve the respective terms set forth in the immediately following paragraphs of this section. 
    The members of the council shall be elected to and occupy a place on the council, such places being numbered one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4), five (5), six (6), and seven (7), respectively. 
    At the regular election to be held on the first Saturday in April, 1985, one council member, who is a bona fide resident thereof and who possesses the qualifications prescribed by this chapter, shall be elected by majority by each of the four single member districts of the City of Denison, Texas, as said districts are defined in Section 2.03 of this charter. Said council members elected to places one (1) and two (2) shall serve for a term of three (3) years. Said council members elected to places three (3) and four (4) shall serve for a term of two (2) years and one (1) year, respectively. 
    At the same election to be held on the first Saturday in April, 1985, the mayor, who is a bona fide resident and who possesses the qualifications prescribed by this charter, shall be elected by a majority vote of the city at large. Said mayor shall serve for a term of three (3) years. 
    At the regular election to be held on the first Saturday in April, 1986, two council members at large, who are bona fide residents and who possess the qualifications prescribed by this charter, shall be elected by a majority vote of the city at large to fill places five (5) and six (6) on the council. Said council members at large shall serve for a term of one (1) year and three (3) years, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 2793, § 1, 12-17-84) 
Sec. 2.02. - Limitation on number of consecutive terms. 
    No person shall be elected to or be eligible to serve on the council for more than two regular three-year terms in succession. 
(Ord. No. 2793, § 1, 12-17-84) 
Sec. 2.03. - Creation of districts; qualifications for candidacy and election. 
    The city council shall, from time to time create, by ordinance, four (4) single-member districts, which shall be known as places one (1), two (2), three (3) and four (4), respectively. Such districts shall be created so that each will contain, as nearly as possible, a population equivalent to the others, according to the latest available census data. The council members occupying places one (1), two (2), three (3) and four (4) on the city council shall be a resident of their corresponding single-member districts. The council members occupying places five (5), six (6) and seven (7) shall be elected on an at-large basis by all qualified voters of the city. The person occupying place seven (7) on the council shall be the Mayor of the City of Denison. 
    No person shall be eligible to be a candidate for election to, or to occupy a place on the city council for places 1, 2, 3 or 4, unless at that time such person is a citizen and qualified voter of the State of Texas and the City of Denison, and is further a bona fide resident of the area of the city designated as comprising that place for which election is sought. Should any such person elected to or occupying places 1, 2, 3 or 4 ever move his residence from the area or district of the city from which he was elected, his office or position shall thereby be automatically declared vacant, and such vacant position shall thereafter be filled by appointment by the city council of another bona fide resident of the area or district to serve until the next regular municipal election. 
    No person shall be eligible to be a candidate for election to, or to occupy a place on the city council for places 5, 6 or 7 unless at that time such person is a citizen and qualified voter of the State of Texas and the City of Denison. A member of the council ceasing to possess all the requirements for occupancy of a place on the council shall immediately forfeit his or her office. 
    No member of the council shall hold any other office or employment under the city government while a member of said council nor shall any member hold any paid employment under the city government within two (2) years thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2793, § 1, 12-17-84) 
Sec. 2.04. - Compensation. 
    Members of the council shall receive remuneration or compensation for the performance of their official duties at the rate of $50.00 each per month beginning April 1, 1986, with a like payment being due and payable to each council member on the first day of each month thereafter during his or her term of office. Members of the council shall also be entitled to all necessary expenses they incur in the performance of their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2793, § 1, 12-17-84) 
Sec. 2.05. - Mayor and mayor pro tem. 
    The mayor shall occupy and be elected to place 7 on the city council on an at-large basis by the voters of the city and shall serve for a term of three (3) years unless sooner removed under the provisions of this charter or the Laws of the State of Texas. The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the council and shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes, for the purposes of receiving service of civil process, for emergency purposes, and for military purposes, but he shall have no regular administrative duties. The mayor, as a member of the council, shall be entitled to vote upon all matters considered by the council, but shall have no veto power. 
    Within thirty (30) days after the regular municipal election and any applicable run-off election, the council shall by election designate one of its members, other than the mayor, as mayor pro tem, who shall serve in such capacity during the pleasure of the council. The mayor pro tem shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor and shall have power to perform every act the mayor could perform if present. 
(Ord. No. 2793, § 1, 12-17-84) 
Sec. 2.06. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the council arising for any cause shall be filled by a majority vote of the remaining members for the unexpired term or until the next city general election. The person appointed to fill such vacancy shall possess all qualifications required for the office. In all cases the vacancy shall be filled by election at the next succeeding city general election for the remaining year of the unexpired term or for the next full term, as the case may be. 
Sec. 2.07. - Powers of the council. 
    All powers and authority which are expressly or impliedly conferred on or possessed by the city shall be vested in and exercised by the council; provided, however, the council shall have no power to exercise those powers which are expressly conferred upon other city officers by this charter. 
Sec. 2.08. - Investigative body. 
    The council shall have the power to inquire into the official conduct of any department, agency, office, officer or employee of the city, and for that purpose shall have the power to administer oaths, subpoena witnesses, compel the production of books, papers and other evidence material to the inquiry. The council shall provide by ordinance penalties for contempt in failing or refusing to obey any such subpoena or to produce any such books, papers, or other evidence, and shall have the power to punish such contempt in the manner provided by such ordinance. 
Sec. 2.09. - Interference in personnel matters. 
    Neither the council nor any of its members shall instruct or request the city manager or any of his subordinates to appoint to or remove from office or employment any person except with respect to those offices which are to be filled by appointment by the council under the provisions of this charter. Except for the purposes of inquiry and investigation, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service of the city solely through the city manager and shall not give orders to any of the manager's subordinates, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 2.10. - City clerk. 
    The city manager shall appoint the city clerk. Such appointment shall be subject to confirmation by the council. The city clerk shall keep the records of the council and shall have such other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned to him by this charter, the council, and the city manager. The city clerk, with the approval of the city manager, shall appoint such assistants to him as may be authorized by the council. 
Sec. 2.11. - Meetings of the council. 
    The city council shall meet regularly at such times as may be prescribed by its rules, but not less frequently than once each calendar month. Such regular meeting or meetings shall be held at the city hall unless the city council shall by ordinance or resolution designate another convenient place within the city. 
    Special meetings may be called at any time by the city clerk upon request of the mayor, the city manager, or a majority of the members of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2793, § 1, 12-17-84) 
Sec. 2.12. - Rules of procedure. 
    The council shall by ordinance determine its own rules and order of business. A majority of the council qualified and serving shall constitute a quorum for all meetings for the transaction of all business, but no action of the council shall be of any force or effect unless it is adopted by the favorable vote of a majority of the members of council qualified and serving, unless otherwise provided by this charter. The council may adopt such rules and prescribe such penalties as it may deem proper to enforce the attendance of its members at all regular and special meetings of the council or its committees. Minutes of all meetings of the council shall be taken and recorded and such minutes shall constitute a public record. 
Sec. 2.13. - Procedure to enact legislation. 
    The council shall legislate by ordinance. The enacting clause of every ordinance shall be, "BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF DENISON." The city attorney shall approve every ordinance adopted by the council, as to its legality, or shall file with the city clerk his written legal objections thereto. Evidence of approval of an ordinance by the city attorney may be by notation on the ordinance itself or by separate paper or instrument. Every ordinance enacted by the council shall be signed by the mayor, the mayor pro tem, or by two members of council and shall be filed with and recorded by the city clerk. Every ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its final passage, unless otherwise provided by law or by the terms of such ordinance. 
Sec. 2.14. - Publication of ordinances. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, the city clerk shall give notice of the enactment of every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, or forfeiture for any violation of any of its provisions, and of every other ordinance required by law or this charter to be published, by causing said ordinance, or its caption and penalty, to be published at least one time within ten days after final passage thereof in the official newspaper of the city. The affidavit of publication by the publisher of such newspaper taken before any officer authorized to administer oaths and filed with the city clerk shall be conclusive proof of the legal publication and promulgation of such ordinance in all courts. 
Sec. 2.15. - Code of ordinances. 
    The council shall have the power to cause all general ordinances of the city to be compiled and printed in code form. Every general ordinance enacted subsequent to such codification shall be enacted as an amendment to the code. The council shall cause all general ordinances to be codified, recodified and reprinted whenever in its discretion such is deemed desirable, or when such codification or recodification is required by law. When adopted by the council, the printed codes of general ordinances contemplated by this section shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of such code or any part thereof being published in any newspaper. The caption, descriptive clause, and other formal parts of the ordinances of the city may be omitted without affecting the validity of such ordinances when they are published as a code. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 3.01. - General elections. 
    The regular election of members of the council to the places on the council occupied by persons whose terms are expiring shall be held on the first Saturday in April of each year. At such election each qualified voter shall vote for not more than one candidate for each at-large council place to be filled; and shall vote for not more than one candidate for the single-member district council place in which the voter resides, depending upon the type of places to be filled by such election. 
    In the case of each single-member district council place to be filled at any regular election, only the qualified voters residing within the area of the city designated as comprising such single-member district council place shall be eligible to vote for a candidate for such place. 
    Said election shall be ordered by the mayor, and in the event of his failure to order the same, the council shall make such order. In the event of the inability of the mayor and the council to act, the election may be called by the city clerk, and in the event of his inability to act, by the County Judge of Grayson County, Texas, and in the event of his inability to act, by the Governor of the State of Texas. The city clerk shall give notice of such election by causing said notice to be published at least thirty days prior to the date of such election in the official newspaper of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2793, § 1, 12-17-84) 
Sec. 3.02. - Regulation of elections. 
    All elections shall be held in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas regulating the holding of municipal elections and in accordance with the ordinances adopted by the council for the conduct of elections. The council shall appoint the election judges and other election officials and shall provide for the compensation of all election officials in city elections, and for all other expenses of holding such elections. 
Sec. 3.03. - Filing of candidates. 
    Any qualified person who desires to become a candidate for election to a place on the council shall file with the city clerk at least thirty days prior to the election day an application for his name to appear on the ballot. Such application shall clearly designate by place number the place on the council to which the candidate seeks election and shall contain a sworn statement by the candidate that he is fully qualified under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas and the provisions of this charter to hold the office he seeks. 
Sec. 3.04. - Election by majority and run-off election. 
    At every election to fill a place or places on the council, election to each place shall be by a majority of all the votes cast at such election for such place. In the event no candidate receives a majority of all the votes cast at such election for any such place, immediately upon declaring the official results of the election, the mayor or the council shall order a run-off election for every place to which no person was elected. Such run-off election shall be held on the second Tuesday following the preceding election. In such run-off election, the two candidates who received the highest number of votes for each place to which no person was elected in the preceding election shall be voted on again and the candidate who receives a majority of all the votes cast at such run-off election for such place shall be declared elected to such place. 
Sec. 3.05. - Canvassing election and declaring results. 
    The returns of every municipal election shall be delivered forthwith by the election judges to the city clerk. The council shall canvass the returns and declare the official results of the election not later than the first regular meeting following the delivery of the votes to the city clerk. The returns of every municipal election shall be recorded in the minutes of the council by precinct totals. The qualified person receiving a majority of the number of votes cast for any office shall thereupon be declared by said council elected. 
Sec. 3.06. - Notification and qualification of city officers. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to see that all votes are promptly canvassed following all elections. Immediately thereafter, it shall also be the duty of the city clerk to notify all persons elected or appointed to office of their election or appointment. Any officer elected or appointed must qualify by taking and subscribing his oath of office within thirty days after his election or appointment; otherwise, the office may be deemed vacant. All newly elected or appointed officers shall take office and enter upon their duties immediately after such notification and qualification. 
(Ord. No. 2793, § 1, 12-17-84) 
Sec. 3.07. - Special elections. 
    The council may by ordinance or resolution call such special elections as are authorized by the laws of the State of Texas or by this charter, fix the time and place of holding same, and provide all means for holding such special elections; provided, however, every special election shall be called and held as nearly as practicable according to the provisions governing general elections. 
ARTICLE IV. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, AND RECALL 

Sec. 4.01. - Power of initiative. 
    The people of the city reserve the power of direct legislation by initiative, and in the exercise of such power may propose any ordinance, except ordinances appropriating money or levying taxes or ordinances repealing ordinances appropriating money or levying taxes, not in conflict with this charter or the constitution or laws of the State of Texas. Any initiated ordinance may be submitted to the council by a petition signed by the qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least ten percent of the qualified voters of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2793, § 1, 12-17-84) 
Sec. 4.02. - Power of referendum. 
    The people reserve the power to approve or reject at the polls any legislation enacted by the council which is subject to the initiative process under this charter, except ordinances authorizing the issuance of either tax or revenue bonds, whether original or refunding bonds, shall not be subject to such referendum. Prior to or within thirty days after the effective date of any ordinance which is subject to referendum, a petition signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least ten percent of the qualified voters of the city may be filed with the city clerk requesting that any such ordinance be either repealed or submitted to a vote of the people. When such a petition has been certified as sufficient by the city clerk, the ordinance specified in the petition shall not go into effect, or further action thereon shall be suspended if it shall have gone into effect, until and unless it is approved by the voters as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 2793, § 1, 12-17-84) 
Sec. 4.03. - Form of petitions. 
    Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed legislation in the form of an ordinance, including a descriptive caption. Referendum petition papers shall contain a sufficient description of the ordinance sought to be referred to identify it, or if the ordinance has been passed by the council, the full text of the ordinance sought to be referred shall be included in such papers. The signatures to the initiative or referendum petitions need not be all appended to one paper, but each signatory shall sign his name in ink or indelible pencil, together with a notation showing his residence address and the precinct number and serial number that appear on his voter registration certificate or such other document as shall be prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas to identify qualified voters under any future legislation. No signature shall be counted where there is reason to believe it is not the actual signature of the purported signatory or that it is a duplication either of name or of handwriting used in any other signature on the petition, and no signature shall be counted unless the residence address of the signatory is shown, or unless it is signed exactly as the name of the voter appears on the official copy of the current poll list or such other document as may be prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas to identify qualified voters under any future legislation, or unless the precinct number and the serial number that appear on the signatory's voter registration certificate or such other document as may be prescribed by state law to identify qualified voters under any future legislation are noted as above required. Before the signatures on any petition paper may be counted, one of the persons signing such petition paper, a qualified voter, shall make oath before the city clerk or other officer competent to administer oaths that the statements made therein are true, that each signature to the paper appended is a genuine signature of the person whose name purports to be signed thereto, and that such signatures were placed thereon in his presence. 
Sec. 4.04. - Filing, examination, and certification of petitions. 
    Within thirty days after an initiative or referendum petition is filed, the city clerk shall determine whether the same is properly signed by the requisite number of qualified voters. The city clerk shall declare void any petition paper which does not have an affidavit attached thereto as required in section 4.03 of this article. In examining the petition, the city clerk shall write the letters "D.V." (declared void) in red ink opposite the names of signatories found not qualified. After completing examination of the petition, the city clerk shall certify the results thereof to the council at its next regular meeting. If the certificate of the city clerk shall show an initiative or referendum petition to be insufficient, the city clerk shall notify the person filing the petition, and it may be amended within ten days from the date of such notice by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers signed and filed as provided for in the original petition. Within thirty days after such amendment is filed, the city clerk shall examine the amended petition and certify as to its insufficiency. If the amended petition is then found to be insufficient, no further proceedings shall be had with regard to it. 
Sec. 4.05. - Council consideration and submission to voters. 
    When the council receives an authorized initiative petition certified by the city clerk to be sufficient, the council shall either: (a) pass the initiated ordinance without amendment within thirty days after the date of the certification to the council; or (b) submit said initiated ordinance without amendments to a vote of the qualified voters of the city at a regular or special election to be held within ninety days after the date of the certification to the council; or (c) at such election submit to a vote of the qualified voters of the city said initiated ordinance without amendment, and an alternative ordinance on the same subject proposed by the council. In such event, should both such ordinances be approved by a majority of the votes cast at such election, the ordinance receiving the highest number of votes shall be effective as an ordinance of the city; the other ordinance shall be deemed rejected and shall not be effective. 
    When the council receives an authorized referendum petition certified by the city clerk to be sufficient, the council shall reconsider the referred ordinance, and if upon such reconsideration such ordinance is not repealed within thirty days, it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the city at a regular or special election to be held not more than ninety days after the date of the certification to the council. 
    Special elections on initiated or referred ordinances shall not be held more frequently than once each six months. No ordinance on the same subject as an initiated ordinance which has been defeated or on the same subject as a referred ordinance which has been approved at any election may be initiated by the voters within two years from the date of such election. 
Sec. 4.06. - Results of election. 
    Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election in accordance with the provisions of this article. If a majority of the legal votes cast is in favor of an initiated ordinance, it shall thereupon be effective as an ordinance of the city. An ordinance thus adopted may be repealed or amended at any time after the expiration of two years by a vote of two-thirds of the council members qualified and serving. A referred ordinance which is rejected by a majority of the legal votes cast in a referendum election shall be deemed thereupon repealed. An ordinance thus rejected may be reenacted at any time after the expiration of two years by a vote of two-thirds of the council members qualified and serving. 
Sec. 4.07. - Power of recall. 
    The people of the city reserve the power to recall any elected officer of the city and may exercise such power by filing with the city clerk a petition, signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least twenty percent of the qualified voters of the city, demanding the removal of such elected officers. The petition shall be signed and verified in the manner required for an initiative petition. 
(Ord. No. 2793, § 1, 12-17-84) 
Sec. 4.08. - Recall election. 
    The provisions regulating examination, certification, and amendment of initiative petitions shall apply to recall petitions. If the petition is certified by the city clerk to be sufficient, the council shall order and hold an election forthwith to determine whether such officer shall be recalled. 
Sec. 4.09. - Results of recall election. 
    If the majority of the legal votes cast as a recall election be for the recall of the officer named on the ballot, the council shall immediately declare his office vacant. An officer thus removed shall not be eligible to hold office again in the city for a period of two years from the date of his recall. 
Sec. 4.10. - Limitation on recall. 
    No recall petition shall be filed against an officer within six months after he takes office, and no officer shall be subjected to more than one recall during his term of office. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION 

Sec. 5.01. - The city manager. 
    The council shall appoint a city manager who shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the city. He shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative training, experience, and ability, and need not, when appointed, be a resident of the city; however, during the tenure of his office, he shall reside within the city. 
    The city manager shall not be appointed for a definite term, but may be removed at the will and pleasure of the council by the vote of a majority of all council members qualified and serving. The action of the council in removing the city manager shall be final, it being the intention of this charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such removal in the council. The city manager shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the council. 
    No member of the council shall, during the time for which he is elected or for two years thereafter, be chosen as city manager. 
Sec. 5.02. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
    The city manager shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all the affairs of the city. The powers herein conferred upon the city manager shall include, but shall not be limited, to the following: 
(a)  To appoint and remove any officer or employee of the city except those officers and employees whose appointment or election is otherwise provided for by law or this charter; 
(b)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or required of him by the council, not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter. 
Sec. 5.03. - Administrative departments. 
    There shall be such administrative departments as are established by this charter and as may be established by ordinance, all of which shall be under the control and direction of the city manager. The council may abolish or combine one or more departments created by it, and by ordinance may assign or transfer duties of any departments of the city from one department to another. 
Sec. 5.04. - Directors of departments. 
    At the head of each department there shall be a director who shall be appointed, and who may be removed, by the city manager. Such directors shall have supervision and control over their respective departments and may serve as chiefs of divisions within their respective departments. Two or more departments may be headed by the same individual, and the city manager may head one or more departments. 
Sec. 5.05. - Departmental organization. 
    The work of each department shall be distributed among such divisions as may be established by ordinance. Pending passage of ordinances establishing department divisions, the city manager may establish temporary divisions in any department. 
Sec. 5.06. - City attorney. 
    There shall be a department of law, the head of which shall be the city attorney. The city attorney shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the city council, and the city attorney shall respond to all requests from the city manager unless otherwise instructed by the city council. 
    The city attorney shall be a competent attorney who is duly licensed to practice law in the State of Texas. The city attorney shall be the legal adviser of, and attorney for, all of the offices and departments of the city, and he shall represent the city in all litigation and legal proceedings. He shall draft, approve, or file his written legal objections to every ordinance adopted by the council, and he shall pass upon all documents, contracts, and legal instruments in which the city may have an interest. 
    There may be such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized and appointed by the council and such assistant city attorneys shall be authorized to act for and on behalf of the city attorney. 
    The council may retain special counsel at any time it deems the same appropriate and necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2793, § 1, 12-17-84) 
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 6.01. - Municipal court. 
    There shall be a court known as the municipal court of the City of Denison, which court shall be deemed always open for the trial of causes, and with such jurisdiction, powers, and duties as are given and prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas. 
Sec. 6.02. - Judge of the municipal court. 
    The municipal court shall be presided over by a magistrate who shall be known as the judge of the municipal court. He shall be appointed by the council for a term of two years, from the first day of January in odd numbered years until the thirty-first day of December two years later, or for the portion of such term unexpired at the time of his appointment. He may be removed for cause by the vote of a majority of the members of the council qualified and serving. 
    In the event the judge of the municipal court is temporarily unable to act for any reason, the council shall appoint a qualified person to act in his place. The judge, or anyone acting in his place, shall receive such compensation as may be set by the council. 
    The council shall have the power to create and establish additional municipal courts and to appoint more than one judge of each municipal court, whether one or more, each of whom shall be a magistrate. 
Sec. 6.03. - Clerk of the municipal court. 
    There shall be a clerk of the municipal court. He shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the court thereto, and otherwise perform any and all acts necessary in issuing process of such court and conducting the business thereof. 
    There shall be such deputy clerks of the municipal court as may be authorized by the council, which deputy clerks shall have authority to act for and on behalf of the clerk of the municipal court. 
Sec. 6.04. - Costs, process, and procedure in the municipal court. 
    The council shall determine what costs, if any, shall be charged for proceedings in and for processes issued by the court. 
    The style of all writs issued out of the municipal court shall be in the name of the City of Denison. 
    All jurors shall be residents of the city and shall otherwise possess the same qualifications as jurors in the state courts, and they shall be summoned in the same manner as provided for in justice courts. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE 

Sec. 7.01. - Department of finance. 
    There shall be a department of finance, the head of which shall be the director of finance. The director of finance shall have knowledge of municipal accounting and shall have had experience in budgeting, accounting, and financial control. Said director shall provide a bond with such surety and in such amount as the council may require. The premiums on such bond shall be paid by the city. 
Sec. 7.02. - Director of finance-Powers and duties. 
    The director of finance shall administer and supervise all financial affairs of the city and shall have such other powers and duties as the council shall by ordinance or resolution prescribe. 
Sec. 7.03. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall be as established by ordinance of the council. In the event the council does not thus establish the fiscal year, the fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of each January and end on the last day of December of the same year. All funds collected by the city during any fiscal year, including both current and delinquent revenues, shall belong to such fiscal year and, except for funds derived to pay interest and create a sinking fund on the bonded indebtedness of the city, may be applied to the payments of expenses incurred during such fiscal year, except as provided in this charter. Any revenues uncollected at the end of any fiscal year, and any unencumbered funds actually on hand, shall become resources of the next succeeding fiscal year. 
Sec. 7.04. - Budget preparation and adoption. 
    At least thirty days prior to the end of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the council a proposed budget presenting a complete financial plan for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be finally adopted not later than the twenty-seventh day of the last month of the fiscal year. Should the council take no final action on or prior to such day, the budget, as submitted, shall be deemed to have been finally adopted by the council. No budget shall be adopted or appropriations made unless the total of estimated revenues, income, and funds available shall be equal to or in excess of such budget or appropriations, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
Sec. 7.05. - Appropriations. 
    From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes named therein. Except as provided in this article, no funds of the city shall be expended, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except pursuant to the annual appropriation ordinance provided by this article. At the close of each fiscal year any unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the fund from which appropriated and become available for reappropriation for the next fiscal year. The council may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one office, department, or agency to another, at any time. The city manager shall have authority, without council approval, to transfer appropriation balances from one expenditure account to another within a single office, department, or agency of the city. 
Sec. 7.06. - Contingent appropriation. 
    Provision shall be made in the annual budget for a contingent appropriation in an amount not more than five percent of the total budget, to be used in case of unforeseen items of expenditure. Such contingent appropriation shall be under the control of the city manager and distributed by him, after approval by the council. Expenditures from this appropriation shall be made only in the event of established emergencies and a detailed account of such expenditures shall be recorded and reported. 
Sec. 7.07. - Borrowing in anticipation of property taxes. 
    In any fiscal year, in anticipation of the collection of the ad valorem property tax for such year, whether levied or to be levied in such year, the council may by resolution authorize the borrowing of money, not to exceed in any fiscal year an amount equal to ten per cent of the budget for the fiscal year. Such borrowing shall be by the issuance of negotiable notes of the city, each of which shall be designated "tax anticipation note for the year 19___" (stating the tax year). Such notes shall mature and be payable not later than the end of the fiscal year in which issued, and may be secured by the pledge of the ad valorem property taxes for such year. 
Sec. 7.08. - Depository. 
    All moneys received by any person, department, or agency of the city for or in connection with affairs of the city shall be deposited promptly in the city depository or depositories, which shall be designated by the council in accordance with such regulations and subject to such requirements as to security for deposits and interest thereon as may be established by ordinance. All checks, vouchers, or warrants for the withdrawal of money from the city depositories shall be signed by the director of finance or his deputy and countersigned by the city manager or such other person or persons as the council shall designate by ordinance or resolution. Provided, that the council, under such regulations and limitations as it may prescribe, may by ordinance authorize the use of machine imprinted facsimile signatures of said director of finance and city manager on such checks, vouchers or warrants. 
Sec. 7.09. - General obligation bonds. 
    The city shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the city and to issue general obligation bonds for permanent public improvements or for any other public purpose not prohibited by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds of the city previously issued. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas. 
Sec. 7.10. - Revenue bonds. 
    The city shall have power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving, extending or repairing of public utilities, recreational facilities, or any other self-liquidating municipal function not prohibited by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue revenue bonds to evidence the obligation created thereby. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable solely from the properties, or interest therein, pledged, or the income therefrom, or both, and shall never be a debt of the city. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas. 
Sec. 7.11. - Sale of bonds. 
    No bond (other than refunding bonds issued to refund and in exchange for previously issued outstanding bonds) issued by the city shall be sold for less than par value and accrued interest. All bonds of the city having been issued and sold in accordance with the terms of this section, and having been delivered to the purchasers thereof, shall thereafter be incontestable, and all bonds issued to refund and in exchange for outstanding bonds previously issued shall, after said exchange, be incontestable. 
Sec. 7.12. - Purchase procedure. 
    All purchases made and contracts executed by the city shall be pursuant to a requisition from the head of the office, department, or agency whose appropriation will be charged, and no contract or order shall be binding upon the city unless and until the director of finance certifies that there is to the credit of such office, department or agency a sufficient unencumbered appropriation and allotment balance to pay for the supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services for which the contract or order is to be issued. All purchases made and contracts executed by the city shall be in accordance with the requirements of the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
Sec. 7.13. - Independent audit. 
    At the close of each fiscal year, and at such other times as it may be deemed necessary, the council shall cause an independent audit to be made of all accounts of the city by a certified public accountant. The certified public accountant selected shall have no personal interest, directly or indirectly, in the financial affairs of the city or any of its officers. Upon completion of the audit, the results thereof shall be published immediately in the official newspaper of the city and copies placed on file in the city clerk's office as a public record. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TAXATION 

Sec. 8.01. - Applicability of the Property Tax Code of the State of Texas. 
    Pursuant to Title I, Section 1.02, of the Property Tax Code of the State of Texas, which was effective January 1, 1982, the city's local property tax administration, appraisal, assessment and collection shall be governed by the provisions of Title I, entitled the "Property Tax Code" of the Tax Code of the State of Texas, as now enacted or as hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 2793, § 1, 12-17-84) 
ARTICLE IX. - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES 

Sec. 9.01. - Inalienability of control of public property. 
    The right of control and use of the public streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, parks, public squares, and public places of the city is hereby declared to be inalienable by the city, except by ordinances not in conflict with the provisions of this charter. No act or omission by the council or any officer or agent of the city shall be construed to grant, renew, extend, or amend, expressly or by estoppel or implication, any right, franchise, or easement affecting said public streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, parks, public squares, public places, and other real property, except as provided in this charter. 
Sec. 9.02. - Power to grant franchise. 
    The council shall have the power by ordinance to grant, renew, and extend all franchises of all public utilities of every character operating within the city and, with consent of the franchise holder, to amend the same. Provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for an indeterminate term, and that no franchise shall be granted for a term of more than twenty-five years. 
Sec. 9.03. - Ordinance granting franchise. 
    Every ordinance granting, renewing, extending, or amending a public utility franchise shall be read at three regular meetings of the council, and shall not be finally acted upon until thirty days after the first reading thereof. Within ten days following the first reading of the ordinance, the full text thereof shall be published in the official newspaper of the city, and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the prospective franchise holder. 
Sec. 9.04. - Transfer of franchise. 
    No public utility franchise shall be transferred by the holder thereof except with the approval of the council expressed by ordinance. 
Sec. 9.05. - Regulation of franchise. 
    Every grant, renewal, extension, or amendment of a public utility franchise, whether provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the council: 
(1)  To forfeit any such franchise by ordinance at any time for failure of the holder thereof to comply with the terms of the franchise. Such power shall be exercised only after written notice to the franchise holder stating wherein the franchise holder has failed to comply with the terms of the franchise and setting a reasonable time for the correction of such failure, and shall be exercised only after hearing and after such reasonable time has expired. 
(2)  To impose reasonable regulations to insure safe, efficient, and continuous service to the public. 
(3)  To require such expansion, extension, enlargement, and improvements of plants and facilities as are necessary to provide adequate service to the public. 
(4)  To require every franchise holder to furnish to the city, without cost to the city, full information regarding the location, character, size, length, and terminals of all facilities of such franchise holder in, over, and under the streets, alleys, and other public property of the city; and to regulate and control the location, relocation, and removal of such facilities. 
(5)  To collect from every public utility operating in the city such proportion of the expense of excavating, grading, paving, repaving, constructing, reconstructing, draining, repairing, maintaining, lighting, sweeping, and sprinkling the streets, alleys, bridges, culverts, viaducts, and other public places of the city as represents the increased cost of such operation resulting from the occupancy of such public place by such public utility, and such proportion of the costs of such operations as results from the damage to or disturbance of such public places caused by such public utility; or to compel such public utility to perform, at its own expense, such operations as above listed which are made necessary by the occupancy of such public places by such utility or by damage to or disturbance of such public places caused by such public utility. 
(6)  To require every franchise holder to allow other public utilities to use its poles and other facilities, including bridges and viaducts, whenever in the judgment of the council such use shall be in the public interest, provided that in such event reasonable terms of use may be imposed and a reasonable rental shall be paid such owner of facilities for such use. Provided further, that inability of such public utilities to agree upon terms of use and rentals for such facilities shall not be an excuse for failure to comply with such requirement by the council. 
To require the keeping of accounts in such form as will accurately reflect the value of the property of each franchise holder which is used and useful in rendering its service to the public and the expenses, receipts, and profits of all kinds of such franchise holder. 
b.  To examine and audit at any time during business hours the accounts and other records of any franchise holder. 
c.  To require reports on the operations of the utility, which shall be in such form and contain such information as the council shall prescribe. 
Sec. 9.06. - Regulation of rates. 
    The council shall have full power after notice and hearing to regulate by ordinance the rates, charges, and fares of every public utility franchise holder operating in the city. Every franchise holder who shall request an increase in rates, charges, or fares, shall have, at the hearing of the council called to consider such request, the burden of establishing by clear, competent, and convincing evidence, the value of its investments properly allocable to service in the city, and the amount and character of its expenses and revenues connected with the rendering of such service. No public utility franchise holder shall institute any legal action to contest any rate, charge, or fare fixed by the council until such franchise holder has filed a motion for rehearing with the council specifically setting out each ground of its complaint against the rate, charge, or fare fixed by the council, and until the council shall have acted upon such motion. Such motion shall be deemed overruled unless acted upon by the council within a reasonable time, not to exceed ninety days from the filing of such motion for rehearing; provided, however, the council may by ordinance or resolution extend such time limit for acting on said motion for rehearing from ninety days to one hundred eighty days. 
ARTICLE X. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10.01. - Interim government. 
    Upon the adoption of this charter, the incumbent members of the city council of the city shall become the council. Each member of the council thus constituted shall continue in the place to which he was elected and shall hold his office for the same term for which he was elected as a member of the present council and until his successor is elected and qualified. The council as thus constituted shall have all the powers provided in this charter. 
Sec. 10.02. - Continuation of government. 
    Any ordinance in effect at the time this charter is adopted, and not otherwise in conflict with this charter, which refers to some office or employment of the city which ceases to exist under this charter, shall continue in force and the powers and duties therein prescribed shall be the powers and duties of the office or employment which, under this charter, succeeds to the same general powers and duties of such office or employment under the previous charter. 
Sec. 10.03. - Effect of charter on existing law. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations in force in the city on the effective date of this charter, and not in conflict with this charter, shall remain in force until altered, amended, or repealed by the council. All taxes, assessments, liens, incumbrances, and demands of or against the city, fixed or established before such date, or for the fixing or establishing of which proceedings have begun at such date, shall be valid when properly fixed or established either under the law in force at the time of the beginning of such proceedings or under the law after the adoption of this charter. 
Sec. 10.04. - Official oath. 
    Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all officers of the city shall take and subscribe the official oath prescribed in the constitution of the State of Texas. 
Sec. 10.05. - Public records. 
    All public records of every office, department, or agency of the city shall be open to inspection by any citizen at all reasonable times; provided police records and vital statistics records, and any other records closed to the public by law, shall not be considered public records for the purpose of this section. 
Sec. 10.06. - Official newspaper. 
    The council shall have power to contract annually with, and by ordinance or resolution designate, a public newspaper of general circulation in the city as the official organ thereof and to continue as such until another is designated, and shall cause to be published therein all ordinances, notices, and other matter required to be published by this charter, by the ordinances of the city, or by the constitution or laws of the State of Texas. 
Sec. 10.07. - Tort liability. 
    Before the city shall be liable for damages for the death or personal injuries of any person or for damages to or destruction of property of any kind, which does not constitute a taking or damaging of property under Article I, Section 17, Constitution of the State of Texas, the person injured, if living, or his representatives, if deceased, or the parent or guardian of a minor child, or the owner, his agent or attorney of the property damaged or destroyed, shall give the city manager notice in writing of such death, injury, damage or destruction, duly verified by affidavit, within thirty days after same has been sustained, stating specifically in such written notice when, where, and how the death, injury, damage, or destruction occurred, and the apparent extent of any such injury, the amount of damages sustained, the actual residence of the claimant by street and number at the date the claim is presented, the actual residence of such claimant for six months immediately preceding the occurrence of such death, injury, damage, or destruction, and the names and addresses of all witnesses upon whom it is relied to establish the claim for damages. The failure to so notify the city manager within the time and manner specified herein shall exonerate, excuse, and exempt the city from any liability whatsoever. No act of any officer or employee of the city shall waive compliance, or estop the city from requiring compliance, with the provisions of this section as to notice. 
Sec. 10.08. - Assignment, execution, and garnishment. 
    The property, real and personal, belonging to the city shall not be liable for sale or appropriation under any writ of execution. The funds belonging to the city, in the hands of any person, firm, or corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or sequestration; nor shall the city be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any account whatever. The city shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents, or contractors. 
Sec. 10.09. - Security or bond not required. 
    It shall not be necessary in any action, suit, or proceeding in which the city shall be a party for any bond, undertaking, or security to be executed in behalf of the city; but all actions, suits, and proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking, or security had been given. The city shall have all remedies of appeal provided by law to all courts in this state without bond or security of any kind. For all the purposes of such actions, suits, proceedings, and appeals, the city shall be liable in the same manner, and to the same extent, as if the bond, undertaking, or security in ordinary cases had been given and executed. 
Sec. 10.10. - Personal interest in city contracts. 
    No member of the city council or other officer or employee of the city shall be directly or indirectly interested in any work, business, or contract, the expense, price, or consideration of which is paid from the city treasury, or by an assessment levied by an ordinance or resolution of the council, nor be the surety on the official bond of any officer of the city or for any person having a contract, work, or business with said city for the performance of which security may be required, except on behalf of the city as an officer or employee. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any officer or employee guilty thereof shall be subject to removal from his office or position. 
Sec. 10.11. - Nepotism. 
    No member of the council, the city manager, or other officer of the city shall appoint, or approve, vote for, or confirm the appointment of, any person to any paid office, position, employment, duty, or other service of the city if such person is related within the second degree by affinity or within the third degree by consanguinity to the person making such appointment or to any member of the council or the city manager. No person to whom this prohibition applies shall be permitted to embark upon any duties or commence any employment within the city or receive any salary, fee, or other emolument from the city. Provided, however, nothing contained in this charter or in any ordinance of the city shall prevent the appointment, approval, voting for, or confirmation of any person who shall have been continuously employed in any office, position, employment, duty, or other service of the city for a period of at least two years prior to the election or appointment of the member or officer appointing, approving, voting for, or confirming the appointment, or to the election or appointment of the member or officer related to such person in the prohibited degree. 
Sec. 10.12. - Health, life, and accident insurance for city employees. 
    The city council shall have the power, exercisable in its discretion, and subject to such limitations and regulations as it shall deem proper to create, operate, amend, and contract for an insurance plan covering health, life, and accident insurance, or any of them, for any or all city employees, and to pay the premiums therefor. 
Sec. 10.13. - Boards, agencies, and commissions. 
    The council shall have the authority to establish by ordinance such boards, agencies, and commissions as it may deem necessary or desirable for the conduct of the city's business and the management of its affairs. The authority, duties, functions, and responsibilities of such boards, agencies, and commissions shall be such as are specified by ordinance. The authority, duties, functions, and responsibilities thus granted to and conferred on such boards, agencies, and commissions shall not be incompatible with the provisions of this charter and shall in no manner conflict with, usurp, or transfer any privilege, authority, duty, function, or responsibility specifically granted herein or by the laws of the State of Texas to another officer, board, agency, or commission of the city. Provided, however, to the extent not prohibited by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, the council may, by ordinance, confer upon a library board and a cemetery board, either or both, full authority with respect to the conduct of its administrative personnel, and financial affairs. 
    No person shall be appointed to nor eligible to serve on the same board, agency, or commission of the city for more than three consecutive two year terms of office. 
Sec. 10.14. - Regulation of the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    In order to promote and protect the life, property, health, safety, welfare, morals, temperance, and peace of the citizens of the city, the council, acting by ordinance, shall have the authority to provide for the establishment of districts or limits within the city in which alcoholic beverages may be offered for sale and sold at retail and to prohibit and make unlawful the offering for sale and the sale at retail of alcoholic beverages in all other parts of the city. 
    In designating districts or limits in which the offering for sale and the sale at retail of alcoholic beverages are permitted, the council shall have the authority to establish districts in which alcoholic beverages may be offered for sale and sold at retail for off premises consumption only, districts in which alcoholic beverages may be offered for sale and sold at retail for off premises consumption and for on premises consumption where such offering for sale and sale are incidental to the operation of a restaurant or cafe business, and districts where alcoholic beverages may be offered for sale and sold at retail for off premises consumption and for on premises consumption. 
    As used herein, the term "alcoholic beverage" shall have the meaning ascribed to it by Chapter 467, Page 1795, Acts of the Forty-fourth Legislature, Second Called Session, 1935, the Texas Liquor Control Act, compiled as Article 666-1 et seq. of the Penal Code of the State of Texas, as heretofore or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 10.15. - Rearrangement and renumbering. 
    The council shall have the power, by ordinance, to renumber and rearrange all articles, sections, and paragraphs of this charter or any amendments thereto, as it shall deem appropriate, and upon the passage of any such ordinance a copy thereof, certified by the city clerk, shall be forwarded to the secretary of state for filing. 
Sec. 10.16. - Judicial notice. 
    This charter shall be deemed a public act, shall have the force and effect of a general law, may be read in evidence without pleading or proof, and judicial notice shall be taken thereof in all courts and places without further proof. 
Sec. 10.17. - Construction of charter. 
    This charter shall not be construed as a mere grant of enumerated powers, but shall be construed as a general grant of power and as a limitation of power on the government of the city in the same manner as the Constitution of Texas is construed as a limitation on the powers of the Legislature. Except where expressly prohibited by this charter, each and every power under Article XI, Section 5, of the Constitution of Texas which it would be competent for the people of the City of Denison to grant expressly to the city, shall be construed to be granted to the city by this charter. 
Sec. 10.18. - Separability clause. 
    If any section or part of a section of this charter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not invalidate or impair the validity, force, or effect of any other section or part of a section of this charter. 
Sec. 10.19. - Submission of charter to voters. 
    This charter commission in preparing this charter finds and declares that it is impracticable to segregate each subject so that the voter may vote "yes" or "no" on the same, for the reason that the charter is so constructed that in order to enable it to work and function it is necessary that it should be adopted in its entirety. For these reasons the charter commission directs that said charter be voted upon as a whole and that it be submitted to the qualified voters of the city at an election to be held for that purpose on the first day of April, 1975. Not less than thirty (30) days prior to such election, the city council shall cause the city clerk to mail a copy of this proposed charter to each qualified voter of the City of Denison as appears from the latest tax collector's roll. After said charter is approved by a majority of the qualified voters, voting at said election, it shall become the charter of the City of Denison upon the entering upon the records of said city of the governing body of the city an official order declaring the adoption of said charter. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
 This table shows the location of the sections of the Home Rule Charter adopted April 1, 1975, and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Section Section  
this Charter 1857  4- 7-75 1.01-10.19 2793 12-17-84 1 2.01-2.05 2.11 3.01 3.06 4.01, 4.02 4.07 5.06 8.01  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Denison, Texas" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1965, § 1-1) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to codify and print ordinances in code form, § 2.15. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to adopt a civil and criminal Code of Ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001 et seq. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes expressed therein or implied from the expression thereof. In case of doubt or ambiguity in the meaning of such provisions, the general shall yield to the particular. Reference for interpretation and construction shall tend to further the accomplishment of the elimination of the particular mischiefs for which the provisions were enacted. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed and the following definitions shall apply, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    Charter. The word Charter shall mean the Charter of the City of Denison, Texas printed in Part I of this volume. 
    City. The word city shall mean the City of Denison, in the County of Grayson and the State of Texas. 
    City council. The words council or city council shall mean the City Council of the City of Denison, constituting the governing body of the city. 
    City officers, departments, boards, committees, or commissions. Whenever reference is made to officers, departments, boards, committees, or commissions, the same shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Denison, Texas." 
    Code. The word Code shall mean this Code of Ordinances, City of Denison, Texas. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time mentioned in the provisions of this Code, the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included, and the last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday nor a holiday. 
    County. The term county shall mean the County of Grayson, Texas. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males. 
    Health officer. The director of the Denison-Sherman-Grayson County Health Unit shall have the authority and the duties set forth in this Code for the city health officer, and wherever the term "health officer" is used, either the city health officer or the director of such health unit shall have the right, authority, duty and responsibility to act. 
    Highway. The term highway shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Month. The word month shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
    oath. The word oath shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed. 
    or, and. Or may be read and, and and may be read or, if the sense requires it. 
    owner. The word owner, applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word person shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. Where criminal prosecution may lie, the officers of any corporation shall jointly and severally be subject to prosecution as being included within the term person. 
    Preceding, following. The words preceding and following mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Roadway. The word roadway shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Sidewalk. The word sidewalk shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The word signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
    Standard time. All hours of time mentioned in this Code refer to and shall be determined by Central Standard Time, as commonly known, except that, if at any future time any different standard of time is established by the United States for an area which includes this city, all such hours shall be determined by such officially proclaimed standard, so long as the same remains in effect. 
    State. The word state shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
    Street. The term street shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. shall mean the latest edition or supplement of Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
    V.T.C.A. The abbreviation V.T.C.A. shall mean the Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated latest edition or supplement. 
    Written or in writing. The words written or in writing shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word year shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1965, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.001 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1965, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-4. - References and editor's notes. 
    The references and editor's notes appearing throughout the Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to assist the user of the Code. 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance regarding any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any ordinance authorizing any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance regarding any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city; 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinances providing for the levy of taxes or for adopting an annual budget; 
(8)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments therefor; 
(9)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or amending personnel rules or regulations; 
(12)  Any ordinance or resolution prescribing taxicab passenger rates; 
(13)  Ordinances prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets, such as ordinances establishing speed limits or designating one-way streets, no parking areas, truck routes, stop intersections, intersections where traffic to be controlled by signals, etc.; 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing or amending zoning or land use regulations or the zoning map, or rezoning property; 
(15)  Any ordinance calling municipal elections or prescribing the manner of conducting the election in accordance with state law; 
(16)  Any ordinance prescribing any fee or payment of money to the city; 
(17)  Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification, benefits or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith; 
(18)  Any ordinance which is temporary although general in effect; 
(19)  Any ordinance which is special although permanent in effect; 
(20)  Any ordinance containing any administrative provisions; 
and all such ordinances shall remain in effect and are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-8. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty of forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Denison, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:..." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Denison, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows: ..." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1965, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1965, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for violations of all ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation including dumping of refuse and not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for all other violations provided however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day any violation of this Code or any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1965, § 1-6) 
Cross reference- Miscellaneous offenses, Ch. 11. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- The city council, § 2.01 et seq.; meeting of city council, § 2.11. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; animals, Ch. 4; emergency management, Ch. 6; housing, Ch. 10; nuisances, Ch. 13; personnel, Ch. 16; planning, Ch. 17; public property, Ch. 18; taxation, Ch. 24; utilities, Ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City manager general authority. 
    Whenever in this Code the city manager or his staff is required to act affirmatively or to refrain from certain actions as set forth in this Code, and whenever the city manager is of the opinion that strict compliance with the code requirement will result in undue hardship or unequal treatment in the implementation of city services, the city manager may alter the action of city staff in a manner inconsistent with the stated requirement to act or refrain by notifying the staff member concerned in writing of the city manager's decision and instruction, with a copy immediately transmitted to members of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 1(a), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Former § 2-1, pertaining to the designation of the city clerk as records management officer, was deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 3251, adopted Nov. 19, 1990, codified herein as Art. VI. The deleted provision derived from Ord. No. 3224, adopted May 21, 1990. 
 Subsequently, Ord. No. 4701, § 1(a), adopted June 17, 2013, added new provisions as herein set out. 
Secs. 2-2-2-35. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-36. - Youth advisory commission-Created. 
    There shall be established and maintained a commission to be known and maintained as the Denison Youth Advisory Commission (YAC) in the City of Denison, Texas, to serve as a liaison between the city staff and the youth of the community. 
(Ord. No. 4205, § 1, 2-16-04; Ord. No. 4827, § 1, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 4953, § 2, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 2-37. - Membership. 
    The YAC shall consist of twenty (20) members and shall be chosen by the city council to serve two-year terms, without compensation. The terms shall run from September 1 to August 31 of each year. Members shall be between the ages of fourteen (14) and nineteen (19). These members shall meet at least one (1) of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Reside within the corporate boundaries of the City of Denison; or 
(2)  Reside within the boundaries of the Denison Independent School District; or 
(3)  Attend a state-recognized school or homeschool within the corporate boundaries of the City of Denison. 
    The following may be ex-officio, non-voting members of the YAC: 
(1)  Two (2) residents affiliated with Denison youth, appointed by the city manager, or his/her designee, to serve as facilitators to the YAC. 
(2)  One (1) city staff member appointed by the city manager to serve as a non-voting, staff liaison to the YAC. 
    No individual who has been convicted of a felony shall be qualified to serve as an ex-officio member of the YAC. By submitting an application for appointment to the YAC, applicants for ex-officio membership must consent to a background check for such purposes, to the extent provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 4205, § 1, 2-16-04; Ord. No. 4827, § 1, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 4953, § 2, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 2-38. - Application process. 
    All members of the YAC shall be selected through an application process and shall be appointed by the city manager, or his/her designee, and take office upon being sworn in. 
(Ord. No. 4205, § 1, 2-16-04; Ord. No. 4827, § 1, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 4953, § 2, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 2-39. - Same-Terms of office; vacancies. 
    The term of office for each member shall be two (2) years, or until his or her successor is duly appointed and qualified. However, when a vacancy occurs prior to the expiration of a term, an appointment may be made by the city manager, or his/her designee, for the remainder of the unexpired terms. 
(Ord. No. 4205, § 1, 2-16-04; Ord. No. 4827, § 1, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 4953, § 2, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 2-40. - Officers. 
    The YAC shall elect from its membership officers for two-year terms of office commencing on the first day of September of each year. A member shall be eligible for reelection to any of these offices as long as he or she remains on the YAC. Officers shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Chair: The person, elected by the members of the YAC, who is responsible for running meetings, developing agenda items and helping all officers with their duties. 
(2)  Vice chair: The person, elected by the members of the YAC, who is responsible for running meetings when the chair is not present and helping all officers with their duties. 
(3)  Secretary: The person, elected by the members of the YAC, who is responsible for taking minutes and making sure the YAC city staff liaison has the updated minutes. 
(4)  Historian: The person, elected by the members of the YAC, who is responsible for keeping track of the history of the YAC, including event documentation, photography and website content submittal. 
(Ord. No. 4205, § 1, 2-16-04; Ord. No. 4827, § 1, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 4953, § 2, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 2-41. - Functions. 
    The YAC shall study, investigate, plan, implement and advise the city of matters related to youth. Specifically, the YAC is assigned with identifying areas for improvement related to youth, including developing programs and services that empower, support, and inform youth; that create a family-friendly community; and that enable and encourage youth to be productive members of the community. The YAC shall serve as an advisory body to the city on all matters that relate to youth. 
(Ord. No. 4205, § 1, 2-16-04; Ord. No. 4827, § 1, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 4953, § 2, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 2-42. - Meetings. 
    The YAC shall hold meetings at least quarterly at locations in the city at times it may designate. At all meetings of the YAC, the presence of a majority of the members then in office shall be necessary and sufficient to constitute a quorum, and an affirmative vote of the majority of those present shall be necessary to pass upon pending questions, except that on tie votes, the vote of the chairperson shall be determinative, the chairperson in addition being entitled to vote on all questions. Minutes of the meeting shall be kept and the record filed with the person performing the duty of YAC city staff liaison. 
(Ord. No. 4205, § 1, 2-16-04; Ord. No. 4827, § 1, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 4953, § 2, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 2-43. - Recommendations. 
    In the performance of its function, the YAC is an advisory body authorized to make recommendations to the city manager on: 
(a)  Policy matters affecting the youth of the community; 
(b)  Planning, organizing, coordinating and carrying out drug-free and alcohol free social, cultural, recreational, achieving, educational and other activities for the youth of the community; 
(c)  Establishing guidelines, rules and procedures for participation in such activities; and 
(d)  Entering into agreements with entertainers, concessionaries and other third parties as may be deemed desirable by the YAC within available funds and in accordance with applicable state and city laws and procedures. 
    All revenues derived from fundraising or other means associated with the YAC, which are under the direct control of the city, shall be maintained by the city and deposited to the appropriate fund for utilization in support of YAC related activities to the extent of citywide needs as determined by the city manager, or his/her designee, during the annual budgeting of funds for all city departments. 
(Ord. No. 4205, § 1, 2-16-04; Ord. No. 4827, § 1, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 4953, § 2, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 2-44. - Reports. 
    By August 1 of each year, the YAC shall submit to the city council a written report of its activities for the previous year and an annual plan of work for the ensuing year. These documents shall be retained as part of the official city records. 
    Subject to the approval of the city manager, the facilities and personnel of the city shall be made available to assist the YAC in carrying out its functions. 
    The YAC is authorized to amend its rules and procedures for the conduct of its authorized activities, subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 4205, § 1, 2-16-04; Ord. No. 4827, § 1, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 4953, § 2, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 2-45. - Attendance. 
    Any member who is unable to attend a meeting shall notify the chair or facilitator in advance of the meeting, stating the reason for his or her absence. YAC members are permitted three (3) unexcused absences from regular meetings. Excessive absences will cause a member's appointment to be reviewed by the YAC officers and ex-officio staff, with potential presentation to the city manager, or his/her designee, for action to remove. 
(Ord. No. 4205, § 1, 2-16-04; Ord. No. 4827, § 1, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 4953, § 2, 7-16-18) 
ARTICLE II. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Boards, agencies, commissions, § 10.13. 
Cross reference- Personnel, Ch. 16; sign review committee, § 19-52; parks and recreation commission, § 18-86 et seq.; board of adjustment, § 28-46 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-46. - Residency requirements for certain appointees. 
(a)  No person is eligible to be appointed to or to serve on the following boards and commissions of the city, nor to be appointed to the following boards or commissions over which the city council or one (1) of its members as the power of appointment, unless that person is a resident of the city at the time of appointment; to-wit: 
(1)  Business and Industrial Corporation of Denison, Inc.; 
(2)  Civil service commission; 
(3)  Community development steering committee; 
(4)  Cemetery advisory board; 
(5)  Greater Texoma Utility Authority; 
(6)  Housing board of adjustment and appeals; 
(7)  Planning and zoning commission; 
(8)  Zoning board of adjustments and appeals; 
(9)  Public library board of directors; 
(10)  Texoma Council of Governments Board of Directors; 
(11)  Buildings appeals board; 
(12)  Denison Community Investment Corporation, subject to the requirements of its corporate by-laws; 
(13)  Parks and recreation advisory board; 
(14)  Convention and visitors bureau advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 1(b), 6-17-13; Ord. No. 4781, § 1, 4-6-15; Ord. No. 4967, § 2(2.01), 10-1-18) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 2-46 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as herein set out. Former § 2-46 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 3698, § 1, adopted Feb. 17, 1997. 
Cross reference- Qualifications and terms of members, § 2-63; planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq.; parks and recreation commission, § 18-86 et seq.; board of adjustment, § 28-46 et seq. 
Sec. 2-47. - Attendance requirements for persons appointed to boards and commissions. 
    Any person appointed to city boards and commissions shall maintain an annual attendance record of not less than seventy-five (75) percent of all regularly and specially called meetings of such board or commission. Each board or commission shall review annually the attendance of members and report to the city council any noncompliance with this section, along with a recommendation of appropriate city council action. In the event the city council determines that any person subject to the requirements of this section has failed to meet such requirements, the city council may declare such person's seat to be vacant. 
(Code 1965, § 2-14) 
Cross reference- Hospital authority, § 2-61 et seq.; planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq.; parks and recreation commission, § 18-86 et seq.; board of adjustment, § 28-46 et seq. 
Sec. 2-48. - Terms of office, appointees. 
(a)  For each board and commission created by the Charter or ordinances of the city, the term of office for each place on the board or commission shall commence on January 1 and continue for the term of years specified in the Charter or ordinance creating the board or commission. 
(b)  In the implementation of the foregoing subsection (a), each term of office existing on the effective date of this provision shall be extended to the 31st of December next following the existing expiration date of such term. The additional time that the appointee serves by virtue of the extension herein created shall not be counted toward the limitation of service established at Section 10.13 of the Charter of the City of Denison. 
(Ord. No. 3411, § 1, 9-20-93) 
Secs. 2-49-2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT STEERING COMMITTEE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4361, adopted June 19, 2006, repealed former Div. 2, §§ 2-61-2-80, the provisions of which pertained to the hospital authority. See also the Code Comparative Table for ordinance history.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 4781, §§ 1-7, adopted April 6, 2015, enacted new provisions, but did not specify manner of inclusion. At the discretion of the editor, said provisions have codified to read as herein setout. 

Sec. 2-61. - Name. 
    The community development steering and housing rehabilitation committee shall be renamed the community development steering committee. 
(Ord. No. 4781, § 1, 4-6-15) 
Sec. 2-62. - Composition; appointment of members. 
    The community development steering committee shall be composed of five (5) members appointed by majority vote of the city council. Such committee shall be advisory to the city council, and shall possess no authority to bind the city. The committee shall assist the city council in the assessment of the community block grant program for the City of Denison. The committee shall conduct public hearings to receive input from the community on the expenditure of funds. 
(Ord. No. 4781, § 2, 4-6-15) 
Sec. 2-63. - Qualifications and terms of members. 
    The members of the community development steering committee shall meet the residency requirement as provided in the City of Denison Municipal Code, section 2-46. Each member of the community development steering committee shall serve for a term of two (2) years. The city council may, by majority vote, appoint a resident citizen of the City of Denison for the remainder of a vacant and unexpired term. Members shall be limited to appointment for not more than three (3) complete successive terms for a total of six (6) years. 
(Ord. No. 4781, § 3, 4-6-15) 
Sec. 2-64. - Members to serve without compensation. 
    The members of the community development steering committee shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 4781, § 4, 4-6-15) 
Sec. 2-65. - Organization; meetings. 
    The members of the community development steering committee shall organize and select a chairman every January. The meetings will be conducted at least quarterly to report the progress of the program. 
(Ord. No. 4781, § 5, 4-6-15) 
Sec. 2-66. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the community development steering committee shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business of the committee. 
(Ord. No. 4781, § 6, 4-6-15) 
Sec. 2-67. - Rules of procedure; record of proceedings. 
    The community development steering committee shall adopt its own rules and procedure and keep a record of its proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 4781, § 7, 4-6-15) 
Secs. 2-68-2-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Residency requirements for appointees, § 2-46; attendance requirements for persons appointed, § 2-47; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8; planning, Ch. 17; subdivisions, Ch. 22; zoning, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference- Planning and zoning, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq.; municipal zoning commissions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.007. 

Sec. 2-96. - Created; composition. 
    There is hereby created a planning and zoning commission consisting of five (5) members and four (4) alternate members, all of whom shall be residents of the city. Alternate members shall serve in the absence of one (1) or more of the regular members when requested by the city manager. 
(Code 1965, § 2-20) 
Sec. 2-97. - Appointment and terms. 
    Members and alternate members of the planning and zoning commission shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve for a term of two (2) years or until their successors are appointed. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member or alternate whose term becomes vacant. 
(Code 1965, § 2-21) 
Charter reference- Limitation on number of consecutive terms, § 10.13. 
Sec. 2-98. - Compensation. 
    Members and alternates of the planning and zoning commission shall serve without compensation. However, the city council may authorize the payment of expenses for travel and meetings and similar costs which may be incurred incident to the duties of the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1965, § 2-22) 
Sec. 2-99. - Removal. 
    Any member or alternate of the planning and zoning commission may be removed by the city council for cause upon written charges and after public hearing. 
(Code 1965, § 2-23) 
Sec. 2-100. - Appointment of officers; adoption of rules. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall appoint its own chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary and shall adopt rules for the conduct of meetings and such other activities as may be appropriate. 
(Code 1965, § 2-24) 
Sec. 2-101. - Meetings. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall meet once each month and at such other times as the chairman or a majority of the regular members of the commission may direct. 
(Code 1965, § 2-25) 
Sec. 2-102. - Quorum. 
    Five (5) members or alternates of the planning and zoning commission shall constitute a quorum. 
(Code 1965, § 2-26) 
Sec. 2-103. - Duties with respect to zoning ordinance. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall perform all functions necessary to carry out the intent of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.001-211.013 relative to the preparation, adoption and amendment of a comprehensive zoning ordinance for the city, including the conduct of public hearings related thereto. The commission shall perform the functions of the zoning board of adjustment as specified by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008 and by the city's comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1965, § 2-27) 
Cross reference- Zoning, Ch. 28; board of adjustment, § 28-46 et seq. 
Sec. 2-104. - Review, approval of subdivision plats. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall perform all functions related to the review and approval of subdivision plats which may be assigned to it by the statutes of the state and ordinances or charter of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-28) 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 2-105. - Duties with respect to flood control ordinance. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall perform all functions necessary to carry out the intent of chapter 8 regarding flood prevention and control and shall perform all duties therein ascribed to it, including specifically the following: 
(1)  To hear and determine appeals from a decision of the director of public works denying a floodplain building permit; and 
(2)  To hear and determine applications for variances and/or exceptions to the provisions of flood prevention and control, chapter 8. 
(Code 1965, § 2-29) 
Cross reference- Flood prevention and protection, § 8-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-106. - Recommendations, advice to council. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall recommend to and advise the city council on matters involving the physical improvement of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-30) 
Sec. 2-107. - Records and reports. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall maintain a record of its meetings and shall report to the city council at least once each year concerning its activities for the past year and its intended activity for the ensuing year. 
(Code 1965, § 2-31) 
DIVISION 4. - ANIMAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE (AAC) 

Sec. 2-108. - Creation of animal advisory committee. 
    There is hereby created an Animal Advisory Committee (AAC). 
(Ord. No. 4804, § 1, 1-4-16) 
Sec. 2-109. - Composition of the animal advisory committee. 
    The AAC must be composed of at least one (1) licensed veterinarian, one (1) municipal official, one (1) person whose duties include the daily operation of an animal shelter, one (1) representative from an animal welfare organization and one (1) member of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 4804, § 1, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 4818, § 2(2.01), 7-18-16) 
Sec. 2-110. - Meetings. 
    The AAC shall meet at least three (3) times a year. 
(Ord. No. 4804, § 1, 1-4-16) 
Sec. 2-111. - Terms. 
    AAC members shall serve staggered two-year terms in accordance with section 2-48 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4804, § 1, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 4818, § 2(2.02), 7-18-16) 
Sec. 2-112. - Officers. 
    A chair, vice chair and secretary of the AAC shall be elected by and from the members and shall serve for a term of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 4804, § 1, 1-4-16; Ord. No. 4818, § 2(2.03), 7-18-16) 
Sec. 2-113. - Powers. 
    The AAC shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt rules and procedures as necessary to provide for the orderly conduct of meetings. 
(2)  Maintain written minutes that record all discussions and recommendations approved by the AAC and the reasons for taking such actions. 
(3)  Conduct surveys and gather information related to animal welfare in the City of Denison. 
(4)  Make advisory recommendations to the city council on policies, programs, or other topics pertaining to the general welfare of animals in the city. Undertake any other research or advisory task at the request of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4804, § 1, 1-4-16) 
Sec. 2-114. - Meetings. 
    The AAC shall meet at least three (3) times a year. Special meetings may be called at any from time to time as deemed necessary All meetings shall be held in conformance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 4804, § 1, 1-4-16) 
DIVISION 5. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION BOARD 

Sec. 2-115. - Creation of the historic preservation board. 
    There is hereby created a board to be known as the Denison Historic Preservation Board (HPB). 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 5, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 2-116. - Composition of the historic preservation board. 
(a)  The historic preservation board shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the city council. At least two (2) members shall be business owners or property owners within the district. All members shall have a known and demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge of historic preservation within the City of Denison. The members shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed at the discretion of the city council. 
(b)  The historic preservation board shall have two (2) ex officio, non-voting members, each of whom shall be entitled to notice of all meetings of the board and to fully participate in the discussion and consideration of all business coming before the board. The ex officio members shall be as follows: 
(1)  The chief building official or designee; and 
(2)  The Main Street director or designee. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 5, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 2-117. - Meetings. 
    The historic preservation board shall meet at least one (1) time per month if business is at hand. Special meetings may be called at any time as requested by the historic preservation officer. All meetings shall be held in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 5, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 2-118. - Terms. 
    Members of the historic preservation board shall serve for staggered terms of two (2) years in accordance with section 2-48. No person shall be appointed to nor eligible to serve for more than three (3) consecutive two (2) year terms of office. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 5, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 2-119. - Officers. 
    The chairman and vice-chairman of the historic preservation board shall be elected by and from the members of the board and shall serve for a term of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 5, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 2-120. - Quorum. 
    Three (3) members of the historic preservation board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. However, not less than a majority of the full, authorized membership of the board may grant or deny a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 5, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 2-121. - Powers. 
    The HPB shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt rules and procedures as necessary to provide for the orderly conduct of HPB meetings. 
(2)  Recommend criteria for the identification of historic, architectural and cultural landmarks. 
(3)  Conduct surveys and maintain an inventory of significant historic, architectural and cultural landmarks and historic districts within the city. 
(4)  Recommend the designation of resources as landmarks and/or historic districts. 
(5)  Maintain written minutes that record all actions taken by the HPB and the reasons for taking such actions. 
(6)  Recommend conferral of recognition upon the owners of landmarks or within districts by means of certificates, plaques or markers. 
(7)  Increase public awareness of the value of historic, cultural and architectural preservation by encouraging and participating in public education programs developed by the historic preservation officer. 
(8)  Make recommendations to the city concerning the utilization of state, federal or private funds to promote the preservation of landmarks and historic districts within the city. 
(9)  Approve or disapprove applications for certificates of appropriateness pursuant to this chapter. 
(10)  Recommend the acquisition of landmark structures by the city where their preservation is essential to the purpose of this chapter and where private preservation is not feasible. 
(11)  Recommend specific design guidelines for the review of landmarks and districts to ensure compatibility within the district. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 5, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 2-122. - Records and reports. 
    The historic preservation board shall maintain a record of its meetings and shall report to the city council at least once each year concerning its activities for the past year and its intended activity for the ensuing year. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 5, 3-19-18) 
DIVISION 6. - CONVENTION AND VISITORS BUREAU ADVISORY BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4967, § 2(2.02), adopted Oct. 1, 2018, enacted provisions designated as div. 5, §§ 2-115-2-117. Inasmuch as division and sections so numbered already exist, said provisions have been redesignated as div. 6, §§ 2-123-2-125, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-123. - Created; membership. 
(a)  There is created the "Convention and Visitors Bureau Advisory Board" of the City of Denison (the "board"). 
    The board shall consist of seven (7) members. Members shall be appointed in accordance with the city Charter and shall serve for no more than two (2) consecutive three (3) year staggered terms. 
    Members of the board shall be appointed from the following groups, organizations or interests as voting members of the board: 
(1)  Owner/general manager/senior management of a food/beverage establishment in the city; 
(2)  Downtown Denison, Inc. representative; 
(3)  Owner/general manager/senior manager of a hotel/motel in the city; 
(4)  Denison Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors Representative; 
(5)  Denison History Representative; 
(6)  Lake Texoma/Tourism Representative; and 
(7)  Sports tourism/outdoor recreation representative. 
    At-large member(s) residing within the corporate city limits or the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city may be appointed to the board if an insufficient number of applications are received from individuals representing these organizations or groups. 
(b)  Notwithstanding section 2-46, individuals who do not reside in the corporate city limits may be appointed and serve on the board if they are an owner, general manager, or senior manager of a business within the city. 
(Ord. No. 4967, § 2(2.02), 10-1-18) 
Sec. 2-124. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purposes of the board are to encourage tourism in the Denison community, to raise the public visibility of local activity which may attract visitors to the city, and to promote and enhance tourism in the convention and hotel industry as authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 351. 
(b)  The board is directed to: 
(1)  Develop and regularly update a strategic plan to include specific goals and objectives for promoting tourism and the preservation and appreciation of historic and cultural attributes of our community; 
(2)  Develop guidelines and evaluate proposals for the awarding of funds to promote tourism, in compliance with local and state law; 
(3)  Recommend an annual convention and visitors bureau budget for adoption by the city council; and 
(4)  Provide a report to the city council on its programs on a timely basis. 
(Ord. No. 4967, § 2(2.02), 10-1-18) 
Sec. 2-125. - Definitions. 
    To encourage tourism in the Denison community includes but is not limited to: 
(1)  Developing programs to increase community awareness of the value of tourism; 
(2)  Promoting local convention activity; 
(3)  Promoting guided-tour groups and day-visit opportunities for individuals; 
(4)  Promoting existing and developing additional community events, historical attractions, cultural events and athletic activities and facilities designed to bring visitors to Denison; 
(5)  Developing and maintaining signage to inform the public of significant local programs, historical sites, parks and related information; and 
(6)  Any other activity allowed for hotel occupancy taxes by state law. 
(Ord. No. 4967, § 2(2.02), 10-1-18) 
ARTICLE III. - DEPARTMENTS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Administrative organization, § 5.01 et seq. 
Cross reference- Fire marshal, § 7-41 et seq.; bureau of fire prevention, § 7-66 et seq.; personnel, Ch. 16. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-126. - Code enforcement authority-Granted. 
    Employees of the city regardless of the department of the city in which employee costs are budgeted, whose function, in whole or in part, includes the inspection of work performed under the authority of the hereinafter itemized chapters of this Code are specifically hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of chapters 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 19, 20, 21, 22, 26 and 28, including but not limited to, the power to cite to appear in answer to complaint as provided in section 2-127. Such employees shall carry on their persons identification issued by the city manager that the employee is duly employed by the city and that the employee is a code enforcement officer of the city. Such employee shall produce such identification on demand while performing duties within the course and scope of the employee's duties. 
(Code 1965, § 5-9) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8; food and food establishments, Ch. 9; housing, Ch. 10; HUD-code manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 12; nuisances, Ch. 13; signs, Ch. 19; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; subdivisions, Ch. 22; utilities, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 28. 
Sec. 2-127. - Same-Authority to cite alleged violators. 
    Any employee authorized under section 2-126 as a code enforcement officer of the city is hereby authorized to issue citations citing the allegation of a code violation under the itemized chapters and appendices of section 2-126. In so citing, the code enforcement officer is authorized to request and to receive the alleged violator's promise to appear in answer to the allegation, and to swear and certify as to taking of such promise for the purpose of enforcing the promise to appear by separate complaint. A code enforcement officer is also authorized to take any and all legal steps necessary in the prosecution of the alleged violation in the municipal court of the city; provided, however, nothing herein shall be construed so as to authorize or empower a code enforcement officer to exercise arrest powers conferred and reserved unto law enforcement officers as that term is applied by and through the statutes of the state. 
(Code 1965, § 5-10) 
Secs. 2-128-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Miscellaneous offenses, Ch. 11; personnel, Ch. 16; civil service for firefighters and police officers, § 16-26 et seq. 

Sec. 2-141. - Microfilming of official records. 
    The following procedures are hereby adopted and established, and shall be followed at all times, in carrying out the program of microfilming official records of the police department. 
(1)  The type of records which shall be microfilmed are criminal history record information maintained on all individuals in the custody of the police department, except for criminal history record information pertaining to juveniles. The criminal record history information consists of but is not limited to arrest sheets, officer's arrest report, and investigative records. 
(2)  Indices to all microfilm records maintained in accordance with this section shall be accurately and currently kept. 
(3)  All microfilm used in carrying out the provisions of this section in microfilming official records shall meet the requirements of the United States of America Standards Institute for archival quality, density, resolution and definition. 
(4)  The police chief or his authorized representative shall check, verify and certify that each microfilm record as produced from official records of the police department is a true and correct duplication of the original public record. 
(5)  Public free access to information contained in the microfilm records of the city is hereby guaranteed to the extent to which members of the public are entitled to same under law. 
(Code 1965, § 20-5) 
State Law reference- Microfilming, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 181.001 et seq. 
Sec. 2-142. - Racial profiling policy of the city 
(I)  Policy and purpose. This racial profiling policy is adopted in compliance with the requirements of articles 2.131 through 2.136, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, which prohibits Texas peace officers from engaging in racial profiling. 
(II)  Definitions. 
(a)  Racial profiling means a law enforcement-initiated action based on an individual's race, ethnicity, or national origin rather than on the individual's behavior or on information identifying the individual as having engaged in criminal activity. Racial profiling pertains to persons who are viewed as suspects or potential suspects of criminal behavior. The term is not relevant as it pertains to witnesses, complainants, persons needing assistance, or other citizen contacts. 
(b)  Race or ethnicity means a particular descent, including but not limited to Caucasian, African, Hispanic, Asian, or Native American descent. 
(c)  Acts constituting racial profiling is an act initiating law enforcement action, such as a traffic stop, a detention, a search, an issuance of a citation, or an arrest based solely upon an individual's race, ethnicity, or national origin or on the basis of racial or ethnic stereotypes, rather than upon the individual's behavior, information identifying the individual as having possibly engaged in criminal activity, or other lawful reasons for the law enforcement action. 
(d)  Pedestrian stop means an interaction between a peace officer and an individual who is being detained for the purposes of a criminal investigation in which the individual is not under arrest. 
(e)  Traffic stop means the stopping of a motor vehicle by a peace officer for an alleged violation of law or ordinance regulating traffic. 
(III)  Prohibition. Peace officers of the City of Denison are strictly prohibited from engaging in racial profiling. The prohibition against racial profiling does not preclude the use of race, ethnicity, or national origin as factors in a detention decision by a peace officer. Race, ethnicity, or national origin may be legitimate factors in such a decision when used as part of a description of a suspect or witness for whom a peace officer is searching. 
(IV)  Complaint process and public education. Any person who believes that a peace officer employed by the city has engaged in racial profiling with respect to that person may file a complaint with the city, and no person shall be discouraged, intimidated, or coerced from filing such a complaint, or be discriminated against because they have filed such a complaint. 
    The city shall accept and investigate citizen complaints alleging racial profiling by its peace officers. Such complaints shall be in writing, or the city employee, officer, or official receiving the complaint should reduce the same to writing, and should include the time, place, and details of the incident of alleged racial profiling, the identity or description of the peace officer or officers involved, and the identity and manner of contacting the complainant. 
    Any peace officer, city employee, or city official who receives a citizen complaint alleging racial profiling shall forward the complaint to the chief of police within twelve (12) hours of receipt of the complaint. Receipt of each complaint shall be acknowledged to the complainant in writing, all such complaints shall be reviewed and investigated by the by the chief of police or his designee within a reasonable period of time, and the results of the review and investigation shall be filed with the city manager and with the complainant. 
    In investigating a complaint alleging racial profiling, the investigator shall seek to determine if the officer who is subject of the complaint has engaged in a pattern of racial profiling that includes multiple acts constituting racial profiling for which there is no reasonable, credible explanation based on established police and law enforcement procedures. A single act constituting racial profiling may not be considered a pattern of racial profiling, and shall not be grounds for corrective action. 
    In the event that a complaint of racial profiling filed by an individual involves an occurrence that was recorded on audio or video, the investigator shall, upon commencement of the investigation of the complaint and upon written request of the officer, promptly provide a copy of the recording to the peace officer that is a subject of the complaint 
    The police department of the city shall provide education to the public concerning the racial profiling complaint process. A summary of the public education efforts made during the preceding year shall be included with the annual report filed with the governing body of the City of Denison under subsection VI below. 
(V)  Corrective action. Any peace officer who is found, after investigation, to have engaged in racial profiling in violation of this policy shall be subject to corrective action, which may include oral or written reprimand; diversity, sensitivity or other appropriate training or counseling; paid or unpaid suspension; termination of employment, or other appropriate action as determined by the chief of police in a manner consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 143. 
(VI)  Collection of information and annual report when citation issued or arrest made. For each traffic stop in which a citation is issued and for each arrest resulting from such traffic stops, a peace officer involved in the stop shall collect information identifying the race or ethnicity of the person detained, stating whether a search was conducted, and if a search was conducted, whether the person detained consented to the search. 
    The information collected shall be compiled in an annual report covering the period January 1 through December 31 of each year, and shall be submitted to the governing body of the City of Denison no later than March 1 of the following year. The annual report shall not include identifying information about any individual stopped or arrested, and shall not include identifying information about any peace officer involved in a stop or arrest. 
(VII)  Audio and video equipment. 
(a)  The chief of police of the city shall, immediately upon enactment of this policy, commence examination of the feasibility of installing video camera equipment and transmitter-activated equipment in each city motor vehicle regularly used to make traffic stops, and transmitter-activated equipment in each city motorcycle regularly used to make traffic stops, and shall report to the governing body of the city on the findings of such examination no later than six (6) months following enactment of this policy. The report shall include funding options available to the city, including any funding available through the department of public safety. 
(b)  In the event that the findings of such examination support the installation of such equipment, the governing body shall consider and take action on installing the equipment, applying for funding to secure and install such equipment, or such other action as the governing body considers appropriate. In the event the examination does not support installing such equipment, the chief of police of the city shall periodically update the governing body on such feasibility. 
(c)  In the event that the governing body determines that funds are needed in order to install the equipment, it shall pass a resolution certifying that fact to the department of public safety. On receipt of either sufficient funds or video and audio equipment, the governing body shall install video and transmitter-activated equipment in each motor vehicle regularly used to make traffic stops, and shall install transmitter-activated equipment on each motorcycle regularly used to make traffic stops, and the governing body shall pass a resolution certifying to the department of public safety that such equipment has been installed and is being used to record each traffic and pedestrian stop made by a peace officer employed by the city that is capable of being recorded by video and audio or audio equipment, as appropriate. 
(VIII)  Review of video and audio-documentation standards. In the event that audio and video equipment is installed, each audio and video recording shall be retained for a minimum period of ninety (90) days unless a complaint is filed alleging that a peace officer of the city has engaged in racial profiling with respect to a traffic or pedestrian stop, in which case the recording shall be retained until final disposition of the complaint. In conjunction with preparation of the annual report required under subsection VI above, the chief of police shall periodically conduct reviews of a randomly-selected sampling of video and audio recordings made recently by peace officers employed by the city in order to determine if patterns of racial profiling exist. 
    In reviewing audio and video recordings, the investigator shall seek to determine if the officer who is involved therein has engaged in a pattern of racial profiling that includes multiple acts constituting racial profiling for which there is no reasonable, credible explanation based on established police and law enforcement procedures. A single act constituting racial profiling may not be considered a pattern of racial profiling, and shall not be grounds for corrective action. 
(IX)  Collection, compilation, analysis, and reporting requirements in absence of either audio and video equipment or nonfunding certification by the governing body. 
(a)  In addition to the annual report required when citations are issued and arrests made, and so long as the city has not equipped all motor vehicles and motorcycles regularly used to make traffic and pedestrian stops with audio and video equipment, as applicable, and so long as the city has not or is not able to certify to the department of public safety that it needs funds for such audio and video equipment but has not received such funds, then each peace officer of the city shall make the following report for each traffic and pedestrian stop: 
(1)  A physical description of each person detained as a result of the stop, including: 
a.  The person's gender; and 
b.  The person's race or ethnicity, as stated by the person, or if the person does not state the person's race or ethnicity, as determined by the officer to the best of his or her ability; 
(2)  The traffic law or ordinances alleged to have been violated or the suspected offense; 
(3)  Whether the officer conducted a search as a result of the stop, and, if so, whether the person detained consented to the search; 
(4)  Whether any contraband was discovered in the course of the search and the type of contraband discovered; 
(5)  Whether probable cause to search existed and the facts supporting the existence of that probable cause; 
(6)  Whether the officer made an arrest as a result of the stop or the search, including a statement of the offense charged; 
(7)  The street address or approximate location of the stop; and 
(8)  Whether the officer issued a warning or a citation as a result of the stop, including a description of the warning or a statement of the violation charged. 
(b)  The information in each report shall be analyzed and compiled in a report that covers the period January 1 through December 31 of each year, and shall be submitted to the governing body of the city no later than March 1 of the following year. Each such report shall include: 
(1)  A comparative analysis of the information compiled by each officer under subsection IX(a)(1)-(8) to: 
a.  Determine the prevalence of racial profiling by peace officers employed by the city; and 
b.  Examine the disposition of traffic and pedestrian stops made by officers employed by the city, including searches resulting from such stops; and 
(2)  Information relating to each complaint filed with the city alleging that a peace officer employed by the city had engaged in racial profiling. 
(c)  The report required by this subsection IX may not include identifying information about a peace officer who makes a traffic or pedestrian stop or about an individual who is stopped or arrested by an officer. 
(d)  The compilation of information, analysis, and report required by this subsection IX shall not be required for any calendar year during which (1) the city has equipped all motor vehicles and motorcycles regularly used to make traffic and pedestrian stops with audio and video equipment, and each traffic and pedestrian stop made by a peace officer employed by the city that is capable of being recorded by video and audio or audio equipment, as appropriate, has been so recorded; or (2) the city has certified to the department of public safety that it needs funds for such audio and video equipment, as described in subsection VII(c) above, but has not received such funds. 
(X)  Peace officer and police chief training. 
(a)  Each peace officer employed by the city shall complete the comprehensive education and training program on racial profiling established by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education (TCLEOSE) not later than the second anniversary of the date the officer was licensed, the date the officer applies for an intermediate proficiency certificate, whichever date is earlier. A person who on September 1, 2001, held a TCLEOSE intermediate proficiency certificate, or who had held a peace officer license issued by TCLEOSE for at least two (2) years, shall complete a TCLEOSE training and education program on racial profiling not later than September 1, 2003. 
    The chief of police shall, in completing the training required by V.T.C.A., Education Code § 96.641, complete the program on racial profiling established by the Bill Blackwood Law Enforcement Management Institute of Texas. 
(XI)  The chief of police is hereby instructed to incorporate the foregoing policy on racial profiling into the department's policy manual immediately and to take each and every step necessary to implement the policy in a manner consistent with this section. 
(Ord. No. 4080, §§ 1, 2, 12-17-01) 
Secs. 2-142-2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Personnel, Ch. 16; solid waste, Ch. 20; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; utilities, Ch. 26. 

Sec. 2-161. - Charter authority; established. 
    Pursuant to section 5.05 of the charter, there is hereby established the public works department. At the head of such department shall be the director of public works, or such other person as may be hereafter designated by position, pursuant to ordinance. 
(Code 1965, § 2-61) 
Secs. 2-162-2-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1(c) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed the former div. 4, § 2-171 which pertained to health department child care facility inspections, and derived from Ord. No. 4126, § 8, adopted Aug. 19, 2002. 

Secs. 2-171-2-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CITY MARSHAL 

Sec. 2-176. - Office of city marshal created. 
    Pursuant to the authority of section 5.03, Denison City Charter, there is hereby created the office of city marshal that shall consist of a city marshal and such deputies as may be authorized from time to time through the funding of such positions in the city's annual budget. The city marshal shall be appointed by the city manager without competitive examination, shall report to the city manager (or his designee), [and] shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The city marshal shall not be a member of the police department, but shall be independent. 
(Ord. No. 4187, § 1, 9-15-03) 
Sec. 2-177. - Powers and duties. 
    The city marshal shall be empowered to promptly and faithfully execute writs and process issued by the municipal court judge and clerk; issue citations upon information from the code enforcement and building inspections departments of the city; be available to the municipal court when it is in session; take suitable and sufficient bail for appearance before the municipal court of a person charged with a violation of a class C misdemeanor or of an ordinance of the municipality; possess the same power and jurisdiction as a peace officer under the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure to execute warrants, writs, capiases and other process, both criminal and civil, issued by the municipal court, and shall perform such other duties as assigned. 
(Ord. No. 4187, § 2, 9-15-03) 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES INDEMNITY[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Tort claims, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 102.001 et seq. 

Sec. 2-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Employees and officials shall mean all persons who were, now are, or shall be paid employees of the city or elected or appointed officials of the city, including, but not limited to, the city council, city manager, city staff, members of boards and commissions established by charter or ordinance of the city and under the jurisdiction and direction of the city council. 
    Losses shall mean amounts such as court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees and judgments, or settlements actually incurred. Losses shall not be construed to include fines or penalties imposed in a criminal matter or punitive damages imposed in a civil suit. 
    Wrongful act shall mean any actual or alleged error, act, statement or omission or neglect or breach of duty by a city employee or official. Provided, however, such wrongful act must be within the course and scope of the employee's or official's authority and/or employment with the city and must not be one of the types of actions excluded in section 2-183. 
(Code 1965, § 2-72) 
Sec. 2-182. - Purpose. 
(a)  This article is enacted for the purpose of providing indemnity to all city employees and elected and appointed officials in order to protect them from the expense of defending any civil lawsuit filed against them in their individual capacity as a result of actions taken while acting within the course and scope of their employment or official duty for the city. 
(b)  It is in the best interest of the city and all of its residents to attract and keep qualified personnel as employees and officials of the city. As an aid in attracting and keeping such qualified personnel, the city should provide either insurance coverage or indemnification for such employees and officials in order to minimize the financial risk of being a city employee or official. 
(c)  The city may also be a defendant or entity against which a claim is made; and where any claim is made simultaneously against the city, and no conflict of interest results, the city, through its own insurance coverage or through its own attorneys or funds authorized for such purposes, will provide a simultaneous defense. In such cases the city will pay any losses and the indemnity fund hereinafter provided and established will not be utilized. 
(Code 1965, § 2-70) 
Sec. 2-183. - Exclusions. 
    Any losses arising in connection with any of the following acts or alleged acts shall not be covered by the indemnity reserve fund: 
(1)  Any criminal act, whether felony or misdemeanor. 
(2)  Acts through which the employee or official gained personal remunerative profit to which he was not entitled. 
(3)  Any act of fraud or dishonesty. 
(4)  Any intentional tort such as assault or battery. 
(5)  Any act which is alleged to create a personal contractual debt on behalf of the city employee or official. 
(6)  Any act which the fund administrator finds to be outside the course and scope of the employee's or official's authority and is inconsistent with, contrary to, or in conflict with the interest of the city. 
(7)  Any act for which a local government is prohibited from paying damages pursuant to V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 102.002(c). 
(Code 1965, § 2-73) 
Sec. 2-184. - Indemnity reserve fund-Created. 
    There is hereby created an indemnity reserve fund for the payment of losses as provided in section 2-181. Appropriations to said fund may be made by the city council from time to time as it, in its discretion, may find to be in the best interest of the city; provided however, the indemnity reserve fund balance shall not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) at any given time, and in that event no appropriation may be made to or from such fund, except as provided herein for the payment of losses incurred. No funds of the city, other than those of the indemnity reserve fund, shall be expended for the losses herein defined for which coverage is extended. Nothing herein shall impose a mandatory obligation upon the city to appropriate the maximum amounts as herein established into the indemnity reserve fund. 
(Code 1965, § 2-74) 
Sec. 2-185. - Same-Administration of fund. 
    The indemnity reserve fund shall be administered by the city manager with the advice and counsel of the city attorney; provided, however, when coverage is sought for an act of the city manager or city attorney, the city council shall administer the fund. 
(Code 1965, § 2-75) 
Sec. 2-186. - Coverage. 
    The city shall pay, up to the maximum amount of the indemnity reserve fund, any and all losses incurred by an employee or official of the city which said employee or official shall become obligated to pay as a result of any claim or claims made against them arising out of any alleged wrongful act while such employee or official is acting within the course and scope of his authority and/or employment, but the city shall have the right to defend any suits filed and investigate any claims made with its own attorney or attorneys chosen by it and may settle claims it deems advisable. 
(Code 1965, § 2-71) 
Secs. 2-187-2-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCES 

Sec. 2-206. - Signing checks. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to use automated check signing equipment to affix signatures of the city manager, director of finance and any other person designated by the city manager in writing and placed on file with the city secretary. It shall be the duty of the city manager to put into place such policies and procedures as may be reasonably necessary to safeguard the equipment and accounts of the city so as to prevent the misuse of such equipment and the financial accounts of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 1(d), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 1(d) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 2-206 in its entirety and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 2-206 derived from the 1965 Code, § 2-11; Ord. No. 3126, § 1, adopted Feb. 6, 1989; and Ord. No. 3349, §§ 1-3, adopted Sept. 14, 1992. 
Secs. 2-207-2-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 3251, adopted Nov. 19, 1990, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1-16 as Art. VI was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-221. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Department head means the officer who, by ordinance, order or administrative policy, is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
    Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the recreation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
    Municipal records means all documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
    Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
    Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
    Records liaison officers mean the persons designated under section 2-228(a). 
    Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
    Records management committee means the committee established in section 2-225. 
    Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-224(a). 
    Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-226. 
    Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. 3251, §§ 1, 2, 11-19-90) 
Sec. 2-222. - Policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. 3251, § 4, 11-19-90) 
Sec. 2-223. - Municipal records declared public property. 
    All municipal records as defined in section 2-221 are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 3251, § 3, 11-19-90) 
Sec. 2-224. - Records management officer. 
(a)  Designated. The city secretary and the successive holds of such office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the state library within thirty (30) days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(b)  Duties. In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to the department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city. 
(7)  Provide records management and assistance to all municipal departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site construction; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and archives commission to determine if the records management program and the municipality's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition of municipal records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13); and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by the department heads or other municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 3251, § 8, 11-19-90; Ord. No. 4701, § 1(e), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 2-225. - Establishment of records management committee; duties. 
    A records management committee consisting of the city manager, the city attorney, the director of finance, and one (1) member of the city council is hereby established. The committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements, if needed; 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer; 
(4)  Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved control schedules; and 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 3251, § 6, 11-19-90) 
Sec. 2-226. - Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The records management committee shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the municipality, and to properly preserve those records of the municipality that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out the duties of that office as prescribed by state law and this article effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees or similar entities of the city and the records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this ordinance and the records management plan adopted and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3251, § 7, 11-19-90) 
Sec. 2-227. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this article department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs and duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3251, § 9, 11-19-90) 
Sec. 2-228. - Records liaison officers. 
(a)  Designation. Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that, in the best interests of the records management program, more than one (1) records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his or her department. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities. In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Ord. No. 3251, §§ 10, 11, 11-19-90) 
Sec. 2-229. - Records control schedules-Development; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and the members of the records management committee. 
(d)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(Ord. No. 3251, § 12, 11-19-90) 
Sec. 2-230. - Same-Implementation; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-226 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee. 
(Ord. No. 3251, § 13, 11-19-90) 
Sec. 2-231. - Same-Destruction of unscheduled records. 
    A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Ord. No. 3251, § 14, 11-19-90) 
Sec. 2-232. - Records center. 
    A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 2-226 shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 2-226. 
(Ord. No. 3251, § 15, 11-19-90) 
Sec. 2-233. - Micrographics. 
    Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the city council, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of municipal records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in rules of the state library and achieves commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency and compliance with commission rules. 
(Ord. No. 3251, § 16, 11-19-90) 
Secs. 2-234-2-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - REGULATIONS FOR BASIC SERVICE CABLE TELEVISION RATES[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3438, adopted Jan. 24, 1994, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. VII, §§ 2-251-2-256. 

Sec. 2-251. - Definitions. 
    In this article: 
    Basic cable rates means the monthly charges for a subscription to the basic service tier and the associated equipment. 
    Basic service tier means a separately available service tier to which subscription is required for access to any other tier of service, including as a minimum, but not limited to, all must-carry signals, all PEG channels, and all domestic television signals other than superstation. 
    Benchmark means a per channel rate of charge for cable service and associated equipment which the FCC has determined is reasonable. 
    Cable Act of 1992 means the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992. 
    Cable operator means any person or group of persons: 
(a)  Who provide cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such a cable system; or 
(b)  Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
    Channel means a unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel number or similar designation. 
    Cost of service showing means a filing in which the cable operator attempts to show that the benchmark rate or the price cap is not sufficient to allow the cable operator to fully recover the costs of providing the basic service tier and to continue to attract capital. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Initial basic cable rates means the rates that the cable operator is charging for the basic service tier, including charges for associated equipment, at the time the city notifies the cable operator of the city's qualification and intent to regulate basic cable rates. 
    Must-carry signal means the signal of any local broadcast station (except superstations) which is required to be carried on the basic service tier. 
    PEG channel means the channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental use, and facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity. 
    Price cap means the ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic cable rates regulated by the city, based on a formula using the GNP fixed weight price index, reflecting general increases in the cost of doing business and changes in overall inflation. 
    Reasonable rate standard means a per channel rate that is at, or below, the benchmark or price cap level. 
    Superstation means any non-local broadcast signal secondarily transmitted by satellite. 
(Ord. No. 3438, § 1, 1-24-94) 
Sec. 2-252. - Initial review of basic cable rates. 
(a)  Notice. Upon the adoption of this ordinance and the certification of the city by the FCC, the city shall immediately notify all cable operators in the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the city intends to regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier and associated equipment as authorized by the Cable Act of 1992. 
(b)  Cable operator response. Within thirty (30) days of receiving notice from the city, a cable operator shall file with the city its current rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment and any supporting material concerning the reasonableness of its rates. 
(c)  Expedited determination and public hearing. 
(1)  If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable benchmark, the city council shall: 
a.  Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and 
b.  Act to approve the rates within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city. 
(2)  If the city council takes no action within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city, the proposed rates will continue in effect. 
(d)  Extended review period. 
(1)  If the city council is unable to determine whether the rates in issue are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the city council shall, within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city and by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination: 
a.  Ninety (90) days if the city council needs more time to ensure that a rate is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard; or 
b.  One hundred fifty (150) days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate above the applicable benchmark. 
(2)  If the city council has not made a decision within the ninety- or one hundred fifty-day period, the city council shall issue a brief written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the proposed rate and on whose behalf the amounts are paid. 
(e)  Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the proposed rate, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record objections. 
(f)  Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed initial basic rate may request the city clerk to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing anytime before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part of the record, the objector must provide the city clerk with the objector's name and address. 
(g)  Benchmark analysis. If a cable operator submits its current basic cable rate schedule as being in compliance with the FCC's reasonable rate standard, the city council shall review the rates using the benchmark analysis in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city council's findings, the initial basic cable rates shall be established as follows: 
(1)  If the current basic cable rates are below the benchmark, those rates shall become the initial basic cable rates and the cable operator's rates will be capped at that level. 
(2)  If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, the rates shall be the greater of the cable operator's per channel rate on September 30, 1992, reduced by ten (10) percent, or the applicable benchmark, adjusted for inflation and any change in the number of channels occurring between September 30, 1992 and the initial date of regulation. 
(3)  If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, but the cable operator's per channel rate was below the benchmark on September 30, 1992, the initial basic cable rate shall be the benchmark, adjusted for inflation. 
(h)  Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator does not wish to reduce the rates to the permitted level, the cable operator shall have the opportunity to submit a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify initial basic cable rates above the FCC's reasonable rate standard. The city council will review a cost-of-service submission pursuant to FCC standards for cost-of-service review. The city council may approve initial basic cable rates above the benchmark if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service determination in rates below the benchmark or below the cable operator's September 30, 1992 rates minus ten (10) percent will prescribe the cable operator's new rates. 
(i)  Decision. 
(1)  By formal resolution. After completion of its review of the cable operator's proposed rates, the city council shall adopt its decision by formal resolution. The decision shall include one of the following: 
a.  If the proposal is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or is justified by a cost-of-service analysis, the city council shall approve the initial basic cable rates proposed by the cable operator, or 
b.  If the proposal is not within the FCC's reasonable rate standard and the cost-of-service analysis, if any, does not justify the proposed rates, the city council shall establish initial basic cable rates that are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or that are justified by a cost-of-service analysis. 
(2)  Rollbacks and refunds. If the city council determines that the initial basic cable rates as submitted exceed the reasonable rate standard or that the cable operator's cost-of-service showing justifies lower rates, the city council may order the rates in accordance with paragraph (g) or (h) above, as applicable. In addition, the city council may order the cable operator to pay to subscribers' refunds of the excessive portion of the rates with interest (computed at applicable rates published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax payments), retroactive to September 1, 1993, or one year, whichever is less. The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the city council's decision resolution. 
(3)  Statement of reasons for decision and public notice. If rates proposed by a cable operator are disapproved in whole or in part, or if there were objections made by other parties to the proposed rates, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision and the city council must give public notice of its decision. Public notice will be given by advertisement once in the official newspaper of the city. 
(j)  Appeal. The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment may be appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3438, § 2, 1-24-94) 
Sec. 2-253. - Review of request for increase in basic cable rates. 
(a)  Notice. A cable operator in the city who wishes to increase the rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment shall file a request with the city and notify all subscribers at least thirty (30) days before the cable operator desires the increase to take effect. This notice may not be given more often than quarterly and not until at least one year after the determination of the initial basic cable rates. 
(b)  Expedited determination and public hearing. 
(1)  If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rate increase request for basic cable service is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable price cap, the city council shall: 
a.  Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and 
b.  Act to approve the rate increase within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its request with the city. 
(2)  If the city council takes no action within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its request with the city, the proposed rates will go into effect. 
(c)  Extended review period. 
(1)  If the city council is unable to determine whether the rate increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the city council shall, by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination: 
a.  Ninety (90) days if the city council needs more time to ensure that the requested increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard as determined by the applicable price cap; and 
b.  One hundred fifty (150) days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate increase above the applicable price cap. 
(2)  The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended review period. 
(3)  If the city council has not made a decision within the ninety- or one hundred fifty-day period, the city council shall issue a brief written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the proposed rate increase and on whose behalf the amounts are paid. 
(d)  Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the requested rate increase, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record objections. 
(e)  Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed rate increase may request the city clerk to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing anytime before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part of the record, the objector must provide the city clerk with the objector's name and address. 
(f)  Delayed determination. If the city council is unable to make a final determination concerning a requested rate increase within the extended time period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect, subject to subsequent refund if the city council later issues a decision disapproving any portion of the increase. 
(g)  Price cap analysis. If a cable operator presents its request for a rate increase as being in compliance with the FCC's price cap, the city council shall review the rate using the price cap analysis in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city council's findings, the basic cable rates shall be established as follows: 
(1)  If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the price cap established by the FCC, the proposed rates shall become the new basic cable rates. 
(2)  If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap established by the FCC, the city council shall disapprove the proposed rate increase and order an increase that is in compliance with the price cap. 
(h)  Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify a rate increase above the price cap, the city council will review the submission pursuant to the FCC standards for cost-of-service review. The city council may approve a rate increase above the price cap if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service determination resulting in a rate below the price cap or below the cable operator's then current rate will prescribe the cable operator's new rate. 
(i)  Decision. The city council's decision concerning the requested rate increase, shall be adopted by formal resolution. If a rate increase proposed by a cable operator is disapproved in whole or in part, or if objections were made by other parties to the proposed rate increase, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision. Objections may be made at the public hearing by a person requesting the city clerk to record the objection or may be submitted in writing at anytime before the decision resolution is adopted. 
(j)  Refunds. 
(1)  The city council may order refunds of subscribers' rate payments with interest if: 
a.  The city council was unable to make a decision within the extended time period as described in paragraph (c) above; and 
b.  The cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end of the extended review period; and 
c.  The city council determines that the rate increase as submitted exceeds the applicable price cap or that the cable operator failed to justify the rate increase by a cost-of-service showing, and the city council disapproves any portion of the rate increase. 
(2)  The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the city council's decision resolution. 
(k)  Appeal. The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment, may be appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3438, § 3, 1-24-94) 
Sec. 2-254. - Cable operator information. 
(a)  City may require. 
(1)  In those cases when the cable operator has submitted initial rates or proposed an increase that exceeds the reasonable rate standard, the city council may require the cable operator to produce information in addition to that submitted, including proprietary information, if needed to make a rate determination. In these cases, a cable operator may request the information be kept confidential in accordance with this section. 
(2)  In cases where initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable rate standard, the city council may request additional information only in order to document that the cable operator's rates are in accord with the standard. 
(b)  Request for confidentiality. 
(1)  A cable operator submitting information to the city council may request in writing that the information not be made routinely available for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and cover all of the information and all copies of the information to which it applies. 
(2)  If feasible, the information to which the request applies shall be physically separated from any information to which the request does not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion of the information to which the request applies shall be identified. 
(3)  Each request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding inspection and a statement of the facts upon which those reasons are based. 
(4)  Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of this subsection shall not be considered. 
(c)  City council action. Requests which comply with the requirements of subsection (b), will be acted upon by the city council. The city council will grant the request if the cable operator presents by a preponderance of the evidence, a case for nondisclosure consistent with applicable federal regulations. If the request is granted, the ruling will be placed in a public file in lieu of the information withheld from public inspection. If the request does not present a case for nondisclosure and the city council denies the request, the city council shall take one of the following actions: 
(1)  If the information has been submitted voluntarily without any direction from the city, the cable operator may request that the city return the information without considering it. Ordinarily, the city will comply with this request. Only in the unusual instance that the public interest so requires, will the information be made available for public inspection. 
(2)  If the information was required to be submitted by the city council, the information will be made available for public inspection. 
(d)  Appeal. If the city council denies the request for confidentiality, the cable operator may seek review of that decision from the FCC within five (5) working days of the city council's decision, and the release of the information will be stayed pending review. 
(Ord. No. 3438, § 4, 1-24-94) 
Sec. 2-255. - Automatic rate adjustments. 
(a)  Annual inflation adjustment. In accordance with FCC regulations, the cable operator may adjust its capped base per channel rate for the basic service tier annually by the final GNP-PI index. 
(b)  Other external costs. 
(1)  The FCC regulations also allow the cable operator to increase its rate for the basic service tier automatically to reflect certain external cost factors to the extent that the increase in cost of those factors exceeds the GNP-PI. These factors include retransmission consent fees, programming costs, state and local taxes applicable to the provision of cable television service, and costs of franchise requirements. The total cost of an increase in a franchise fee may be automatically added to the base per channel rate, without regard to the GNP-PI. 
(2)  For all categories of external costs other than retransmission consent and franchise fees, the starting date for measuring changes in external costs for which the basic service per channel rate may be adjusted will be the date on which the basic service tier becomes subject to regulation or February 28, 1994, whichever occurs first. The permitted per channel charge may not be adjusted for costs of retransmission consent fees or changes in those fees incurred before October 6, 1994. 
(c)  Notification and review. The cable operator shall notify the city at least thirty (30) days in advance of a rate increase based on automatic adjustment items. The city shall review the increase to determine whether the item or items qualify as automatic adjustments. If the city makes no objection within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of the increase, the increase may go into effect. 
(Ord. No. 3438, § 5, 1-24-94) 
Sec. 2-256. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Refunds. The city may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion of previously paid rates under the following circumstances: 
(1)  A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be in excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment; or 
(2)  The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued by the city. 
(b)  Fines. If the cable operator fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order, the cable operator shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day the cable operator fails to comply. 
(Ord. No. 3438, § 6, 1-24-94) 
Secs. 2-257-2-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MUNICIPAL COURT FUNDS AND FEES[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4972, § 3, adopted Nov. 5, 2018, repealed former art. VIII in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former art. VIII, §§ 2-266-2-269, pertained to the municipal court technology fund, and derived from Ord. No. 4035, §§ 1-4, adopted April 2, 2001. 

Sec. 2-266. - Establishment and assessment of the municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, hereinafter known as "technology fund," pursuant to article 102.0172, as it exists or may be amended, of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)  The City of Denison Municipal Court is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court technology fee in the amount of four dollars ($4.00) against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. 
(c)  The technology fee shall be collected on convictions for offenses committed on or after May 1, 2001. 
(Ord. No. 4972, § 3, 11-5-18) 
Sec. 2-267. - Designated use of the technology fund. 
(a)  The technology fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of or to maintain technological enhancements for the municipal court of the City of Denison, Texas, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Computer systems; 
(2)  Computer networks; 
(3)  Computer hardware; 
(4)  Computer software; 
(5)  Imaging systems; 
(6)  Electronic kiosks; 
(7)  Electronic ticket writers; and/or 
(8)  Docket management systems. 
(b)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council of the City of Denison, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 4972, § 3, 11-5-18) 
Sec. 2-268. - Establishment and assessment of the municipal court building security fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund, hereinafter known as "security fund," pursuant to article 102.017, as it exists or may be amended, of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)  The City of Denison Municipal Court is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court building security fee in the amount of three dollars ($3.00) against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. 
(c)  The building security fee shall be collected on convictions for offenses committed on or after May 7, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 4972, § 3, 11-5-18) 
Sec. 2-269. - Designated use of the security fund. 
    The security fund shall be used only for financing the purchase of security devices and/or services for the building or buildings housing the municipal court of the City of Denison, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems; 
(2)  Handheld metal detectors; 
(3)  Walkthrough metal detectors; 
(4)  Identification cards and systems; 
(5)  Electronic locking and surveillance equipment; 
(6)  Video teleconferencing systems; 
(7)  Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security services; 
(8)  Signage; 
(9)  Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems; 
(10)  Locks, chains, alarms, or similar security devices; 
(11)  The purchase or repair of bullet-proof glass; 
(12)  Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel; and/or 
(13)  Warrant officers and related equipment. 
(Ord. No. 4972, § 3, 11-5-18) 
Sec. 2-270. - Establishment and assessment of the juvenile case manager fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court juvenile case manager fund, pursuant to articles 102.0174 and 45.056 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as exists or may be amended. 
(b)  The City of Denison Municipal Court is hereby authorized to assess a juvenile case manager fee in the amount of five dollars ($5.00) against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. 
(c)  The juvenile case manager fee shall be collected on convictions entered during the time that the city employees a juvenile case manager. 
(Ord. No. 4972, § 3, 11-5-18) 
Sec. 2-271. - Designated use of the juvenile case manager fund. 
(a)  The juvenile case manager fund may be used to finance the salary, benefits, training, travel expenses, office supplies, and other necessary expenses relating to the position of the juvenile case manager that is employed by the municipal court under article 45.056(a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. If there is any money remaining in the fund after those costs are paid, on approval by the employing court, a juvenile case manager may direct the remaining money to be used to implement programs directly related to the duties of the juvenile case manager, including juvenile alcohol and substance abuse programs, educational and leadership programs, and any other projects designed to prevent or reduce the number of juvenile referrals to the court. 
(b)  The juvenile case manager fund may not be used to supplement the income of an employee whose primary role is not that of a juvenile case manager. 
(Ord. No. 4972, § 3, 11-5-18) 
Sec. 2-272. - Convictions for the purpose of assessing fees. 
    The technology fee, security fee, and when a juvenile case manager is employed the juvenile case manager fee, shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as costs of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
(1)  A judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person; 
(2)  The person is placed on deferred disposition; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgement and sentence. 
(Ord. No. 4972, § 3, 11-5-18) 
Sec. 2-273. - Establishment and assessment of the warrant special expense fee. 
(a)  There is hereby created a special expense fee, pursuant to articles 45.203 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)  The City of Denison Municipal Court is hereby authorized to assess a special expense fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) against all defendants who fail to appear pursuant to V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 38.10 or V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 543.009 when a warrant for arrest is issued for the defendant who failed to appear without showing good cause. 
(c)  The special expense fee may be assessed for the issuance and service of warrants occurring after the date of which this ordinance [from which this article derives] becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 4972, § 3, 11-5-18) 
Sec. 2-274. - Designated use of warrant special expense fees. 
    Warrant special expense fees may be administered for the use and benefit of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 4972, § 3, 11-5-18) 
Sec. 2-275. - Administration of fees. 
(a)  The clerk of the court shall collect and pay all fees to the municipal treasurer of the City of Denison, who shall deposit the technology fee into the municipal court technology fund, the security fee into the municipal court building security fund, and the juvenile case manager fee into the municipal court juvenile case manager fund. Special expense fees for the issuance and service of warrants shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(b)  All fees collected pursuant to this article, must be administered by or under the direction of the council. 
(Ord. No. 4972, § 3, 11-5-18) 
Sec. 2-276. - Waiver of fees. 
    The judge of the municipal court may waive fees established or adopted by ordinance in cases of demonstrated financial hardship if the defendant is indigent, has insufficient resources or income to pay the fee, or is otherwise unable to pay all or part of the underlying fine or costs. The judge may grant time served or alternative methods of payment, such as payment plans or community service, to discharge the fees, when necessary to comply with Chapter 45 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, or when the judge determines it is in the interest of justice. 
(Ord. No. 4972, § 3, 11-5-18) 
Secs. 2-277-2-285. - Reserved. 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Alcoholic beverages, § 10.14. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; food and food establishments, Ch. 9; nuisances, Ch. 13; signs, Ch. 19; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; zoning, Ch. 28. 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise provided, the words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the same meanings as ascribed to them by V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code. The term "beer establishment," as used herein, shall mean any place where beer is sold for consumption or is permitted to be consumed on the premises where sold. 
(Code 1965, § 3-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-2. - License or permit to manufacture, sell, distribute, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, brew, distill, sell or distribute any wine, beer, liquor or other alcoholic beverage within the city, or engage in any other activity for which a license or permit is required by the state alcoholic beverage code, without first obtaining a license from the city. The annual fee charged by the city for a license or permit shall be an amount equal to one-half (1/2) the fee charged by the state for a license or permit to engage in similar activity. Such fee shall be paid to the city secretary and the city secretary shall provide suitable and proper blanks for issuing receipts therefore referred and shall keep a duplicate copy of all licenses and permit receipts issued as a part of the records of his/her office. All license and permit receipts issued under the terms of this section shall terminate two (2) years from the date of issuance and no license or permit receipt shall be issued covering a longer term than two (2) years. 
(b)  No applicant shall be granted a license or permit under this section who has not first been approved by the county and who fails to present satisfactory evidence of the same. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to sell beer at retail, other than a manufacturer or distributor, to use or display a license or permit or to exercise any privilege granted by a license or permit except at the place, address, premises and location for which the license is granted. 
(Code 1965, § 3-2; Ord. No. 4701, § 2(a), 6-17-13) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to levy fee in amount not exceeding one-half the state fee, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 11.38, 61.36. 
Sec. 3-3. - Late hours licenses and permits-Issuance. 
(a)  The holder of a retail dealer's on-premises late hours license is hereby authorized to sell, offer for sale, and deliver beer on Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. and on any day except Sunday between the hours of midnight and 2:00 a.m. 
(b)  The holder of a private club late hours permit may allow persons to consume or be served alcoholic beverages on club premises on Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. and on any other day between the hours of midnight and 2:00 a.m. 
(c)  A city fee in the amount of one-half of the state fee is hereby levied for each retail dealer's on-premises late hours license and private club late hours permit issued pursuant to the provisions of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code for premises located within the corporate limits of the city. Payment of such fee shall entitle the applicant to a city license or permit the equivalent of the state license or permit. 
(Code 1965, § 3-3) 
State Law reference- Extended hours permit, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 105.03(c), (d), 105.05(c), (d). 
Sec. 3-4. - Late hours licenses and permits; expiration. 
    All the retail dealer's on-premises late hours licenses and/or private club late hours permits issued by the city shall expire at 12:00 midnight August 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 2(b), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 2(b) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 3-4 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as herein set out. Former § 3-4 was entitled "Late hours licenses and permits; expiration; proration of fee," and derived from the 1965 Code, § 3.31. 
Sec. 3-5. - Sale near church, school or hospital. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages by any dealer is prohibited within three hundred (300) feet of any church, public school or public hospital. This section shall not apply where the church, school or hospital is built within three hundred (300) feet of a place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold existing on September 4, 1963. 
(b)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public schools shall be from the nearest property line of the public school to the nearest doorway by which the public may enter the place of business, along street lines and in direct line across intersections. For any permit or license covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering the premises under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53, the measurement of the distance between the premises and a public school shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. 
(c)  Every applicant for an original alcoholic beverage license or permit for a location with a door by which the public may enter the place of business of the applicant that is within one thousand (1,000) feet of the nearest property line of a public school, measured along street lines and directly across intersections, must give written notice of the application to officials of the public school before filing the application with the state alcoholic beverage commission. A copy of the notice must be submitted to the state alcoholic beverage commission with the application. This subsection does not apply to a permit or license covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering the premises under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53. 
(d)  As to any dealer who held a license or permit on September 1, 1983, in a location where a regulation under this section was in effect on that date, for purposes of subsection (a), but not subsection (c), of this section, the measurement of the distance between the place of business of the dealer and a public school shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. This subsection applies only as long as the place of business is continuously in operation from that date, whether or not under the same license or permit. 
(Code 1965, § 3-4) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; public places, Ch. 18; zoning, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to enact ordinance, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33. 
Sec. 3-6. - Consumption or possession in cemeteries prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or have in his possession any alcoholic beverages within any cemetery located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 3-16; Ord. No. 4701, §§ 2(c), (d), 6-17-13) 
Cross reference- Cemeteries, § 18-26 et seq. 
Editor's note- Section 2(c) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 3-6 which pertained to building requirements for on-premises establishments, and derived from the 1965 Code, § 3-6. Section 2(d) of said ordinance renumbered § 3-9 as § 3-6. 
Sec. 3-7. - Possession or consumption in parks prohibited. 
    No person shall consume or have in his possession any alcoholic beverage as defined by the laws of the state while on public park property owned by the city; provided however, this section shall not apply to T-Bar Softball Park during adult league play or tournaments, nor during the days and hours in which a duly issued special event permit has been issued and in effect within the boundaries of the entertainment district as that district may be defined from time to time. The city manager shall promulgate rules to govern the use of alcohol. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 2(e), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 2(c) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 3-7 which pertained to regulations for beer establishment personnel, and derived from the 1965 Code, § 3-7. Section 2(e) of said ordinance, repealed former § 3-10, which pertained to possession or consumption in parks prohibited, and derived from the 1965 Code, § 3-17 and Ord. No. 3132, § 2, adopted March 7, 1989. Said section 2(e) enacted new provisions as § 3-7. 
Sec. 3-8. - Possession prohibited at school athletic events. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or carry into any enclosure, field or stadium, where athletic events sponsored or participated in by any public school are being held, any alcoholic beverage or to have any alcoholic beverage in his possession while in or on such enclosure, field or stadium. 
(Code 1965, § 3-19; Ord. No. 4701, § 2(f), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 2(c) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 3-8 which pertained to consumption in public places prohibited, and derived from the 1965 Code, § 3-15. Section 2(f) of said ordinance, renumbered § 3-11 as § 3-8. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Education Code § 37.122. 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; food and food establishments, Ch. 9; housing, Ch. 10; HUD-code manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 12; nuisances, Ch. 13; zoning, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference- Rabies control, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-6a; estrays, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 142.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Maintenance of premises where animals kept. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having under his control any premises upon which is located or maintained any pen, yard or other enclosure for the keeping of horses, cattle or other animals to fail to keep such pen, yard or enclosure free and clear from all stagnant water, slops, filth, manure and mire. 
(Code 1965, § 4-1; Ord. No. 3548, § 3, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 3552, § 1, 6-5-95) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 13. 
Sec. 4-2. - Keeping of swine and goats prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, or cause to be kept, any swine within the corporate limits of the city, except under the following circumstances: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, or raise more than two (2) adult potbellied pigs in any one (1) household within the city. A potbellied pig is considered an adult potbellied pig when it reaches six (6) months of age. A person may keep in excess of two (2) potbellied pigs in any one (1) household within the city if the pigs are non-adult potbellied pigs, but under no set of circumstances may such non-adult potbellied pigs come from more than one (1) litter. 
(2)  All such potbellied pigs shall be kept indoors at all times other than times for evacuation of waste material or during exercise periods. 
(3)  All such potbellied pigs shall receive animal vaccinations for erysipelas. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the pig and of the property to forward to the animal control supervisor an erysipelas vaccination certificate from a licensed veterinarian which shall include the following information: 
a.  Name and address of pet owner; 
b.  Description of the pet; 
c.  Date of vaccination; 
d.  Tag number; and 
e.  Other appropriate information. 
(4)  No person shall keep any potbellied pig at any location within the city unless such person has filed with the animal control supervisor an Application of Harboring a Potbellied Pig, and such application has been approved by the animal control supervisor. 
(5)  For purposes of this section, the term "potbellied pig" shall mean a variety of swine meeting the standards of the North American Pot Bellied Pig Association. 
(6)  Swine may be kept under direct supervision by and upon the premises of public and private schools, fairs, or livestock shows so long as such swine are not kept closer than five hundred (500) feet from any habitation located on another's property. 
(b)  Except as may be provided elsewhere within this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep, or cause to be kept, any goat within the corporate limits of the city, except under the following circumstances: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, or raise more than two (2) adult pygmy goats in any one (1) household within the city. A pygmy goat is considered an adult when it reaches six (6) months of age. A person may keep in excess of two (2) pygmy goats in any one household within the city if the goats are non-adult, but under no set of circumstances may such non-adult pygmy goats come from more than one (1) litter. 
(2)  All such pygmy goats shall receive animal vaccinations as may be required by a doctor of veterinary medicine. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the goat and of the property to forward to the animal control supervisor vaccination certificate from a licensed veterinarian which shall include the following information: 
a.  Name and address of pet owner; 
b.  Description of the pet; 
c.  Date and type of vaccination; 
d.  Tag number; and 
e.  Other appropriate information. 
(3)  No person shall keep any pygmy goat at any location with the city unless such person has filed with the animal control supervisor an Application of Harboring a Pygmy Goat, and such application has been approved by the animal control supervisor. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, the term "Pygmy Goat" shall mean a variety of goat meeting the standards of the National Pygmy Goat Association. 
(Code 1965, § 4-2; Ord. No. 3498, §§ 1, 2, 11-21-94; Ord. No. 3548, §§ 1, 2, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 4-3. - Fences and space allocations for livestock and fowl. 
    No person shall maintain livestock or fowl within the city unless the following requirements and space allocations for each animal or fowl are satisfied: 
(1)  Horses, mules, jacks, jennets, ponies or other animals of like kind. There shall be a minimum enclosed space of one-half acre for each horse, mule, jack, jennet, pony or other animal of like kind kept within the city limits. Such one-half acre shall be in addition to the area on which a residence or business structure is located. The shed used for protection against the elements may be located on this plot. Every additional horse, mule, jack, jennet, pony or other animal of like kind that is kept on the same lot must be given an additional one-half acre. Such lot must be enclosed with a suitable safe fence. Space and other requirements for properly zoned enclosed riding schools, riding schools, enclosed stables (public or commercial) and stables (public or commercial) are listed in section 4-6. 
(2)  Cows. There shall be a minimum enclosed space of one-half acre for each cow kept within the city. Such one-half acre shall be in addition to the area on which a residence or business structure is located. The shed for protection against the elements and used for milking purposes may be located on this plot. Any additional cows will be given one-half acre each. The lot will be enclosed with a suitable safe fence. 
(3)  Goats and sheep. Any goat or sheep kept in the city limits will be allowed a minimum enclosed space of one-half acre for stable and lot. Such one-half acre shall be in addition to the area on which a residence or business structure is located. Any additional goat or sheep kept at the same lot will be granted an additional one-half acre. 
(4)  Chickens. Any fowl lot maintained in the city limits must be large enough to provide twelve (12) square feet per chicken. The chicken house will be allowed to be a part of this area. Suitable wire shall be used as the fence material for chickens. The house must be of such construction as will allow for ease in cleaning and airing. 
(5)  Rabbits. Suitable wire or metal shall be used as fence and hutch material for rabbits. All rabbit hutches must be kept in a sanitary manner at all times, and so constructed as to allow ease in cleaning. 
(6)  Location of pens and coops; cleanliness. The lot in which horses, mules, jacks, jennets, ponies or other animals of like kind, cows, goats or sheep are kept under provisions of this section may not be located nearer than one hundred (100) feet to the nearest adjoining residence, and on vacant lots have free run from property line to property line. Fowl lots maintained under the provisions of sections 4-3 through 4-6 may not be situated closer than fifty (50) feet to the nearest adjoining residence. Rabbit hutches may not be located nearer than fifty (50) feet to the nearest adjoining residence. All animals or fowl and rabbit shelters or buildings will be thoroughly cleaned at least once per week and will be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition at all times. 
(7)  Exception. Provided, however, that this section shall not apply to property or acreage not subdivided or platted. 
(Code 1965, § 4-7; Ord. No. 3498, 11-21-94; Ord. No. 3548, § 1, 5-15-95) 
Cross reference- Zoning, Ch. 28. 
Sec. 4-4. - Exemption for educational facilities. 
    Vocational agriculture or animal husbandry facilities owned and maintained by state-accredited educational institutions or public school systems shall be exempted from the provisions of sections 4-2 and 4-3 restricting the kind and number of animals kept within the city; provided, however, nothing herein shall be construed to exempt such facilities from all other provisions of this Code not specifically exempted herein. 
(Ord. No. 3112, § 1, 11-21-88) 
Sec. 4-5. - Equine kept at a riding school or public stable. 
    No person shall maintain any equine in a riding school or stable (public or commercial) within the city unless the following requirements and space allocations are met: 
(1)  This section is applicable only to a riding school or stable (public or commercial) which is located in the proper zone according to the city's zoning ordinance. 
(2)  There shall be a minimum enclosed space of one thousand (1,000) square feet for each horse, mule, jack, jennet, pony, or other equine kept in a riding school or stable (public or commercial). This space requirement may be met through individual pens and/or stalls of that minimum size. Alternatively, this space requirement may be met through individual stalls of a smaller size together with joint turnout, or exercise, pen(s) to aggregate this minimum amount per equine kept at the school or stable. 
(3)  Every pen and stall must be at least twenty (20) feet from any adjacent residence located in a residential zone (UE, 1F-1, 1F-2, 1F-3, 2F, MF-1, MF-2, MH). 
(4)  All pens and stalls in which any equines are kept in the city shall be so drained and offal so removed as to create no offensive odor or smell. 
(5)  It is preferred that all pens and stalls be paved with concrete or asphaltic concrete, but a sand base will be allowed if adequate dry bedding is provided to eliminate pooling and/or runoff of liquid offal and if such sand base and dry bedding is effective in controlling odors. 
(6)  Pens and stalls shall be cleaned daily. Manure and wet bedding shall be placed in a metal, concrete, or plastic container securely screened or otherwise protected from flies, vermin, and rodents. This container shall be emptied, with contents promptly removed from the premises, not less than once each week. Alternatively, manure and wet bedding may be placed in a compost pile located at least one hundred (100) feet from any adjacent residence and at least twenty (20) feet from any other adjacent building. Such compost pile shall be turned not less than once each week. 
(7)  No fly concentration shall be allowed on the premises. 
(Code 1965, § 4-8) 
Sec. 4-6. - Certain animals prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of Section 822.116, Health and Safety Code of the State of Texas, no person shall keep, harbor, or maintain within the city a dangerous or domesticated wild animal, as that term may be defined from time to time by the State of Texas, including, but not limited to, a lion, a tiger, an ocelot, a cougar, a leopard, a cheetah, a jaguar, a bobcat, a lynx, a serval, a caracal, a hyena, a bear, a coyote, a jackal, a baboon, a chimpanzee, an orangutan, a gorilla, a wildcat, a wolf or a hybrid of any of the animals herein listed. 
(b)  No person shall keep, harbor, or maintain any poisonous snake or reptile within the city. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any of the exceptions enumerated in Section 822.102 (a), Health and Safety Code of the State of Texas, now or as hereafter amended. 
(Code 1965, § 4-9; Ord. No. 4077, 11-19-01) 
Sec. 4-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4882, § 2, adopted June 19, 2017, repealed former § 4-7 which pertained to vicious or dangerous animals prohibited, and derived from the 1965 Code, § 4-42. 
Sec. 4-8. - Guard dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful to place or maintain any dog which has been specifically trained to attack in any area for the protection of persons or property, unless the dog is physically confined to a specific area or is under complete and absolute control. The area or premises in which a guard dog is confined must be conspicuously posted with warning signs bearing letters not less than two (2) inches high. 
(Code 1965, § 4-43) 
Sec. 4-9. - Animals running at large prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper or person having control over any chicken or other fowl or horse, cow, mule, jack, jennet, sheep, goat, hog or other animal of like kind to permit the same to run at large at any time within the corporate limits of the city or to interfere with or trespass upon the premises of any other person, unless the consent of such other person shall first be obtained. 
(b)  All persons keeping or raising chickens and other fowl within the city shall keep them confined in suitable coops or in yards properly fenced to prevent them from escaping and running at large. All such persons shall keep such coops or yards in a clean and sanitary condition, so that the same shall not become foul or offensive to the adjacent neighbors or dangerous to the public health. 
(Code 1965, §§ 4-3, 4-5, 4-6) 
Cross reference- Housing, Ch. 10; HUD-code manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 12; nuisances, Ch. 13; public property, Ch. 18; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; subdivision regulations, Ch. 22; zoning, Ch. 28. 
Sec. 4-10. - Impounding animals. 
(a)  Animals owned or harbored in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or law of the state shall be taken into custody by the animal control officer or other designated official and be impounded. Stray animals shall be similarly impounded. 
(b)  As soon as practicable after impoundment, if the owner of the impounded animal is known, immediate notice shall be given to him. Any impounded animal may be redeemed upon payment of the care and feeding charges, veterinary charges, rabies vaccination charges, and such other costs as set by the city council and on file in the city clerk's office. If such animal is not redeemed within seventy-two (72) hours of the notice, it shall be deemed abandoned and may be placed for adoption subject to payment of the impoundment fee, care and feeding charges, veterinary charges, and such other costs as set by the city council or the animal may be humanely euthanized under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. 
(c)  Any animal taken into custody pursuant to this chapter, except those animals which have inflicted bites on humans or animals during the preceding ten (10) days and that are visibly affected with any sign of communicable disease other than rabies, which are being held at the impounding facility, may, instead of being impounded, be humanely destroyed. Any animal which has inflicted any bites on humans or animals during the preceding ten (10) days shall have its head removed and submitted to the laboratory for rabies examination. 
(Code 1965, § 4-45) 
Sec. 4-11. - Abandoning animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully abandon any animal, or to withhold food or water from any animal such that its health is endangered, or it is caused to suffer unduly. 
(Code 1965, § 4-44) 
Sec. 4-12. - Disposal of dead animals. 
    Dogs, cats or other dead animals shall not be placed in garbage bags or garbage containers furnished by the city. The city shall pick up a dead animal upon notice to the city. Larger animals shall be removed by and at the expense of the owner to a proper place of disposal and buried to sufficient depth to eliminate any health hazard or other nuisance. 
(Code 1965, § 12-8) 
Sec. 4-13. - Animal control officer. 
    The director of public health shall, with the consent and approval of the city council, appoint an individual to act as animal control officer who shall perform the duties and responsibilities outlined in this article. Any city police officer is hereby empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 4-46) 
Sec. 4-14. - Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon first conviction, be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon second conviction, be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), plus an amount equal to the expenses relating to the animal attack upon human beings or domestic animals. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon three (3) or more convictions, be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus any expenses relating to animal attacks upon human beings or domestic animals, but in no event shall the fine exceed the jurisdictional limit of the municipal court. 
(Code 1965, § 4-47) 
Secs. 4-15-4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 4-31. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the following words and terms, unless the context indicates a different meaning, shall be interpreted as follows: 
    Animal means any living creature classified as a member of the animal kingdom, including but not limited to dogs, cats, cows, horses, birds, fish, mammals, reptiles, insects, fowl, and livestock, but specifically excluding human beings. 
    Animal control department means an establishment that is operated, controlled, or contracted with by the city for the confinement, safekeeping, control and/or destruction of animals which come into the custody of the city. 
    Animal control officer means any individual employed, contracted with, or appointed by the city for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of this article or any other law or code relating to the licensure of animals, control of animals, or seizure and impoundment of animals, and includes any state or local law enforcement officer or other employee whose duties in whole or in part include assignments that involve the seizure and impoundment of any animal (see "local rabies control authority"). 
    Cat means a domestic feline of either sex, including one (1) neutered or sterilized. 
    Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of the appropriate authority and whether upon private or public property: 
(1)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(2)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person; or 
(3)  Has, when unprovoked, chased or approached a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, provided that such actions are attested to in a sworn statement by one (1) or more persons and dutifully investigated by the appropriate authority; or 
(4)  At the time, a person attacked was not committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or was not teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or has not, in the past, been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog or was not committing or attempting to commit a crime; or 
(5)  Without provocation, bites or attacks another animal. 
    Dog means all domesticated members of Canis familiaris, male and female, alive or dead. 
    Domestic animal shall include all species of animals commonly and universally accepted as being domesticated. 
    Euthanasia means to humanely cause the death of an animal by a method which: 
(1)  Rapidly produces unconsciousness and death without visible evidence of pain or distress; or 
(2)  Utilizes anesthesia produced by an agent which causes painless loss of consciousness with death following such loss of consciousness. 
    Harboring means the act of keeping and caring for an animal, or of providing a premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter, or care for a period of ten (10) days. 
    Impound means to seize and hold in the custody of the local rabies control authority or other authority such as a veterinarian. 
    Law enforcement officer means those authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, namely, the local rabies control authority, any animal control officer, or any peace officer. 
    Local rabies control authority means the animal control officer is designated as the local rabies control authority and has authority to appoint representatives to enforce the provisions of this chapter, receive reports of animal bites, investigate animal bites, insure quarantine of possibly rabid animals and otherwise carry out provisions of state law pertaining to control and eradication of rabies. 
    Owner means a person who owns or has custody or control of a dog. 
    Person means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation or any other legal entity. 
    Pet shall include dogs, cats, rabbits, rodents, birds, reptiles, and any other species of animal which is sold or retained as a household pet, but shall not include skunks, nonhuman primates, and any other species of wild, exotic or carnivorous animal that may be further restricted in this law. 
    Police dog means any dog used by a law enforcement agency or its officers in the administration of official duties. 
    Quarantine means strict confinement under restraint by closed cage or padlock or in any other manner approved in this chapter or state law on the private premises of the owner or at a facility approved by the state board of health or its designee, or the local rabies control authority. 
    Rabies vaccination shall mean the vaccination of a dog, cat, or other domestic animal with an antirabies vaccine approved by the United States Department of Agriculture and administered by a veterinarian licensed by the state. 
    Running at large means an animal not under the physical control of the owner or his authorized representative. 
    Secure enclosure shall mean, while on the owner's property, a dangerous dog is securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children (nine (9) years of age or younger) and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and, where appropriate, a secure top to prevent the dog from escaping over, under, or through the structure and shall also provide protection from the elements. 
    Severe injury means any physical injury which results in broken bones, multiple bites, or disfiguring lacerations requiring sutures or reconstructive surgery. 
    Stray animal means any animal for which there is no identifiable owner or harborer. 
    Unprovoked means an action by an animal that is not in response to being tormented, abused, teased or assaulted by any person; in response to pain or injury; or in protection for itself or its food, kennel, immediate territory, or nursing offspring. 
    Vicious animal means any specific animal that chases, terrorizes, bites, attacks or injures human beings or domesticated animals without provocation; or which because of temperament, conditioning or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite or injure human beings or domesticated animals. 
    Wild animal means all species of animals which exist in a natural unconfined state and are not usually domesticated. 
(Code 1965, § 4-34; Ord. No. 4882, § 3, 6-19-17) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 4-32. - Running at large prohibited. 
    The owner or harborer of any dog shall keep it under restraint at all times and the dog shall not be permitted to run at large within the city. By "restraint" it is meant that the owner or harborer shall keep the dog in a secure enclosure or tied to prevent it from running loose. 
(Code 1965, § 4-17) 
Sec. 4-33. - Barking dogs deemed nuisance. 
    It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to harbor or keep on his premises or in or about his premises or premises under his control any dog which by loud or prolonged barking or howling shall cause the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or the occupants of adjacent premises to be disturbed. 
(Code 1965, § 4-21) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 13. 
Sec. 4-34. - Vaccinations. 
    Every owner of a dog or cat four (4) months of age or older shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies. All dogs or cats vaccinated at four (4) months of age or older shall be revaccinated at one (1) year of age and annually thereafter. Such routine vaccination should be performed during the months of January and February during each calendar year. Any person moving into the city from a location outside of the city shall comply with this article within ten (10) days after having moved into the city. If the dog or cat has inflicted a bite on any person or another animal within the last ten (10) days, the owner of such dog or cat shall report such fact to the veterinarian, and no rabies vaccination shall be administered until after the ten-day observation period. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 3, 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 4-34 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 4-34 derived from the 1965 Code, § 4-35. 
Sec. 4-35. - Certificate of vaccination. 
    Upon vaccination, the veterinarian shall execute and furnish to the owner of the dog or cat as evidence thereof, a certificate upon a form furnished by the veterinarian. The veterinarian shall retain a duplicate copy and one (1) copy thereof shall be filed with the city-county health department. Such certificate shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the vaccinated dog or cat; 
(2)  The date of vaccination; 
(3)  The type of rabies vaccine used; 
(4)  The year and number of rabies tag; and 
(5)  The breed, age, color and sex of the vaccinated dog or cat. 
(Code 1965, § 4-36) 
Sec. 4-36. - Rabies tags. 
    Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of vaccination referred to in section 4-35, the owner of the dog or cat shall cause to be attached to the collar or harness of the vaccinated dog or cat a metal tag, serially numbered to correspond with the vaccination certificate number, and bearing the year of issuance and the name of the issuing veterinarian and his address. The owner shall cause the collar or harness, with the attached metal tag, to be worn by his dog or cat whenever such dog or cat is running at large. 
(Code 1965, § 4-37) 
Sec. 4-37. - Harboring unvaccinated dogs or cats. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor any dog or cat which has not been vaccinated against rabies, as provided in section 4-34, or which cannot be identified as having a current vaccination certificate. 
(Code 1965, § 4-38) 
Sec. 4-38. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the city, including without limitation, the animal control officer or local rabies control authority and their designees. 
(b)  Authority to issue citations. The animal control officer, local rabies control authority and any law enforcement officer of the city shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this article. 
(c)  Mailing of citations. If the person cited is not present, the animal control officer, local rabies control authority, or law enforcement officer of the city issuing the citation may send the citation to the alleged offender by registered or certified mail. 
(d)  Interference. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly or recklessly interfere with or in any way attempt to prevent the performance of any official duties or acts of the local rabies control authority, animal control officer or law enforcement officer performing his duties under this article or pursuant to a lawful order of a court. 
(e)  Authority to destroy animals. The local rabies control authority shall have the authority to humanely euthanize and/or destroy any animal in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(f)  Authority to use tranquilizer gun. The local rabies control authority shall have the authority to use a tranquilizer gun in the lawful discharge of his/her duties. 
(g)  Exemption of police dogs. Police dogs are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(h)  Right of entry. Law enforcement officers are hereby authorized to enter upon any fenced or unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of capturing, impounding and/or quarantining any animal upon having probable cause to believe the animal to have bitten, injured or otherwise attacked a human being or other animal or to have, or have been exposed to, rabies or another communicable disease posing a danger to the public health, safety or welfare, or otherwise pose a clear and present danger to human beings or other animals. This authorization is granted due to the emergency created by the potential rabies hazard or danger of injury to persons or other animals, and in recognition of the likelihood that such animal will otherwise escape capture. As a matter of policy, law enforcement officers shall not enter upon private property to capture and/or impound any animal known to belong to the owner of such property without probable cause to believe the animal poses a threat or danger to property, human beings or other animals. 
(i)  Authority to establish fees. The city manager shall, from time to time, establish registration fees, and other fees associated with administration of this article, in writing. 
(Ord. No. 4882, § 4, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 4-39. - Dangerous dogs. 
    The provisions of Subchapter D, Chapter 822 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, are adopted by and incorporated into this article. 
(1)  Declaration of dangerous dog. If the animal control authority or the local rabies control authority has cause to believe that a dog is a dangerous dog as defined by this article, he may find and declare such dog a dangerous dog. 
(2)  Notice of determination. Within three (3) business days of declaring a dog to be dangerous, the animal control authority or local rabies control authority shall provide notice to the person owning the dog of its designation as a dangerous dog and provide such person with a copy of this article. The notification to the owner shall be in writing and may be provided either in person or through certified mail. The animal control authority or local rabies control authority shall also notify the city manager, fire department, and police department of the designation of any dog as a dangerous dog. The notification shall describe the dog and specify any particular requirements or conditions placed upon the owner of the dog. 
(3)  Notice of right to appeal. The notice shall inform the owner of the dog that he may request, in writing, an appeal of the dangerous dog determination within fifteen (15) days from the receipt of the certified mail or date of the personal notification of the dangerous dog declaration to contest the finding and designation. In order to file an appeal of the dangerous dog determination, the owner shall: 
a.  File a notice of appeal of the animal control authority's dangerous dog determination with the municipal court; and 
b.  Attach a copy of the determination from the animal control authority. 
(4)  Requirements for owner of dangerous dog. If the owner of a dog that has been determined dangerous by the local rabies control authority or animal control authority elects not to appeal that decision pursuant to section 4-39(3) of this article, then within thirty (30) days of the expiration of the fifteen-day time period for appeal, the owner shall comply with the requirements listed in this section. If the owner of a dog that has been determined dangerous appeals that decision to the municipal court, then such owner shall comply with the requirements of this section within thirty (30) days after the date of the determination by the municipal court that the designation is to be upheld. The requirements of this section that must be met are as follows: 
a.  Register the dangerous dog with the local rabies control authority for the area in which the dog is kept and pay the registration fee; and 
b.  Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash and in a muzzle in the immediate control of a person or in a secure enclosure; and 
c.  Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in the amount specified by state law to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility to the animal control authority for the area in which the dog is kept. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner or a person who keeps custody or control of a dangerous dog to intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly fail to comply with any one (1) or more requirements of this subsection. 
(5)  [Failure to comply.] The owner of a dangerous dog who fails to comply with section 4-39(4) shall timely deliver the dog to the animal control authority on or before the 30th day after the owner is notified that the dog is dangerous. It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly, intentionally or recklessly fail to timely deliver or surrender a dog to the animal control authority as required by this article or in accordance with a lawful order of a municipal court or other court of jurisdiction. 
(6)  For purposes of this section, a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog when: 
a.  The owner knows of an attack described in the definition of dangerous dog under section 4-31 of this article; and 
b.  The owner is informed by the animal control officer that the dog is a dangerous dog; or 
c.  A determination is made by the municipal court or other court of jurisdiction that the animal is a dangerous dog. 
(7)  Proceedings and appeal from dangerous dog determination. Appeals from the local rabies control authority's determination that a dog is dangerous will be heard by the municipal court. Upon notice of appeal as prescribed in this section, the municipal court will hear the case at the next available trial setting after the request for appeal. The appeal is a civil proceeding for the purpose of affirming or reversing the determination that a dog is dangerous. Costs may be assessed and bonds determined in accordance with Chapter 822, Subchapter D, Health and Safety Code. An owner or person filing an application under Subchapter D, Chapter 822, Health and Safety Code may appeal the decision of the municipal court as allowed by law. 
(8)  Offense. 
a.  A person commits an offense if: (i) the person is the owner of a dangerous dog and the dog makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the dog's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person; or (ii) the person violated any provision of Chapter 822 of the Texas Health and Safety Code. 
b.  An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor. 
c.  If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the dangerous dog euthanized by the local rabies control authority. 
(Ord. No. 4882, § 4, 6-19-17) 
Secs. 4-40-4-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4233, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 7, 2004, amended art. III in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former art. III derived from Code 1965, §§ 4-39-4-41; and Ord. No. 3385, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 7, 1983. 

Sec. 4-56. - Rabies control. 
    Chapter 826, Texas Health and Safety Code as it is now and as it may hereafter be amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated as though fully set forth herein and such provisions shall be controlling within the corporate limits. Further, the rules and regulations adopted by the Texas Board of Health, Chapter 169, Texas Administrative Code, are hereby adopted in their entirety and incorporated as though fully set forth herein and such provision shall be controlling within the corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 4233, §§ 1, 2, 9-7-04) 
Sec. 4-57. - Local rabies control authority. 
    The local rabies control authority, as that term is defined and provided by chapter 826, Texas Health and Safety Code, shall be the office of the chief of police who shall be vested with all the powers and authority therein conferred. 
(Ord. No. 4233, §§ 1, 2, 9-7-04) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4246, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004, amended Ch. 5 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Ch. 5 derived from Code 1965, §§ 3-93.3(a), 3-93.3(b), 5-1-5-3, 5-5-5-8, 5-19(a), 5-19(b), 5-78-5-89, 9-1-9-9, 9-11-9-13, 9-15, 9-16, 9-17(a), 9-17(b), 9-18, 9-31-9-33, 9-33(a)-(d), 9-34, 9-36-9-38, 9-39.1, 9-39.2, 9-39.4-3-39.7, 9-40-9-42, 9-60, 9-60(a)-(n), 9-61, 9-62, 9-64, 9-65, 9-68, 121/2-1, 153/4-1; Ord. No. 3124, § 1, adopted Feb. 6, 1989; Ord. No. 3203, §§ 2-9, adopted Feb. 19, 1990; Ord. No. 3241, § 1, adopted Oct. 1, 1990; Ord. No. 3378, § 1, adopted April 19, 1993; Ord. No. 3379, § 1, adopted April 19, 1993; Ord. No. 3435, § 1, adopted Jan. 10, 1994; Ord. No. 3459, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 18, 1994; Ord. No. 3517, § 1, adopted March 6, 1995; Ord. No. 3593, § 1, adopted Nov. 6, 1995; Ord. No. 3761, § 1, adopted Nov. 12, 1997; Ord. No. 3923, §§ 1-4, 8, adopted Jan. 10, 2000; Ord. No. 3944, § 1, adopted March 20, 2000; Ord. No. 4104, § I, adopted May 6, 2002; and Ord. No. 4114, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 20, 2002. 
Cross reference- Specific code enforcement authority, § 2-126; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; building requirements for alcoholic beverage on-premises sale establishments, § 3-6; location of alcoholic beverage establishments restricted, § 3-5; animals, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; housing, Ch. 10; housing code adopted, § 10-1; posting advertising matter on property without consent of owner prohibited, § 11-1; HUD-code manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 12; nuisances, Ch. 13; planning, Ch. 17; signs, Ch. 19; solid waste, Ch. 20; subdivision regulations, Ch. 22; swimming pools, Ch. 23; utilities, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 28. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-101. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is the practical safeguarding of persons and of buildings and their contents from hazards arising from the use of building materials, construction or installation practices of both licensed and unlicensed artisans of the building trades. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-102. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all installations of materials and equipment, and the work done pursuant thereto, within or on public and private buildings and premises within the city, with exceptions as provided herein. 
(b)  On all installations hereafter made and all existing installations that are altered, all work shall be done in a manner that will conform with the requirements for a sufficient and safe structure as provided by the building standards adopted in article III of this chapter. Repair and maintenance work shall be such that if any building materials or equipment are removed and replaced, they shall be replaced in a manner that conforms with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-103. - Responsibility for safe work. 
    This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any material or equipment for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability or waiving any governmental or official immunity by reason of the inspection or re-inspection authorized herein; or the certificate of approval issued as herein provided; or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any building materials, equipment or installation of same authorized herein. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-104. - Central fire limits established. 
    The central fire limits of the city are hereby established as the historic overlay area designated on the city's zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 4(a), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 4(a) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 5-104 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 5-104 derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004. 
Sec. 5-105. - Building lines-Austin Avenue. 
    A building line is hereby established on Austin Avenue within the city extending from the center line of Austin Avenue a distance of forty-seven (47) feet, which line shall parallel the center line of Austin Avenue on the east and west sides. From and after August 1, 1950, no building or obstruction shall be built, rebuilt, constructed or reconstructed on any lot or parcel of ground adjacent to Austin Avenue that shall be nearer than forty- seven (47) feet to the centerline of Austin Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-106. - Same-West Crawford Street and Lillis Lane. 
(a)  Definition; purpose of section. The term building line, as used in this section, shall be construed to mean street right-of-way line, and the setback requirements under the city's zoning ordinance and all amendments thereto shall apply in addition to the right-of-way lines or building lines established by this section. It is the intent and purpose of this section to preserve all land within the building lines herein established for ultimate street purposes. 
(b)  Established. Building lines are hereby established on West Crawford Street and Lillis Lane at the places and locations hereinafter described and within the corporate boundaries of the city, which building lines are more particularly described as follows: 
(1)  West Crawford Street, thirty (30) feet on either side of the center line commencing at French Avenue and ending at Lillis Lane. 
(2)  Lillis Lane, thirty (30) feet on either side of the center line commencing at West Morton Street and ending at Stafford Drive. 
(c)  Buildings not to be erected or repaired within lines. No new building or other structure shall be erected after April 1, 1964, on any part of the street or land within the building lines described in subsection (b), and no building or other structure located within such building lines on April, 1964, shall thereafter be re-erected or substantially repaired. 
{d)  Existing buildings to conform within five (5) years. All structures on or between the building lines established by this section or extending in whole or in part within such building lines on April 1, 1964, are hereby required to conform to the new building lines established in this section within five (5) years from April 1, 1964. 
(e)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any officer, agent, employee or other person duly authorized by the state or the city when performing any employment pursuant to the widening, straightening or extension of the street and/or the right-of-way contemplated by this section, or to authorize utility extensions within the right-of-way herein described. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Secs. 5-107-5-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 5-201. - Restrictions on employees. 
    An officer or employee associated with the building division shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or in the making of plans or of specifications therefore, unless he is the owner of such building. Such officer or employee shall not engage in any work that is inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-202. - Same-Liability. 
    An officer or employee of the city, or a member of the building appeals board, charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting for the city council in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee arising out of an act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this chapter shall be defended by the city until the final termination of the proceedings and have afforded the benefit contemplated by article IV, chapter 2 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-203. - Records. 
    The inspection department shall retain adequate records of all applications filed, permits issued, inspections conducted, appeals brought under the authority of this chapter and any other document created or acquired by it of construction and installation work in the city. Such records shall be filed in an orderly manner so as to be readily available and so that references can readily be made to any phase of the construction. Such records shall be retained by the inspection department for a period of time required by the city's record retention policy. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-204. - Office of chief building official. 
    There is hereby created the office of chief building official in the city who is appointed by the city manager and who is assigned the responsibility for the effective and efficient implementation and enforcement of this chapter and of the construction standards adopted herein. The chief building official shall appoint such number of qualified officers, inspectors, assistants and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time, and shall be in charge of those so appointed. When adopted codes refer to: building official, code official or authority having jurisdiction, it shall mean the chief building official. 
(Ord. No. 4631, § 2, 1-17-12) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4631, § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 2012, repealed the former § 5-204. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted a new § 5-204 as set out herein. The former § 5-204 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004. 
Sec. 5-205. - Building appeals board created. 
(a)  There is hereby created a seven-member building appeals board consisting of: 
(1)  A licensed Realtor in the city; 
(2)  A licensed, master electrical contractor in the city; 
(3)  A general contractor in the city; 
(4)  A business/professional resident in the city; 
(5)  A licensed, master mechanical contractor in the city; 
(6)  A licensed, master plumbing contractor in the city; and 
(7)  A member at-large. 
(b)  The city council shall make all appointments to the board. If qualified persons are not available, the city council may appoint such other person as it deems qualified to serve as a representative of the general public. The chief building official or his authorized representative, the fire marshal, public works director, and a county sanitarian shall be ex officio nonvoting members of the board who shall be entitled to notice of all meetings of the board. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-206. - Same-Records. 
    The chief building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the board and such records shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-207. - Same-Appointment and terms of office. 
    Following the appointment of the initial board, the members appointed shall draw lots for four (4) two-year terms and three (3) one-year terms. Thereafter, members of the board and their successors shall be appointed for and shall hold office for staggered terms of two (2) years or until their successors are appointed and have qualified. Upon the failure of any member of the board to maintain qualifications as a member or in the event of a vacancy in such board for any cause, the city council shall immediately appoint a qualified person to fill the unexpired term for any such vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-208. - Same-election of officers and adoption of rules. 
    The members of the board shall meet as soon after their appointment as practicable for the purpose of organization. The board shall formally elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from its members and may adopt such rules as it deems necessary for the orderly conduct of its affairs. A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and all action taken by the board shall require a majority of the board seated and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-209. - Same-Removal; compensation. 
    Any member of the board may be removed with or without cause by the city council upon recommendation of such removal by the city manager or may be removed by said council without such recommendation if it finds that the removal of a member or members is for the best interest of the public. All members shall serve without compensation and shall be subject to chapter 2, article II, division 1 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-210. - Same-duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the board to assist the chief building official in the administration of this chapter and, at reasonable intervals of time, to review the provisions of this chapter for effectiveness, efficiency and equity in its application. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the board to hear appeals taken by persons or firms aggrieved by a decision of the chief building official or his inspectors in the administration of this chapter, when such appeal is provided pursuant to the expressed or implied language of this chapter. 
(c)  The board shall submit to the city council such recommendations for the improvement and revision of this chapter as it may from time to time deem necessary and proper in light of the development of new materials, methods or techniques which would result in a better and more economical installation. All requests for use of materials or methods not covered in this chapter shall be fully supported by factual evidence, or prior approval, from a recognized testing agency or such impartial, qualified authority acceptable to the board. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-211. - Same-Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any interpretation of this chapter or by any decision or ruling of the building official or inspector under this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the board. 
(b)  The appeal shall be made in writing and shall state the substance of the order appealed and shall be submitted to the chief building official within five (5) days from the date of the order appealed. The chief building official shall set the matter for hearing before the board. Notice of the date, hour and place of the hearing shall be posted in accordance with chapter 551, Local Government Code of the state and served upon the persons requesting the appeal at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(c)  Upon the date specified for the hearing by the board, the board shall hear the appeal together with the testimony of all parties concerned and render a decision within three (3) business days thereafter as to whether or not the action of the chief building official or inspector complies with this chapter, which decision shall be final if not appealed to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-212. - Appeal to city council. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any interpretation of this chapter by any decision or ruling of the building appeals board under this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the city council. 
(b)  The appeal shall be made in writing and shall state the substance of the order appealed and shall be submitted to the city secretary within five (5) days from the date of the order appealed. The city secretary shall set the matter for hearing before the board. Notice of the date, hour and place of the hearing shall be posted in accordance with chapter 551, Local Government Code of the state and served upon the persons requesting the appeal at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(c)  Upon the date specified for the hearing by the city council, the city council shall hear the appeal together with the testimony of all parties concerned and render a decision within ten (10) business days thereafter as to whether or not the action of the building appeals board complies with this chapter, which decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04; Ord. No. 4701, § 4(b), 6-17-13) 
Secs. 5-213-5-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4631, § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 2012, repealed the former §§ 5-301-5-309. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted new §§ 5-301-5-309 as set out herein. The former sections pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004. Section 3 of Ord. No. 4631 renumbered §§ 5-310-5-316 as §§ 5-311-5-317. 

Sec. 5-301. - International Building Code adopted. 
(a)  The International Building Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, and the whole thereof, except such portions as may hereinafter be amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length herein, and from and after the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions therein shall be controlling within the area of jurisdiction of the city. A copy of the International Building Code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk for inspection during normal business hours. 
(b)  The International Building Code, 2012 Edition is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 of the 2012 International Building Code is hereby amended as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Denison, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Section 101.4 of the 2012 International Building Code is hereby amended by adding a new section as follows: 
101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.6 and referenced elsewhere in this code, when specifically adopted, shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the electrical Code as adopted. 
(3)  Section 101.4.7 of the 2012 International Building Code is hereby amended as follows: 
101.4.7 Electrical. The provisions of the Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Section 109 of the 2012 International Building Code is hereby amended as follows: 
109.1 Fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the city's adopted fee schedule have been paid, and an amendment to a permit shall not be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
109.2 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work requiring a permit before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in the city's adopted fee schedule, but in no case less than a penalty equal to 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition the required permit fees. 
109.3 Fee schedule. The fees for all work requiring a permit shall be as indicated in the city's adopted fee schedule. 
109.4 Fee refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1.  Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
2.  Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended. 
The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
109.5 Re-inspection Fee. A fee as established by city council may be charged when: 
1.  The inspection called for is not ready when the inspector arrives; 
2.  No building address or permit card is clearly posted; 
3.  City approved plans are not on the job site available to the inspector; 
4.  The building is locked or work otherwise not available for inspection when called; 
5.  The job site is red-tagged twice for the same item; 
6.  The original red tag has been removed from the job site. 
7.  Failure to maintain erosion control, trash control or tree protection. Any reinspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that job site. 
Any re-inspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that job site. 
(5)  Section 111.1 of the 2012 International Building Code is hereby amended as follows: 
111.1 Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Whenever there is a change in tenant or ownership of a building, a new certificate of occupancy shall be required within 90 days of the change in tenant or ownership of the building. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from permits under Section 105.2. 
2.  Certificates of occupancy are not required for Group R-3 and Group U occupancies. 
(6)  Section 2308.4.3 of the 2012 International Building Code is hereby amended by adding a new section as follows: 
2308.4.3 Application to engineered design. When accepted by the Building Official, any portion of this section is permitted to apply to buildings that are otherwise outside the limitations of this section provided that: 
1.  The resulting design will comply with the requirements specified in Chapter 16; 
2.  The load limitations of various elements of this section are not exceeded; and 
3.  The portions of this section which will apply are identified by an engineer in the construction documents. 
(Ord. No. 4631, § 2, 1-17-12; Ord. No. 4701, § 4(c), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 5-302. - International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings adopted. 
(a)  The International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, and the whole thereof, except such portions as may hereinafter be amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length herein, and from and after the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions therein shall be controlling within the area of jurisdiction of the city. A copy of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings shall be on file in the office of the chief building official for inspection during normal business hours. 
(b)  The International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 Edition, is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section R101.1 of the 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings is hereby amended as follows: 
R101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings of the City of Denison hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Section R102.4 of the 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings is hereby amended as follows: 
R102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes, when specifically adopted, and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections R102.4.1 and R102.4.2. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference made to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of a listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer's instructions shall apply. 
R102.4.1 Differences. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. 
R102.4.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards. Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code, the provisions of this code, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard. 
(3)  Section R105.2 of the 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings is hereby amended by deleting items 1, 2 and 10 under Building. 
(4)  Section R108 of the 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings is hereby amended as follows: 
R108.1 Fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the city's adopted fee schedule have been paid, and an amendment to a permit shall not be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
R108.2 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work requiring a permit before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in the city's adopted fee schedule, but in no case less than a penalty equal to 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition the required permit fees. 
R108.3 Fee schedule. The fees for all work requiring a permit shall be as indicated in the city's adopted fee schedule. 
R108.4 Fee refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1.  Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
2.  Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended. 
The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
R108.5 Re-inspection Fee. A fee as established by city council may be charged when: 
1.  The inspection called for is not ready when the inspector arrives; 
2.  No building address or permit card is clearly posted; 
3.  Approved plans are not on the job site available to the inspector; 
4.  The building is locked or work otherwise not available for inspection when called; 
5.  The job site is red-tagged twice for the same item; 
6.  The original red tag has been removed from the job site and/or, 
7.  Violations exist on the property including failure to maintain erosion control, trash control or tree protection. 
Any re-inspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that job site. 
(5)  Section R202 of the 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings is hereby amended by amending the definition of "Townhouse" as follows: 
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units separated by property lines in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on at least two sides. 
(6)  Table R301.2(1) of the 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings is hereby amended by completing the undesignated values as follows: 
Ground Snow Load 5 lb/ft 2 Wind Speed 90 (3-sec-gust)/76 fastest mile Topographic effects No Seismic Design Category A Weathering Moderate Frost line depth 12" Termite Very Heavy Winter Design Temp 20°F Ice Barrier Underlayment Required No Flood Hazards Local Code Air Freezing Index 128 Mean Annual Temp 63.4°F  
(7)  The exception listed under Section R302.2 of the 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings is hereby amended as follows: 
Exception: a common two-hour fire-resistance rated wall assembly, or one-hour fire-resistance rated wall assembly, when equipped with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system, tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 is permitted for townhouses if such walls do not contain plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents in the cavity of the common wall. The wall shall be rated for fire exposure from both sides and shall extend to and be tight against exterior walls and the underside of the sheathing. Electrical installations shall be installed in accordance with Chapters 34 through 43. Penetrations of electrical outlet boxes shall be in accordance with Section R302.4. 
(8)  Exception 5 listed under Section R302.2.4 of the 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings is hereby amended as follows: 
5.  Townhouses separated by a common two-hour fire resistance rated wall or on-hour fire resistance rated wall when equipped with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system as provided in Section R302.2. 
(9)  Section R302.3 of the 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings is hereby amended by adding an exception number 3 as follows: 
3.  Two-family dwelling units that are also divided by a property line through the structure shall be separated as required for townhouses. 
(10)  Section G2415.12 of the 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings is hereby amended by adding an exception number 3 as follows: 
G2415.12 (404.12) Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18 inches (305 mm) below grade. 
(11)  Section G2415.12.1 of the 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings is hereby deleted. 
(12)  Section G2417.4.1 of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code shall be amended as follows: 
G2417.4.1 (406.4.1) Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be as indicated below - or other methods at the discretion of the Code Official. Where piping is carrying gas at a pressure of less than fourteen inches (14") of water column pressure (1/2 psi), the test shall be performed utilizing a diaphragm gauge with a dial that has a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3 1/2; "), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi. For welded piping and where piping is carrying gas at a pressure that of fourteen inches (14") of water column pressure (1/2 psi) or greater, the test shall be performed utilizing a diaphragm gauge with a dial that has a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (31/2"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure. Where the test pressure exceeds 125 psig (862 kPa gauge), the test pressure shall not exceed a value that produces a hoop stress in the piping greater than 50 percent of the specified minimum yield strength of the pipe. 
(13)  Section G2417.4.2 of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code shall be amended as follows: 
G2417.4.2 (406.4.2) Test duration. Test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Code Official, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Code Official, but in no case for less than thirty (30) minutes. 
(Ord. No. 4631, § 2, 1-17-12; Ord. No. 4701, §§ 4(d)-(f), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 5-303. - International Energy Conservation Code adopted. 
(a)  The International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, and the whole thereof, except such portions as may hereinafter be amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length herein, and from and after the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions therein shall be controlling. A copy of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, shall be on file in the office of the Building Official for inspection during normal business hours. 
(b)  The International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section C101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Energy Code of the City of Denison, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Section R101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Energy Code of the City of Denison, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(3)  Table R402.1.2 
Column: Wood Frame Wall R-value 
Climate zone 3 
R-15 batts, which are designed to fit in a 2 × 4 wall, shall be allowed. In addition, a requirement of R-2 on the exterior shall be required, which may be achieved with the exterior sheathing, house wrap and siding material. The change would be listed as R-15+2. There are not other changes to the table R402.1.2. 
The building thermal envelope shall meet the requirements of Table R402.1.2 based on the climate zone specified in Chapter 3. 

(4)  Section R402.4.1.2 Testing (Blower Door Test). 
R402.4.1.2 Testing. 
The building or dwelling unit shall be tested and verified as having an air leakage rate not exceeding five air changes per hour in Climate Zones 1 and 2, and five air changes per hour in Climate Zones 3. Testing shall be conducted in accordance with ASTM E 779 or ASTM E 1827 and reported at a pressure of 0.2-inch w.g. (50 Pascals). Where required by the code official, testing shall be conducted by an approved third party. A written report of the results of the test shall be signed by the party conducting the test and provided to the code official. Testing shall be performed at any time after creation of all penetrations of the building thermal envelope. 
During testing: 
1.  Exterior windows and doors, fireplace and stove doors shall be closed, but not sealed, beyond the intended weather stripping or other infiltration control measures. 
2.  Dampers including exhaust, intake, makeup air, backdraft and flue dampers shall be closed, but not sealed beyond intended infiltration control measures. 
3.  Interior doors, if installed at the time of the test, shall be open. 
4.  Exterior doors for continuous ventilation systems and heat recovery ventilators shall be closed and sealed. 
5.  Heating and cooling systems, if installed at the time of the test, shall be turned off. 
6.  Supply and return registers, if installed at the time of the test, shall be fully open. 
(Ord. No. 4631, § 2, 1-17-12; Ord. No, 4921, § 2, 12-11-17; Ord. No. 4964, § 2(Exh. A), 9-17-18) 
Sec. 5-304. - National Electrical Code adopted. 
(a)  The 2017 Edition of the National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association, and the whole thereof, except such portions as may hereinafter be amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length herein, and from and after the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions therein shall be controlling within the area of jurisdiction of the city. A copy of the National Electric Code shall be on file with the building official for inspection during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 4631, § 2, 1-17-12; Ord. No. 4701, § 4(g), 6-17-13; Ord. No, 4921, § 2, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 5-305. - International Mechanical Code adopted. 
(a)  The International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, and the whole thereof, except such portions as may hereinafter be amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length herein, and from and after the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions therein shall be controlling within the area of jurisdiction of the city. A copy of the International Mechanical Code shall be on file in the office of the chief building official for inspection during normal business hours. 
(b)  The International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 of the 2012 International Mechanical Code is hereby amended as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the City of Denison, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Section 102.8 of the 2012 International Mechanical Code is hereby amended as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes. The codes and standards listed herein shall be those that are listed in Chapter 15 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections 102.8.1 and 102.8.2. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the electrical Code as adopted. 
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing and the manufacturer's installation instructions shall apply. 
102.8.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. 
102.8.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards. Where the extent of the reference to the referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code, the provisions of this code, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard. 
(3)  Section 106.5 of the 2012 International Mechanical Code is hereby amended as follows: 
106.5 Fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the city's adopted fee schedule have been paid, and an amendment to a permit shall not be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
106.5.1 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work requiring a permit before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in the city's adopted fee schedule, but in no case less than a penalty equal to 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition the required permit fees. 
106.5.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all work requiring a permit shall be as indicated in the city's adopted fee schedule. 
106.5.3 Fee refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1.  Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
2.  Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended. 
The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
106.5.4 Re-inspection Fee. A fee as established by city council may be charged when: 
1.  The inspection called for is not ready when the inspector arrives; 
2.  No building address or permit card is clearly posted; 
3.  Approved plans are not on the job site available to the inspector; 
4.  The building is locked or work otherwise not available for inspection when called; 
5.  The job site is red-tagged twice for the same item; 
6.  The original red tag has been removed from the job site and/or, 
7.  Violations exist on the property including failure to maintain erosion control, trash control or tree protection. 
Any re-inspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that job site. 
(Ord. No. 4631, § 2, 1-17-12; Ord. No. 4701, §§ 4(h), (i), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 5-306. - International Plumbing Code adopted. 
(a)  The International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, and the whole thereof, except such portions as may hereinafter be amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length herein, and from and after the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions therein shall be controlling within the area of jurisdiction of the city. A copy of the International Plumbing Code shall be on file in the office of the chief building official for inspection during normal business hours. 
(b)  The International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 of the 2012 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Plumbing Code of the City of Denison hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Section 102.8 of the 2012 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes. The codes and standards listed herein shall be those that are listed in Chapter 14 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections 102.8.1 and 102.8.2. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the electrical Code as adopted. 
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing and the manufacturer's installation instructions shall apply. 
102.8.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. 
102.8.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards. Where the extent of the reference to the referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code, the provisions of this code, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard. 
(3)  Section 106 of the 2012 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended as follows: 
106.6 Fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the city's adopted fee schedule have been paid, and an amendment to a permit shall not be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
106.6.1 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work requiring a permit before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in the city's adopted fee schedule, but in no case less than a penalty equal to 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition the required permit fees. 
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all work requiring a permit shall be as indicated in the city's adopted fee schedule. 
106.6.3 Fee refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1.  Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
2.  Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended. 
The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
106.6.4 Re-inspection Fee. A fee as established by city council may be charged when: 
1.  The inspection called for is not ready when the inspector arrives; 
2.  No building address or permit card is clearly posted; 
3.  Approved plans are not on the job site available to the inspector; 
4.  The building is locked or work otherwise not available for inspection when called; 
5.  The job site is red-tagged twice for the same item; 
6.  The original red tag has been removed from the job site and/or, 
7.  Violations exist on the property including failure to maintain erosion control, trash control or tree protection. 
Any re-inspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that job site. 
(4)  Section 109.1 of the 2012 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended as follows: 
109.1 Application for appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the board of appeals established by ordinance. The board shall be governed by the enabling ordinance. 
(5)  Section 109.2 of the 2012 International Plumbing Code is hereby deleted. 
(6)  Section 305.4 of the 2012 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended as follows: 
305.4 Freezing. Water, soil and waste pipes shall not be installed outside of a building, in attics or crawl spaces, concealed in outside walls, or in any other place subjected to freezing temperatures unless adequate provision is made to protect such pipes from freezing by insulation or heat or both. Exterior water supply system piping shall be installed not less than 18 inches below grade. 
(7)  Section 409.2 of the 2012 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended as follows: 
409.2 Water connection. The water supply to a commercial dishwashing machine shall be protected against backflow by an air gap or backflow preventer in accordance with Section 608. 
(8)  Section 417.5.2 of the 2012 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended as follows: 
417.5.2 Shower lining. Floors under shower compartments, except where prefabricated receptors have been provided, shall be lined and made water tight utilizing material complying with Sections 417.5.2.1 through 417.5.2.5. Such liners shall turn up on all sides at least 3 inches (76 mm) above the finished threshold level and shall extend outward over the threshold and fastened to the outside of the threshold jamb. Liners shall be recessed and fastened to an approved backing so as not to occupy the space required for wall covering, and shall not be nailed or perforated at any point less than 1 inch (25 mm) above the finished threshold. Liners shall be pitched one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) and shall be sloped toward the fixture drains and be securely fastened to the waste outlet at the seepage entrance, making a water-tight joint between the liner and the outlet. The completed liner shall be tested in accordance with Section 312.9 and Section 417.7. 
(9)  Section 417.7 of the 2012 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended as follows: 
417.7 Test for shower receptors. Shower receptors shall be tested for water tightness by filling with water to the level of the rough threshold. The drain shall be plugged in a manner so that both sides of pans shall be subjected to the test at the point where it is clamped to the drain. 
(10)  Section 504.6 of the 2012 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended as follows: 
504.6 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve, temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall: 
1.  Not be directly connected to the drainage system. 
2.  Discharge through an air gap. 
3.  Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full size to the air gap. 
4.  Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device or equipment. 
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with those instructions. 
5.  Discharge to an indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors. Where discharging to the outdoors in areas subject to freezing, discharge piping shall be first piped to an indirect waste receptor through an air gap located in a conditioned area. 
6.  Discharge in a manner that does not cause personal injury or structural damage. 
7.  Discharge to a termination point that is readily observable by the building occupants. 
8.  Not be trapped. 
9.  Be installed so as to flow by gravity. 
10.  Not terminate less than 6 inches or more than 24 inches (152 mm) above grade nor more than 6 inches above the waste receptor. 
11.  Not have a threaded connection at the end of such piping. 
12.  Not have valves or tee fittings. 
13.  Be constructed of those materials listed in Section 605.4 or materials tested, rated and approved for such use in accordance with ASME A112.4.1. 
(11)  Section 608.16.5 of the 2012 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended as follows: 
608.16.5 Connections to lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker, a double-check assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A valve shall not be installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
(12)  Table 702.1 of the 2012 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended by deleting the reference to PVC cellular core material. 
(13)  Table 702.2 of the 2012 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended by deleting the reference to PVC cellular core material. 
(14)  Table 702.3 of the 2012 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended by deleting the reference to PVC cellular core material. 
(15)  Table 702.4 of the 2012 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended by deleting the reference to PVC cellular core material. 
(16)  Section 1106.1 of the 2012 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended as follows: 
1106.1 General. The size of the vertical conductors and leaders, building storm drains, building storm sewers, and any horizontal branches of such drains or sewers shall be based on six (6) inches per hour. 
(17)  Section 1107.3 of the 2012 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended as follows: 
1107.3 Sizing of secondary drains. Secondary (emergency) roof drain systems shall be sized in accordance with Section 1106. Scuppers shall be sized to prevent the depth of ponding water from exceeding that for which the roof was designed as determined by Section 1101.7. Scuppers shall not have an opening dimension of less than 4 inches (102 mm). The flow through the primary system shall not be considered when sizing the secondary roof drain system. 
(Ord. No. 4631, § 2, 1-17-12; Ord. No. 4701, §§ 4(j), (k), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 5-307. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 4(l) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 5-307 which pertained to the International Fire Code adopted, and derived from Ord. No. 4631, § 2, adopted Jan. 17, 2012. 
Sec. 5-308. - International Fuel Gas Code adopted. 
(a)  The International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, and the whole thereof, except such portions as may hereinafter be amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length herein, and from and after the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions therein shall be controlling within the area of jurisdiction of the city. A copy of the International Fuel Gas Code shall be on file in the office of the chief building official for inspection during normal business hours. 
(b)  The International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code is hereby amended as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Denison, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Section 102.8 of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code is hereby amended as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes. The codes and standards listed herein shall be those that are listed in Chapter 8 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections 102.8.1 and 102.8.2. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the electrical Code as adopted. 
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing and the manufacturer's installation instructions shall apply. 
102.8.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. 
102.8.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards. Where the extent of the reference to the referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code, the provisions of this code, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard. 
(3)  Section 106.6 of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code is hereby amended as follows: 
106.6 Fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the city's adopted fee schedule have been paid, and an amendment to a permit shall not be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
106.6.1 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work requiring a permit before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in the city's adopted fee schedule, but in no case less than a penalty equal to 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition the required permit fees. 
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all work requiring a permit shall be as indicated in the city's adopted fee schedule. 
106.6.3 Fee refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1.  Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
2.  Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended. 
The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
106.6.4 Re-inspection Fee. A fee as established by city council may be charged when: 
1.  The inspection called for is not ready when the inspector arrives; 
2.  No building address or permit card is clearly posted; 
3.  Approved plans are not on the job site available to the inspector; 
4.  The building is locked or work otherwise not available for inspection when called; 
5.  The job site is red-tagged twice for the same item; 
6.  The original red tag has been removed from the job site and/or, 
7.  Violations exist on the property including failure to maintain erosion control, trash control or tree protection. 
Any re-inspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that job site. 
(4)  Section 109.1 of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code is hereby amended as follows: 
109.1 Application for appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the board of appeals established by ordinance. The board shall be governed by the enabling ordinance. 
(5)  Section 109.2 of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code is hereby deleted. 
(6)  Section 404.12 of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code shall be amended as follows: 
404.12 Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18 inches below grade. 
(7)  Section 404.12.1 of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code is hereby deleted. 
(8)  Section 406.4.1 of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code shall be amended as follows: 
406.4.1 Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be as indicated below - or other methods at the discretion of the Code Official. Where piping is carrying gas at a pressure of less than fourteen inches (14") of water column pressure (1/2 psi), the test shall be performed utilizing a diaphragm gauge with a dial that has a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (31/2"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi. For welded piping and where piping is carrying gas at a pressure that of fourteen inches (14") of water column pressure (1/2 psi) or greater, the test shall be performed utilizing a diaphragm gauge with a dial that has a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (31/2"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure. Where the test pressure exceeds 125 psig (862 kPa gauge), the test pressure shall not exceed a value that produces a hoop stress in the piping greater than 50 percent of the specified minimum yield strength of the pipe. 
(9)  Section 406.4.2 of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code shall be amended as follows: 
406.4.2 Test duration. Test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Code Official, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Code Official, but in no case for less than thirty (30) minutes. 
(Ord. No. 4631, § 2, 1-17-12; Ord. No. 4701, §§ 4(m)-(o), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 5-309. - International Existing Building Code adopted. 
(a)  The International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, and the whole thereof, except such portions as may hereinafter be amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length herein, and from and after the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions therein shall be controlling within the area of jurisdiction of the city. A copy of the International Existing Building Code shall be on file in the office of the chief building official for inspection during normal business hours. 
(b)  The International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 of the 2012 International Existing Building Code is hereby amended as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Existing Building Code of the City of Denison, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(Ord. No. 4631, § 2, 1-17-12; Ord. No. 4701, § 4(p), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 5-310. - Local amendments-Conflicts. 
    If and when this chapter is amended by the city council by adding, deleting or altering a provision of one (1) of the codes adopted by this article and a conflict exists between the local amendment and the codes, the provisions of the local amendment shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 4631, § 2(5-316), 1-17-12) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4631, § 2, adopted Jan. 17, 2012, added provisions intended for use as § 5-316. At the editor's discretion, to prevent duplication of section numbers, these provisions have been included as § 5-310. 
Sec. 5-311. - Residential occupancies in the central fire limits. 
(a)  In the event that a structure situated within the central fire limits does not meet the requirements of chapter 7 of the International Building Code as it relates to fire-resistant separation between mixed occupancies, chapter 9 of the International Building Code as it relates to fire protection systems and chapter 9 of the International Fire Code as it relates to fire protection systems, the owner may obtain an occupancy permit for a residential use of one (1) or two (2) dwelling units on the second floor, or above, of a multistory building by complying with the requirements of this section, the conflicting provisions of the International Building Code notwithstanding. For occupancies that contain more than two (2) dwelling units, the requirements of chapter 7 of the International Building Code, chapter 9 of the International Building Code and chapter 9 of the International Fire Code must be met. 
(b)  Two (2) means of egress from the second floor shall be provided. At least one (1) means shall be to the exterior of the building, and if a fire escape is to be used as the means of egress to the exterior, the fire escape shall have a landing and shall be of metal construction. The exit door shall be equipped in a manner to satisfy the requirements of section 1008, entitled Doors, Gates and Turnstiles, International Building Code. A means of egress utilizing the interior of the ground floor of a building shall be enclosed in a manner to provide a one-hour fire-resistant rating. Each door in the enclosure shall be not less than a forty-five (45) minute fire-resistant rating and shall be equipped with a self-closing device. The underside of an interior staircase serving as a means of egress from the second floor shall be fitted with a material that provides a one-hour fire-resistant rating. 
(c)  Every room, except for rooms exempted by the fire marshal, and spaces within the building shall be equipped with smoke alarms that are interconnected in such a way that if one (1) alarm sounds, all smoke alarms in the building will sound. The smoke alarms shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the International Building Code, section 907 and the International Fire Code, section 907 and manufacturer's installation standards. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 4(q), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 4(q) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 5-311 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 5-311 derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004; and Ord. No. 4631, § 3, adopted Jan. 17, 2012. 
Sec. 5-312. - Wiring in central fire limits to be encased in conduit. 
    All electrical wiring for light, heat, power or other purposes hereafter installed in the central fire limits as respectively described in this chapter, shall in all cases be contained and encased in approved metallic conduit. For this purpose, type MC cable, as defined by the National Electrical Code, shall be considered to be encased in conduit. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 4(r), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 4(r) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 5-312, entitled "Wiring to be encased in conduit," and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 5-312 derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004; and Ord. No. 4631, § 3, adopted Jan. 17, 2012. 
Sec. 5-313. - Modification by special permission. 
(a)  The electrical regulations of this Code may be modified or waived by special permission by the building official in particular cases where such modification or waiver is reasonable and does not differ from the intent of this Code. 
(b)  Such permission shall be obtained in writing prior to starting the work, and a copy of the permission shall be filed in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 4(s), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 4(s) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 5-312, entitled "Number of outlets allowed and branch circuits," and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 5-312 derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004; and Ord. No. 4631, § 3, adopted Jan. 17, 2012. 
Sec. 5-314. - Connection from power lines to electric service installations. 
    The electrical service provider, its agents or employees, shall make all connections from the power lines to the electric service installations. It shall be unlawful for any other person or persons to do so. 
(Ord. No. 4716, § 1(a), 11-18-13) 
Editor's note- Section 4(t) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 5-314, which pertained to modification by special permission, and derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004; and Ord. No. 4631, § 3, adopted Jan. 17, 2012. 
 Subsequently, Ord. No. 4716, § 1(a), adopted Nov. 18, 2013, added new provisions as herein set out. 
Sec. 5-315. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4897, § 2, adopted August 21, 2017, repealed § 5-315, which pertained to metal roofs and derived from Ord. No. 4716, adopted November 18, 2013. 
Sec. 5-316. - Residential water heaters. 
    Any water heater installed in a residential occupancy is prohibited from being installed in the attic. 
    Exception[s]: 
(1)  Existing residential occupancies where a water heater is being replaced that is already located in the attic. 
(2)  A residential occupancy where there are permanent stairs that lead directly from the second floor area to the attic. Pull-down attic stairs will not be considered permanent stairs for the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. No. 4716, § 1(c), 11-18-13) 
Editor's note- Section 4(u) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 5-316, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 5-316 derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004; and Ord. No. 4631, § 3, adopted Jan. 17, 2012. 
 Subsequently, Ord. No. 4716, § 1(c), adopted Nov. 18, 2013, repealed § 5-316, and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 5-316 pertained to connection from power lines to electric service installations. 
Sec. 5-317. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 4(t) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 5-317, which pertained to PVC cellular core materials prohibited, and derived from Ord. No. 4604, § 1, adopted July 18, 2011; and Ord. No. 4631, § 3, adopted Jan. 17, 2012. 
Secs. 5-318-5-324. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-325. - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms, when used in sections 5-325-5-341, have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Air gap means a complete physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel. 
    Atmospheric vacuum breaker means an assembly containing an air inlet valve, a check seat, and an air inlet port. The flow of water into the body causes the air inlet valve to close the air inlet port. When the flow of water stops the air inlet valve falls and forms a check against back-siphonage. At the same time it opens the air inlet port allowing air to enter and satisfy the vacuum. Also known as an atmospheric vacuum breaker back-siphonage prevention assembly. 
    Backflow prevention means the mechanical prevention of reverse flow, or back siphonage, of non-potable water from an irrigation system into the potable water source. 
    Backflow prevention assembly means any assembly used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of assembly used is based on the existing or potential degree of health hazard and backflow condition. 
    Completion of irrigation system installation means when the landscape irrigation system has been installed, all minimum standards met, all tests performed, and the irrigator is satisfied that the system is operating correctly. 
    Consulting means the act of providing advice, guidance, review or recommendations related to landscape irrigation systems. 
    Cross-connection means an actual or potential connection between a potable water source and an irrigation system that may contain contaminates or pollutants or any source of water that has been treated to a lesser degree in the treatment process. 
    Design means the act of determining the various elements of a landscape irrigation system that will include, but not be limited to, elements such as collecting site specific information, defining the scope of the project, defining plant watering needs, selecting and laying out emission devices, locating system components, conducting hydraulics calculations, identifying any local regulatory requirements, or scheduling irrigation work at a site. Completion of the various components will result in an irrigation plan. 
    Design pressure means the pressure that is required for an emission device to operate properly. Design pressure is calculated by adding the operating pressure necessary at an emission device to the total of all pressure losses accumulated from an emission device to the water source. 
    Double check valve means an assembly that is composed of two (2) independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closed resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. Also known as a double check valve backflow prevention assembly. 
    Emission device means any device that is contained within an irrigation system and that is used to apply water. Common emission devices in an irrigation system include, but are not limited to, spray and rotary sprinkler heads, and drip irrigation emitters. 
    Employed means engaged or hired to provide consulting services or perform any activity relating to the sale, design, installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service to irrigation systems. A person is employed if that person is in an employer-employee relationship as defined by Internal Revenue Code, 26 United States Code Service, § 3212(d) based on the behavioral control, financial control, and the type of relationship involved in performing employment related tasks. 
    Head-to-head spacing means the spacing of spray or rotary heads equal to the manufacturer's published radius of the head. 
    Health hazard means a cross-connection or potential cross-connection with an irrigation system that involves any substance that may, if introduced into the potable water supply, cause death or illness, spread disease, or have a high probability of causing such effects. 
    Hydraulics means the science of dynamic and static water; the mathematical computation of determining pressure losses and pressure requirements of an irrigation system. 
    Inspector means a licensed plumbing inspector, water district operator, other governmental entity, or irrigation inspector who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor. 
    Installer means a person who actually connects an irrigation system to a private or public raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, who is licensed according to T.A.C., tit. 30, ch. 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations). 
    Irrigation inspector means a person who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor and is required to be licensed under T.A.C., tit. 30, ch. 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations). 
    Irrigation plan means a scaled drawing of a landscape irrigation system which lists required information, the scope of the project, and represents the changes made in the installation of the irrigation system. 
    Irrigation services means selling, designing, installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, servicing, permitting, providing consulting services regarding, or connecting an irrigation system to a water supply. 
    Irrigation system means an assembly of component parts that is permanently installed for the controlled distribution and conservation of water to irrigate any type of landscape vegetation in any location, and/or to reduce dust or control erosion. This term does not include a system that is used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by V.T.C.A., Agricultural Code § 251.002. 
    Irrigation technician means a person who works under the supervision of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair, service or supervise installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system in or to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under T.A.C., tit. 30, ch. 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations). 
    Irrigation zone means a subdivision of an irrigation system with a matched precipitation rate based on plant material type (such as turf, shrubs, or trees), microclimate factors (such as sun/shade ratio), topographic features (such as slope) and soil conditions (such as sand, loam, clay, or combination) or for hydrological control. 
    Irrigator means a person who sells, designs, offers consultations regarding, installs, maintains, alters, repairs, services or supervises the installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licenses under T.A.C., tit. 30, ch. 30. 
    Irrigator-in-charge means the irrigator responsible for all irrigation work performed by an exempt business owner, including, but not limited to obtaining permits, developing design plans, supervising the work of other irrigators or irrigation technicians, and installing, selling, maintaining, altering, repairing, or servicing a landscape irrigation system. 
    Landscape irrigation means the science of applying the necessary amount of water to promote or sustain healthy growth of plant material or turf. 
    License means an occupational license that is issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality under T.A.C., tit. 30, ch. 30 to an individual that authorizes the individual to engage in an activity that is covered by T.A.C., tit. 30, ch. 30. 
    Mainline means a pipe within an irrigation system that delivers water from the water source to the individual zone valves. 
    Maintenance checklist means a document made available to the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative that contains information regarding the operation and maintenance of the irrigation system, including, but not limited to: checking and repairing the irrigation system, setting the automatic controller, checking the rain or moisture sensor, cleaning filters, pruning grass and plants away from irrigation emitters, using and operating the irrigation system, the precipitation rates of each irrigation zone within the system, any water conservation measures currently in effect from the water purveyor, the name of the water purveyor, a suggested seasonal or monthly watering schedule based on current evapotranspiration data for the geographic region, and the minimum water requirements for the plant material in each zone based on the soil type and plant material where the system is installed. 
    Major maintenance, alteration, repair or service means any activity that involves opening to the atmosphere the irrigation main line at any point prior to the discharge side of any irrigation zone control valve. This includes, but is not limited to, repairing or connecting into a main supply pipe, replacing a zone control valve, or repairing a zone control valve in a manner that opens the system to the atmosphere. 
    Master valve means a remote control valve located after the backflow prevention device that controls the flow of water to the irrigation system mainline. 
    Matched precipitation rate means the condition in which all sprinkler heads within an irrigation zone apply water at the same rate. 
    New installation means an irrigation system installed at a location where one did not previously exist. 
    Pass-through contract means a written contract between a contractor or builder and a licensed irrigator or exempt business owner to perform part or all of the irrigation services relating to an irrigation system. 
    Potable water means water that is suitable for human consumption. 
    Pressure vacuum breaker means an assembly containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. Also known as a pressure vacuum breaker back-siphonage prevention assembly. 
    Reclaimed water means domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated to a quality suitable for beneficial use, such as landscape irrigation. 
    Records of landscape irrigation activities means the irrigation plans, contracts, warranty information, invoices, copies of permits, and other documents that relate to the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of a landscape irrigation system. 
    Reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly means an assembly containing two (2) independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves and below the first check valve. 
    Static water pressure means the pressure of water when it is not moving. 
    Supervision means the on-the-job oversight and direction by a licensed irrigator who is fulfilling his or her professional responsibility to the client and/or employer in compliance with local or state requirements. Also a licensed installer working under the direction of a licensed irrigator or beginning January 1, 2009, an irrigation technician who is working under the direction of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair or service an irrigation system. 
    Water conservation means the design, installation, service, and operation of an irrigation system in a manner that prevents the waste of water, promotes the most efficient use of water, and applies the least amount of water that is required to maintain healthy individual plant material or turf, reduce dust, and control erosion. 
    Zone flow means a measurement, in gallons per minute or gallons per hour, of the actual flow of water through a zone valve, calculated by individually opening each zone valve and obtaining a valid reading after the pressure has stabilized. For design purposes, the zone flow is the total flow of all nozzles in the zone at a specific pressure. 
    Zone valve means an automatic valve that controls a single zone of a landscape irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 4548, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 5-326. - Valid license required. 
    Any person who connects an irrigation system to the water supply within the city or the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, commonly referred to as the ETJ, must hold a valid license, as defined by T.A.C., tit. 30, ch. 30 and required by the V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1903, or as defined by V.T.C.A., Government Code, Title 22, ch. 365 and required by V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1301. 
Exemptions: 
A property owner is not required to be licensed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Occupations Code Title 12, § 1903.002(c)(1) if he or she is performing irrigation work in a building or on a premises owned or occupied by the person as the person's home. A home or property owner who installs an irrigation system must meet the standards contained in T.A.C., Title 30, ch. 344 regarding spacing, water pressure, spraying water over impervious materials, rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology, backflow prevention and isolation valves. The city may, at any point, adopt more stringent requirements for a home or property owner who installs an irrigation system. See V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1903.002 for other exemptions to the licensing requirement. 
(Ord. No. 4548, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 5-327. - Permit required. 
    Any person installing an irrigation system within the territorial limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city is required to obtain a permit from the city. Any plan approved for a permit must be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Application for a permit shall be filed with the chief building official. 
Exemptions: 
(1)  An irrigation system that is an on-site sewage disposal system, as defined by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 355.002; or 
(2)  An irrigation system used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 251.002; or 
(3)  An irrigation system connected to a groundwater well used by the property owner for domestic use. 
(Ord. No. 4548, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 5-328. - Backflow prevention methods and devices. 
(a)  Any irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply must be connected through a backflow prevention method approved by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). The backflow prevention device must be approved by the American Society of Sanitary Engineers; or the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California; or the Uniform Plumbing Code; or any other laboratory that has equivalent capabilities for both the laboratory and field evaluation of backflow prevention assemblies. The backflow prevention device must be installed in accordance with the laboratory approval standards or if the approval does not include specific installation information, the manufacturer's current published recommendations. 
(b)  If conditions that present a health hazard exist, one (1) of the following methods must be used to prevent backflow; 
(1)  An air gap may be used if: 
a.  There is an unobstructed physical separation; and 
b.  The distance from the lowest point of the water supply outlet to the flood rim of the fixture or assembly into which the outlet discharges is at least one (1) inch or twice the diameter of the water supply outlet, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies may be used if: 
a.  The device is installed at a minimum of twelve (12) inches aboveground in a location that will ensure that the assembly will not be submerged; and 
b.  Drainage is provided for any water that may be discharged through the assembly relief valve. 
(3)  Pressure vacuum breakers may be used if: 
a.  No back-pressure condition will occur; and 
b.  The device is installed at a minimum of twelve (12) inches above any downstream piping and the highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the top of the sprinkler. 
(4)  Atmospheric vacuum breakers may be used if: 
a.  No back-pressure will be present; 
b.  There are no shut-off valves downstream from the atmospheric vacuum breaker; 
c.  The device is installed at a minimum of six (6) inches above any downstream piping and the highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the top of the sprinkler; 
d.  There is no continuous pressure on the supply side of the atmospheric vacuum breaker for more than twelve (12) hours in any twenty-four-hour period; and 
e.  A separate atmospheric vacuum breaker is installed on the discharge side of each irrigation control valve, between the valve and all the emission devices that the valve controls. 
(c)  Backflow prevention devices used in applications designated as health hazards must be tested upon installation and annually thereafter. 
(d)  If there are no conditions that present a health hazard, double check valve backflow prevention assemblies may be used to prevent backflow if the device is tested upon installation and test cocks are used for testing only. 
(e)  If a double check valve is installed belowground: 
(1)  Test cocks must be plugged, except when the double check valve is being tested; 
(2)  Test cock plugs must be threaded, watertight, and made of nonferrous material; 
(3)  A Y-type strainer is installed on the inlet side of the double check valve; 
(4)  There must be a clearance between any fill material and the bottom of the double check valve to allow space for testing and repair; and 
(5)  There must be space on the side of the double check valve to test and repair the double check valve. 
(f)  If an existing irrigation system without a backflow-prevention assembly requires major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service, the system must be connected to the potable water supply through an approved, properly installed backflow prevention method before any major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service is performed. 
(g)  If an irrigation system is connected to a potable water supply through a double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, or reduced pressure principle backflow assembly and includes an automatic master valve on the system, the automatic master valve must be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention assembly. 
(h)  The irrigator shall ensure the backflow prevention device is tested by a licensed backflow prevention assembly tester prior to being placed in service and the test results provided to the local water purveyor and the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative within ten (10) business days of testing of the backflow prevention device. 
(Ord. No. 4548, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 5-329. - Specific conditions and cross-connection control. 
(a)  Before any chemical is added to an irrigation system connected to the potable water supply, the irrigation system must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or air gap. 
(b)  Connection of any additional water source to an irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply can only be done if the irrigation system is connected to the potable water supply through a reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or an air gap. 
(c)  Irrigation system components with chemical additives induced by aspiration, injection, or emission system connected to any potable water supply must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow device. 
(d)  If an irrigation system is designed or installed on a property that is served by an on-site sewage facility, as defined in T.A.C., tit. 30, ch. 285, then: 
(1)  All irrigation piping and valves must meet the separation distances from the on-site sewage facilities system as required for a private water line in T.A.C., tit. 30, § 285.91(10); 
(2)  Any connections using a private or public potable water source that is not the city's potable water system must be connected to the water source through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly as defined in T.A.C., tit. 30, § 344.50; and 
(3)  Any water from the irrigation system that is applied to the surface of the area utilized by the on-site sewage facility system must be controlled on a separate irrigation zone or zones so as to allow complete control of any irrigation to that area so that there will not be excess water that would prevent the on-site sewage facilities system from operating effectively. 
(Ord. No. 4548, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 5-330. - Water conservation. 
    All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, altered, repaired, serviced, and operated in a manner that will promote water conservation as defined in the definitions section of sections 5-325-5-341. 
(Ord. No. 4548, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 5-331. - Irrigation plan design: Minimum standards. 
(a)  An irrigator shall prepare an irrigation plan for each site where a new irrigation system will be installed. A paper or electronic copy of the irrigation plan must be on the job site at all times during the installation of the irrigation system. A drawing showing the actual installation of the system is due to each irrigation system owner after all new irrigation system installations. During the installation of the irrigation system, variances from the original plan may be authorized by the licensed irrigator if the variance from the plan does not: 
(1)  Diminish the operational integrity of the irrigation system; 
(2)  Violate any requirements of sections 5-325-5-341; and 
(3)  Go unnoted in red on the irrigation plan. 
(b)  The irrigation plan must include complete coverage of the area to be irrigated. If a system does not provide complete coverage of the area to be irrigated, it must be noted on the irrigation plan. 
(c)  All irrigation plans used for construction must be drawn to scale. The plan must include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The irrigator's seal, signature, and date of signing; 
(2)  All major physical features and the boundaries of the areas to be watered; 
(3)  A North arrow; 
(4)  A legend; 
(5)  The zone flow measurement for each zone; 
(6)  Location and type of each: 
a.  Controller; and 
b.  Sensor (for example, but not limited to, rain, moisture, wind, flow, or freeze). 
(7)  Location, type, and size of each: 
a.  Water source, such as, but not limited to, a water meter and point(s) of connection; 
b.  Backflow prevention device; 
c.  Water emission device, including, but not limited to, spray heads, rotary sprinkler heads, quick-couplers, bubblers, drip, or micro-sprays; 
d.  Valve, including but not limited to, zone valves, master valves, and isolation valves; 
e.  Pressure regulation component; and 
f.  Main line and lateral piping. 
(8)  The scale used; and 
(9)  The design pressure. 
(Ord. No. 4548, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 5-332. - Design and installation: Minimum requirements. 
(a)  [Component limitations.] No irrigation design or installation shall require the use of any component, including the water meter, in a way which exceeds the manufacturer's published performance limitations for the component. 
(b)  Spacing. 
(1)  The maximum spacing between emission devices must not exceed the manufacturer's published radius or spacing of the device(s). The radius or spacing is determined by referring to the manufacturer's published specifications for a specific emission device at a specific operating pressure. 
(2)  New irrigation systems shall not utilize aboveground spray emission devices in landscapes that are less than forty-eight (48) inches not including the impervious surfaces in either length or width and which contain impervious pedestrian or vehicular traffic surfaces along two (2) or more perimeters. If pop-up sprays or rotary sprinkler heads are used in a new irrigation system, the sprinkler heads must direct flow away from any adjacent surface and shall not be installed closer than four (4) inches from a hardscape, such as, but not limited to, a building foundation, fence, concrete, asphalt, pavers, or stones set with mortar. 
(3)  Narrow paved walkways, jogging paths, golf cart paths or other small areas located in cemeteries, parks, golf courses or other public areas may be exempted from this requirement if the runoff drains into a landscaped area. 
(c)  Water pressure. Emission devices must be installed to operate at the minimum and not above the maximum sprinkler head pressure as published by the manufacturer for the nozzle and head spacing that is used. Methods to achieve the water pressure requirements include, but are not limited to, flow control valves, a pressure regulator, or pressure compensating spray heads. 
(d)  Piping. Piping in irrigation systems must be designed and installed so that the flow of water in the pipe will not exceed a velocity of five (5) feet per second for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe. 
(e)  Irrigation zones. Irrigation systems shall have separate zones based on plant material type, microclimate factors, topographic features, soil conditions, and hydrological requirements. 
(f)  Matched precipitation rate. Zones must be designed and installed so that all of the emission devices in that zone irrigate at the same precipitation rate. 
(g)  [No spray areas.] Irrigation systems shall not spray water over surfaces made of concrete, asphalt, brick, wood, stones set with mortar, or any other impervious material, such as, but not limited to, walls, fences, sidewalks, streets, etc. 
(h)  Master valve. When provided, a master valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention device on all new installations. 
(i)  PVC pipe primer solvent. All new irrigation systems that are installed using PVC pipe and fittings shall be primed with a colored primer prior to applying the PVC cement in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code (Section 316) or the International Plumbing Code (Section 605). 
(j)  Rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology. All new automatically controlled irrigation systems must include sensors or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system during periods of moisture or rainfall. Rain or moisture shut-off technology must be installed according to the manufacturer's published recommendations. Repairs to existing automatic irrigation systems that require replacement of an existing controller must include a sensor or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system during periods of moisture or rainfall. 
(k)  Isolation valve. All new irrigation systems must include an isolation valve between the water meter and the backflow prevention device. 
(l)  Depth coverage of piping. Piping in all irrigation systems must be installed according to the manufacturer's published specifications for depth coverage of piping. 
(1)  If the manufacturer has not published specifications for depth coverage of piping, the piping must be installed to provide minimum depth coverage of six (6) inches of select backfill, between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil. All portions of the irrigation system that fail to meet this standard must be noted on the irrigation plan. If the area being irrigated has rock at a depth of six (6) inches or less, select backfill may be mounded over the pipe. Mounding must be noted on the irrigation plan and discussed with the irrigation system owner or owner's representative to address any safety issues. 
(2)  If a utility, manmade structure, or roots create an unavoidable obstacle, which makes the six-inch depth coverage requirement impractical, the piping shall be installed to provide a minimum of two (2) inches of select backfill between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil. 
(3)  All trenches and holes created during installation of an irrigation system must be backfilled and compacted to the original grade. 
(m)  Wiring irrigation systems. 
(1)  Underground electrical wiring used to connect an automatic controller to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be listed by Underwriters Laboratories as acceptable for burial underground. 
(2)  Electrical wiring that connects any electrical components of an irrigation system must be sized according to the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(3)  Electrical wire splices which may be exposed to moisture must be waterproof as certified by the wire splice manufacturer. 
(4)  Underground electrical wiring that connects an automatic controller to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be buried with a minimum of six (6) inches of select backfill. 
(n)  Water contained within the piping of an irrigation system is deemed to be non-potable. No drinking or domestic water usage, such as, but not limited to, filling swimming pools or decorative fountains, shall be connected to an irrigation system. If a hose bib (an outdoor water faucet that has hose threads on the spout) is connected to an irrigation system for the purpose of providing supplemental water to an area, the hose bib must be installed using a quick coupler key on a quick coupler installed in a covered purple valve box and the hose bib and any hoses connected to the bib must be labeled "non-potable, not safe for drinking." An isolation valve must be installed upstream of a quick coupler connecting a hose bib to an irrigation system. 
(o)  [On-site supervision.] Beginning January 1, 2010, either a licensed irrigator or a licensed irrigation technician shall be on site at all times while the landscape irrigation system is being installed. When an irrigator is not on site, the irrigator shall be responsible for ensuring that a licensed irrigation technician is on site to supervise the installation of the irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 4548, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 5-333. - Completion of irrigation system installation. 
    Upon completion of the irrigation system, the irrigator or irrigation technician who provided supervision for the on-site installation shall be required to complete four (4) items: 
(1)  A final "walk through" with the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative to explain the operation of the system; 
(2)  A maintenance checklist on which the irrigator or irrigation technician shall obtain the signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative and shall sign, date, and seal the checklist. If the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative is unwilling or unable to sign the maintenance checklist, the irrigator shall note the time and date of the refusal on the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative's signature line. The irrigation system owner or owner's representative will be given the original maintenance checklist and a duplicate copy of the maintenance checklist shall be maintained by the irrigator. The items on the maintenance checklist shall include but are not limited to: 
a.  The manufacturer's manual for the automatic controller, if the system is automatic; 
b.  A seasonal (spring, summer, fall, winter) watering schedule based on either current/real time evapotranspiration or monthly historical reference evapotranspiration (historical ET) data, monthly effective rainfall estimates, plant landscape coefficient factors, and site factors; 
c.  A list of components, such as the nozzle, or pump filters, and other such components; that require maintenance and the recommended frequency for the service; and 
d.  The statement "This irrigation system has been installed in accordance with all applicable state and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders. I have tested the system and determined that it has been installed according to the Irrigation Plan and is properly adjusted for the most efficient application of water at this time." 
(3)  A permanent sticker which contains the irrigator's name, license number, company name, telephone number and the dates of the warranty period shall be affixed to each automatic controller installed by the irrigator or irrigation technician. If the irrigation system is manual, the sticker shall be affixed to the original maintenance checklist. The information contained on the sticker must be printed with waterproof ink. 
(4)  The irrigation plan indicating the actual installation of the system must be provided to the irrigation system's owner or owner representative. 
(Ord. No. 4548, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 5-334. - Maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of irrigation systems. 
(a)  The licensed irrigator is responsible for all work that the irrigator performed during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system during the warranty period. The irrigator or business owner is not responsible for the professional negligence of any other irrigator who subsequently conducts any irrigation service on the same irrigation system. 
(b)  All trenches and holes created during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system must be returned to the original grade with compacted select backfill. 
(c)  Colored PVC pipe primer solvent must be used on all pipes and fittings used in the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code (Section 316) or the International Plumbing Code (Section 605). 
(d)  When maintenance, alteration, repair or service of an irrigation system involves excavation work at the water meter or backflow prevention device, an isolation valve shall be installed, if an isolation valve is not present. 
(Ord. No. 4548, § 1, 3-1-10) 
Sec. 5-335. - Advertisement requirements. 
(a)  All vehicles used in the performance of irrigation installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service must display the irrigator's license number in the form of "LI_______" in a contrasting color of block letters at least two (2) inches high, on both sides of the vehicle. 
(b)  All forms of written and electronic advertisements for irrigation services must display the irrigator's license number in the form of "LI_______." Any form of advertisement, including business cards, and estimates which displays an entity's or individual's name other than that of the licensed irrigator must also display the name of the licensed irrigator and the licensed irrigator's license number. Trailers that advertise irrigation services must display the irrigator's license number. 
(c)  The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the commission must be prominently displayed on a legible sign and displayed in plain view for the purpose of addressing complaints at the permanent structure where irrigation business is primarily conducted and irrigation records are kept. 
(Ord. No. 4548, § 1(5-336), 3-1-10) 
Sec. 5-336. - Contracts. 
(a)  All contracts to install an irrigation system must be in writing and signed by each party and must specify the irrigator's name, license number, business address, current business telephone numbers, the date that each party signed the agreement, the total agreed price, and must contain the statement, "Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us." All contracts must include the irrigator's seal, signature, and date. 
(b)  All written estimates, proposals, bids, and invoices relating to the installation or repair of an irrigation system(s) must include the irrigator's name, license number, business address, current business telephone number(s), and the statement: "Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission On Environmental Quality (TCEQ) (MC-178), P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's web site is: www.tceq.state.tx.us." 
(c)  An individual who agrees by contract to provide irrigation services as defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 30, § 344.30 (relating to license required) shall hold an irrigator license issued under V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 30, Title 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations) unless the contract is a pass-through contract as defined in T.A.C., tit. 30, § 344.1(36) (relating to definitions). If a pass-through contract includes irrigation services, then the irrigation portion of the contract can only be performed by a licensed irrigator. If an irrigator installs a system pursuant to a pass-through contract, the irrigator shall still be responsible for providing the irrigation system's owner or through contract, the irrigator shall still be responsible for providing the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative a copy of the warranty and all other documents required under this chapter. A pass-through contract must identify by name and license number the irrigator that will perform the work and must provide a mechanism for contacting the irrigator for irrigation system warranty work. 
(d)  The contract must include the dates that the warranty is valid. 
(Ord. No. 4548, § 1(5-337), 3-1-10) 
Sec. 5-337. - Warranties for systems. 
(a)  On all installations of new irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative with a written warranty covering materials and labor furnished in the new installation of the irrigation system. The irrigator shall be responsible for adhering to terms of the warranty. If the irrigator's warranty is less than the manufacturer's warranty for the system components, then the irrigator shall provide the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative with applicable information regarding the manufacturer's warranty period. The warranty must include the irrigator's seal, signature, and date. If the warranty is part of an irrigator's contract, a separate warranty document is not required. 
(b)  An irrigator's written warranty on new irrigation systems must specify the irrigator's name, business address, and business telephone number(s), must contain the signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative confirming receipt of the warranty and must include the statement: "Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 130897, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us." 
(c)  On all maintenance, alterations, repairs, or service to existing irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative a written document that identifies the materials furnished in the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service. If a warranty is provided, the irrigator shall abide by the terms. The warranty document must include the irrigator's name and business contact information. 
(Ord. No. 4548, § 1(5-338), 3-1-10) 
Sec. 5-338. - Duties and responsibilities of city irrigation inspectors. 
    A licensed irrigation inspector shall enforce the ordinance of the city, and shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Verifying that the appropriate permits have been obtained for an irrigation system and that the irrigator and installer or irrigation technician, if applicable, are licensed; 
(2)  Inspecting the irrigation system; 
(3)  Determining that the irrigation system complies with the requirements of this chapter; 
(4)  Determining that the appropriate backflow prevention device was installed, tested, and test results provided to the city; 
(5)  Investigating complaints related to irrigation system installation, maintenance, alteration, repairs, or service of an irrigation system and advertisement of irrigation services; and 
(6)  Maintaining records according to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4548, § 1(5-339), 3-1-10) 
Sec. 5-339. - Items not covered by this ordinance [Ordinance No. 4548]. 
    Any item not covered by this ordinance and required by law shall be governed by the V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, V.T.C.A., Water Code, T.A.C., tit. 30, and any other applicable state statute or Texas Commission on Environmental Quality rule. 
(Ord. No. 4548, § 1(5-340), 3-1-10) 
Sec. 5-340. - Fees. 
    The city council may create a schedule of fees for obtaining and renewing an irrigation permit. These fees will be in amounts sufficient to cover the city's costs in issuing and renewing the permits, including, but not limited to, staff time and other overhead costs. This schedule will be kept in the office of the chief building official. 
(Ord. No. 4548, § 1(5-341), 3-1-10) 
Sec. 5-341. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter as may be required by governing law. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this Code, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of the ordinance codified in this chapter is declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that a provision of this chapter is violated shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under this chapter is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates the chapter or to require specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with the chapter; and 
(2)  Other available relief. 
(Ord. No. 4548, § 1(5-342), 3-1-10) 
Secs. 5-342-5-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ARTISAN'S LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4631, § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 2012, repealed the former §§ 5-401-5-405. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted new §§ 5-401-5-405 as set out herein. The former sections pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004. 

Sec. 5-401. - Required. 
(a)  All persons who engage in or work at the actual installation, alteration, repair or renovation of electrical, mechanical or plumbing equipment and materials for which a permit is required by this chapter shall have in their possession either a master's or journeyman's license issued by the state. Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting the employment of apprentices or helpers working under the supervision of a licensed artisan. A licensed artisan for the type of work being conducted at any given time shall be on the job during all periods in which work, installation, alteration or repair is being performed. 
(b)  The following are exempt from the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Homesteaded property. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit any person that owns homesteaded property from personally installing, altering, repairing, or renovating any electrical, mechanical or plumbing equipment or materials, provided the real property is designated as a homestead by the homeowner in the Grayson County Appraisal District records, all work is performed by the homeowner only, the plans and specifications for the work to be accomplished have been approved by the chief building official, and all permits required by this chapter have been issued. 
(2)  Utility company. No license shall be required for the installation of work requiring a permit under this chapter, so long as the equipment and materials installed, altered, repaired or renovated is performed by company employees or agents, is and remains on the property of the utility company and is used in the pursuit of the delivering services rendered by the utility company. 
(3)  Railroad company. No license shall be required for the installation of wiring, devices and equipment used for signaling purposes on company property and performed by employees or agents of the railroad company. 
(4)  Telecommunications and cable companies. No license shall be required for the installation of wiring, devices and equipment used for communication and/or video distribution telecommunications and cable companies so long as the equipment and materials installed, altered, repaired or renovated is performed by company employees or agents, and is used in the pursuit of the delivering services rendered by the company. 
(5)  Routine maintenance. No license shall be required for maintenance work done by any person through an employee regularly employed to do such maintenance work solely on or within the premises or property owned or controlled by such person; provided however, such maintenance work shall not include the installation or addition of any new equipment or devices. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 4(v), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 4(v) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 5-401, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 5-401 derived from Ord. No. 4631, § 3, adopted Jan. 17, 2012. 
Sec. 5-402. - License registration. 
(a)  Save and except for those individuals qualifying under subsection 5-401(b) above, each person performing work in the city requiring a permit as provided in article V of this chapter shall register with the city and pay the fee provided in the city's adopted fee schedule for the purpose of evidencing compliance with the licensure requirements of the state. The chief building official shall promulgate a registration form that as a minimum requires the submittal and disclosure of the following information: 
(1)  Name, residence address and telephone number(s) of the license holder; 
(2)  Business name, email address, office address, telephone number(s) of the license holder, both of the main and local, if any, office; 
(3)  State-issued license number, along with a photocopy of such license; 
(4)  Designation of a twenty-four-hour-per-day emergency number; 
(b)  Each registrant in the city shall notify the city of any change in status in the person's license within three (3) business days of any change in information concerning the license, such as a change in business name or address, and shall notify the city within two (2) business days in the event of a suspension or revocation by the state of the license registered with the city. Failure to so notify shall be a violation of this section and upon conviction punishable in a manner consistent with section 1-12 of this Code. 
(c)  Each registrant shall keep the registration, or a copy thereof, on his person or vehicle at all times while performing work requiring a registration. Upon request, a registrant shall produce the registration for examination by any member of the building department of the city. Failure to so produce shall constitute a violation of this chapter punishable upon conviction by a fine in manner consistent with the provisions of section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4631, § 2, 1-17-12; Ord. No. 4701, § 4(w), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 5-403. - Registration fee. 
    Save and except for those individuals qualifying under section 5-401(b) above, each person performing work in the city requiring a permit as provided in article V of this chapter shall pay an annual registration fee in the amount required in the city's adopted fee schedule to the city to defray the cost of creating and administering the registration file of the license holder. 
(Ord. No. 4631, § 2, 1-17-12) 
Sec. 5-404. - Reserved. 
Sec. 5-405. - Expiration of registration. 
    All registrations under this article shall expire at midnight one year from the date of registration. 
(Ord. No. 4631, § 2, 1-17-12) 
Sec. 5-406. - Suspension, revocation of license. 
    After notice and hearing as provided in section 5-407 the building appeals board may suspend or revoke any registration for a period of not more than one (1) year after determining at a proper hearing that the registrant has done any of the following: 
(1)  Been convicted of an offense involving moral turpitude. For the purposes of this subsection, records of any court of this state or of the federal government shall be admissible at a hearing held pursuant to this article for the purpose of establishing conviction of registrant for an offense involving moral turpitude; 
(2)  Permitted an unlawful or fraudulent use of such registration; 
(3)  Is a habitual violator of this Code (habitual shall mean three (3) or more separate violations). For the purposes of this subsection, records of the municipal court of the city shall be admissible at a hearing held pursuant to this article for the purpose of establishing prior allegations of violation by registrant and of registrant's conviction thereon. 
(4)  Performed work that is in violation of this code and then failed or refused to make corrections necessary for the work to conform to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-407. - Hearings on suspension and revocation of license. 
(a)  When, in the opinion of the building official, there is probable cause to suspend or revoke the registration of any registrant of the city under this Code, the building official shall file with the building appeals board his notice of intention to seek the suspension or revocation of the registrant's registration. Within three (3) working days of delivery of such notice, the building official shall file in writing with the board the building official's grounds for seeking suspension or revocation, specifically citing names and addresses of individuals who possess knowledge of the information concerning the grounds cited, and specifically stating the relief or decision sought from the board. A copy of the grounds as stated shall be delivered to the registrant in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, at registrant's address as evidenced on registrant's registration. 
(b)  Within five (5) days of receipt of such statement of grounds for suspension or revocation, the board shall set a date, place and time for hearing said statement, and notice of such date, time and place shall be delivered to the building official and to the registrant, such notice to registrant to be delivered in the manner specified above for notice of grounds for suspension or revocation. The hearing may be continued from time to time within the discretion of the board; provided, however, after reasonable effort has been made by the board to accommodate the calendars of the building official and registrant, the board may proceed with the hearing with or without the presence of the building official or registrant at such hearing. 
(c)  At such hearing, the burden of proving that grounds do exist upon which to base a suspension or revocation of registration shall be upon the building official. The registrant may question documents, records, or testimony presented by the building official, and the registrant may present relevant documents, records or testimony calculated to show cause why the registration should not be suspended or revoked. The board may set and determine rules and procedures for such hearing that the board finds necessary to facilitate its duty to hear and consider the statement of grounds present. 
(d)  Upon conclusion of the hearing, the board may make any decision which it deems necessary and proper under this Code; provided, however, that in no event shall a suspension or revocation of registration be imposed which is more restrictive against the registrant than that period of suspension or revocation initially sought by the building official in his statement of grounds and relief. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-408. - Certain acts prohibited. 
    In addition to other provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts: 
(1)  To display or cause or permit to be displayed or to have in one's own possession any instrument purporting to be any registration or license for the doing of any work, knowing such instrument to be fictitious or to have been cancelled, revoked or suspended. 
(2)  To lend or knowingly permit the use of any registration or license for the doing of any work to any person not entitled thereto under the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  To display or represent as one's own any registration or license for the doing of any work when such registration or license has not been lawfully issued to the person so displaying the same. 
(4)  To fail or refuse to surrender to the building official, on demand, any registration for the doing of any work that has been suspended, cancelled or revoked as provided by law. 
(5)  To apply for or have in one's possession more than one (1) current registration or license of the same type provided for in this chapter. 
(6)  To use a false or fictitious name or give a false or fictitious address in any application for registration provided for in this chapter, or any renewal or duplicate thereof, or knowingly make a false statement or knowingly conceal a material fact or otherwise commit fraud in making any such application. 
(7)  To perform any character of work, for which a registration and license is required, without the registration and license required by this chapter, or while such registration or license is suspended, cancelled or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Secs. 5-409-5-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PERMITTING 

Sec. 5-501. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any structure, engage in or work at the installation, alteration, repair or renovations of electrical, mechanical or plumbing equipment and materials subject to the provisions of this chapter without first securing a permit from the chief building official. 
(b)  No permit shall be valid until the fees prescribed in this section shall have been paid. No amendment to a permit shall be approved until the additional fees, if any, shall have been paid. 
(c)  A master electrician, master plumber, mechanical contractor or general contractor to whom a permit is issued upon application by telephone shall make full payment for the permit before the permit is issued. 
(d)  Permits shall be issued only to a duly licensed and insured master electrician, master plumber, mechanical contractor or general contractor or his authorized representative. Persons owning homesteaded property and meeting the requirements of section 5-401 shall not be required to have licenses and insurance. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 4(x), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 4(x) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 5-401, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 5-401 derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004. 
Sec. 5-502. - Condition of the permit. 
    The chief building official shall act upon an application for a permit, with plans as required, without unreasonable delay. A permit issued shall be construed to be permission to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside any of the provisions of this Code, nor shall such issuance of a permit prevent the chief building official from thereafter requiring correction of errors in plans or in construction, or of violations of this Code. Any permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six (6) months after its issuance and work has proceeded to the point that an inspection is required and performed by the chief building official. One (1) year from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire unless an extension is granted by the chief building official. The chief building official may grant one (1) or more extensions of time for periods not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 4(y), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 4(y) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 5-401, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 5-402 derived from Ord. No. 4631, § 2, adopted Jan. 17, 2012. 
Sec. 5-503. - Fees. 
(a)  Required. It is a violation of this chapter for any person to commence any work for which a permit is required by this chapter before obtaining the necessary permit from the city and such violation shall be subject to the penalty prescribed herein. 
(b)  Schedule of permit fees. The fees for permits required by this division shall be as approved and adopted by the city council and kept on file in the building official's office. 
(c)  Penalty fees. If any person commences work before obtaining the necessary permit from the city, the permit and inspection fee shall be doubled or charged as indicated in the adopted fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 4631, § 2, 1-17-12) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4631, § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 2012, repealed the former § 5-503. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted a new § 5-503 as set out herein. The former § 5-503 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004. 
[Sec. 5-504. - Reserved.] 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4631, § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 2012, repealed the former § 5-504, which pertained to exceptions and derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004. 
Sec. 5-505. - Permits not transferable. 
    A change in the responsible artisan on a permitted job for any reason shall make the initial permit null and void. The new permittee shall be required to obtain a new permit before work is allowed to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 4631, § 2, 1-17-12) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4631, § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 2012, repealed the former § 5-505. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted a new § 5-505 as set out herein. The former § 5-505 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004. 
Sec. 5-506. - Payment of permit fees; disposition. 
    All permit fees prescribed and paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be paid to the building official or his authorized representative of the city, and the accumulated daily amounts thereof shall be by him paid over to the finance department of the city for deposit to the account of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-507. - Permits-Procedures, conditions for issuance by telephone. 
(a)  The procedures and conditions set out in [subsection] (b) below are hereby established as procedures and conditions under which building, plumbing, electrical, gas and mechanical permits may be issued to qualified applicants upon application by telephone for permits that do not require plan review and have been approved for telephone issuance by the chief building official. 
(b)  The procedures and conditions are as follows: 
(1)  Any duly licensed master plumber, in accordance with the plumbing and fuel gas code of the city and shown as authorized to perform plumbing work in the State of Texas as reflected by the records of the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners, may apply for a plumbing or gas permit by contacting the chief building official or his duly authorized representative by telephone, requesting such permit and paying the required permit fee via credit card. 
(2)  Any duly licensed master electrician, in accordance with the electrical code of the city and shown as authorized to perform electrical work in the State of Texas as reflected by the records of the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation, may obtain an electrical permit by contacting the chief building official or his authorized representative by telephone, requesting such permit and paying the required permit fee via credit card. 
(3)  Any duly licensed mechanical contractor, in accordance with the mechanical code of the city and shown as authorized to perform mechanical work in the State of Texas as reflected by the records of the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation, may obtain a mechanical permit by contacting the chief building official or his authorized representative by telephone, requesting such permit, and paying the required permit fee via credit card. 
(4)  The authorized person requesting any permit by telephone must do so prior to commencing any work on the project or job. All information required by the chief building official, or his authorized representative, relating to the work to be performed by the applicant shall be furnished prior to issuance of the permit. 
The cost of the permit requested by the applicant shall be determined by the chief building official or his authorized representative, at the time of the request for the permit, and shall be paid by the contractor prior to the issuance of the permit and before any work has commenced. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 4(z), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 4(z) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 5-507, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 5-507 derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004. 
Sec. 5-508. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1(d) of Ord. No. 4716, adopted Nov. 18, 2013, repealed § 5-508 which pertained to bonds; certain demolition permits, and derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004. 
ARTICLE VI. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 5-601. - Notice of completion and application for inspection. 
    It shall be the duty of the person installing any work requiring a permit under this chapter to notify the inspection department. Such person shall notify the inspection department that the work is ready for an inspection. All persons making requests for inspections must do so on days the inspection office is open for business, and not later than 4:00 p.m. of each day the office is open. Persons desiring inspections after 4:00 p.m. shall call on the following day the office is open. Inspections shall be performed by the inspection department, within twenty-four (24) hours on those days they are open for business, after official receipt of request for inspection. Requests for inspection for other than times the inspection department is open for business must be by special arrangement. Upon the completion of any work requiring a permit under this chapter, and an inspector shall inspect the installation within twenty-four (24) hours after notice is given. 
(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 5-602. - Notice of noncompliance. 
    If, upon inspection, it is found that any part of the work does not comply with the provisions of this article, the inspector shall give notice of the violation to the person to whom the permit was issued. When an installation, upon completion, is found not to comply with all the requirements of this article, the inspector shall not issue a certificate of approval to local utility providers and no utilities that have been disconnected may be reconnected. Where permanent service has not been established, permanent service shall not be provided by any utility provided unless and until all deficiencies have been eliminated and approval of the work has been approved as provided by section 5-603. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 4(aa), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 4(aa) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 5-602, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 5-602 derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004. 
Sec. 5-603. - Approval of installation, authority to connect. 
    When work, upon completion, is found to comply with all the requirements of this chapter, the inspector shall issue a certificate of approval to local utility providers. Such certificate shall authorize the connection of the installation to the utilities and the use of the installation. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 4(bb), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 4(bb) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 5-603, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 5-603 derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004. 
Sec. 5-604. - Concealment of work before inspection. 
    Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the chief building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the chief building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 4(cc), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 4(cc) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 5-604, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 5-604 derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004. 
Sec. 5-605. - Inspection tags. 
(a)  Any inspector from the inspection department of the city shall display a tag at the time of inspection of any construction or installation requiring an inspection under the ordinances of the city. The inspection tag shall clearly indicate: the address where the work was done, the type of inspection performed and the result of the inspection. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to proceed with any work requiring an inspection or conceal any work unless an inspection tag is displayed approving the work. 
(c)  The gas and electric service provider shall not install a utility meter for any use unless a release has been made for the service by the chief building official or his authorized representative. 
(d)  Only the chief building official or his authorized representative may remove a disapproval tag after it is displayed on the work. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 4(dd), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 4(dd) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 5-605, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 5-605 derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004. 
Secs. 5-606-5-700. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ENFORCEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4701, §§ 4(ee), (ff), repealed §§ 5-701 and 5-702, and enacted new provisions as set out herein. Former §§ 5-701 and 5-702 pertained to authority and certain acts prohibited, and derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004. 

Sec. 5-701. - Authority. 
(a)  Enforcement. The chief building official and his duly authorized representatives shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. Reference herein to the chief building official shall include and mean the inspectors working under the supervision of the chief building official unless the plain reading of a provision indicates that inclusion of the inspectors is not intended in the context of the provision. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the chief building official, work on any building or structure that is being done contrary to the provisions of chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner or his agent or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, written notice shall not be required. 
(c)  Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or where the chief building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this chapter which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the chief building official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this chapter, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the chief building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the chief building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
(d)  Repairs, disconnection. When any installation of materials or equipment is found by the chief building official to be dangerous to persons or property because it is defective or improperly installed, the person owning the materials and/or equipment shall be notified in writing and shall have any changes or repairs made as required by the chief building official, which will place such materials and/or equipment in safe condition. If such work is not completed within the period specified by the chief building official in the notice, the chief building official shall have the authority to disconnect or order the disconnection of utility service(s) at the subject location. 
(e)  Emergency action. 
(1)  Electric service. In cases of emergency, when necessary for safety to persons or property, or when the installation of materials and/or equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department, the chief building official or fire marshal shall have the power to cause such electrical service to be disconnected from the source of electrical energy supplying the same. He shall notify the provider of electric transmission and distribution service of such action. Thereafter, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit electric current to be supplied to such location until the same shall have been made safe and the chief building official shall have issued are lease of the electric service for that property. 
(2)  Gas service. In cases of emergency, when necessary for safety to persons or property, or when the installation of materials and/or equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department, the chief building official, fire marshal or fire chief shall have the power to order such gas service to be disconnected from the transmission and service lines of the gas utility provider. Upon such order, the gas utility provider shall disconnect the service as soon as possible. Thereafter, it shall be unlawful for any person, including the gas utility provider, to cause or permit gas service to be supplied to such location until it has been made safe and the chief building official shall have issued a release of the gas service for that property. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 4(ee), 6-17-13) 
Secs. 5-702-5-800. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PREMISES MAINTENANCE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4629, § 1, adopted Dec. 12, 2011, amended Art. VIII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VIII, §§ 5-801-5-5-811, pertained to dangerous and unsafe buildings, and derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004. 

PART A. - MINIMUM MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 5-801. - General. 
(a)  Title. This part A. shall be known as the Minimum Property Standards Code and shall be hereinafter referred to in this part as the "code." 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to protect the health, safety, morals, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Denison by establishing minimum standards applicable to the use, occupancy and maintenance of all structures, buildings and properties. Minimum standards are established with respect to utilities, facilities, and other physical components essential to make structures safe, sanitary, and fit for human use and habitation. It is further declared to be the purpose and intent of this code to regulate and control public nuisances and other conditions or circumstances that adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of the general public. It is not intended that this Code be interpreted or enforced to require the city to intervene in matters which are primarily personal or private in nature and which may appropriately be resolved between or among private interests without material damage to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(c)  Compliance . This code is found to be remedial and essential to the public interest, and it is intended that this code be liberally construed to effect its purpose. All structures within the city on the effective date of this code, or constructed thereafter, must comply with the provisions of this Code. 
(d)  Scope. This code shall apply to all zoning districts, land, properties, structures, and buildings within the city, including all vacant, occupied, residential, nonresidential, improved or unimproved land, properties, structures and buildings. 
(e)  Other ordinances. If any other ordinances or codes of the city conflict with this code and the standards or regulations established herein, the higher or stricter standard or regulation shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 4629, § 1, 12-12-11) 
Sec. 5-802. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this code. When terms are not defined in this code, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within context with which they are used. 
    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
    Building Code means the International Residential Code, for cases involving one- and two-family dwellings, or the International Building Code for all other structures, both promulgated by the International Code Council, as adopted by this jurisdiction. 
    Enforcement authority means the Chief Building Official of the City of Denison or his/her designee. 
    Graffiti means words, phrases, designs, symbols, letters, or drawings written, painted, scratched or applied in any other way to any sidewalk, fence, wall, window, walls of buildings, tree, or other structure or item or to any portion or element thereof, whether the property is public or private, regardless of its content or nature and regardless of the nature of the material of the structural component or property. 
    Nuisance means the following: 
(1)  Any public nuisance known at common law. 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements, or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may be hazardous for children; 
(3)  Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as determined by the health officer; 
(4)  Any tree, shrub, or other plant which creates a hazard or risk of damage or destruction to persons or property; 
(5)  Any substandard condition under this code. 
    Owner means a person claiming, or in whom vested, the ownership, dominion, or title of real property, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Holder of fee simple title; 
(2)  The holder of a life estate; 
(3)  The holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five years or more; 
(4)  The buyer in possession, or having right of possession under a contract for deed; 
(5)  The mortgagee, receiver, executor, or trustee in possession or control or having the right of possession or control of real property; but not including the holder of a leasehold estate or tenancy for initial term of less than five years; and 
(6)  In the case of a cooperation or partnership, "owner" includes an officer, partner, or manager of the entity. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, association, or any other legal entity. 
    Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings, structures, landscaping or trees thereon. 
    Property means a lot, plot, or parcel of land, including any structures on the land. 
    Repair means the replacement of existing work with the same kind of material used in the existing work, not including additional work that would change the structural safety of the building, or that would affect or change required exit facilities, a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring or heating installations, or that would be in violation of a provision of law or ordinance. The term "repair" or "repairs" shall not apply to any change of construction. 
    Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. Structure shall include but is not limited to any residential building, non-residential building, dwelling, condominium, townhouse, apartment unit, detached garage, shed, awning, fence, screening wall, sign, swimming pool, excavation. 
    Tenant means any person or their agent who occupies a structure or property. 
    Unauthorized means without the permission of the owner or the person in control of the property, whether public or private. 
(Ord. No. 4629, § 1, 12-12-11) 
Sec. 5-803. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The enforcement authority for this code shall be the Chief Building Official of the City of Denison or his/her designee. 
(b)  The enforcement authority is authorized at reasonable times to inspect: 
(1)  Premises which contain no structure; and 
(2)  The exterior of a structure and premises which contain a structure, provided, however, if such structure is occupied, the enforcement authority shall first present proper credentials and request entry on the premises; 
(c)  The enforcement authority shall have the power to obtain search warrants allowing the inspection of any specified premises to determine the presence of a health hazard or unsafe building condition, including but not limited to any structural, property, or utility hazard, or in violation of any health or building regulation, statute, or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4629, § 1, 12-12-11) 
Sec. 5-804. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  In addition to imposing a criminal penalty the city may, in accordance with the state law bring a civil action against a person violating a provision of this code. The civil action may include, but is not limited to, a suit to recover a civil penalty authorized by state law for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed or continued. 
(b)  The civil penalties provided for in subsection (a) above, and any criminal penalties are in addition to any other enforcement remedies including injunctive relief that the city may have under city ordinances and state law. 
(Ord. No. 4629, § 1, 12-12-11) 
Sec. 5-805. - Responsibility. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any premises, building or structure, or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code. 
(b)  Every owner and tenant of any premises shall maintain such premises in compliance with this code and in a clean, sanitary, and safe condition; and shall dispose of rubbish, garbage, junk or other waste in a lawful manner. 
(c)  An owner shall not let, rent, or lease any premises for occupancy or use which does not comply with this code. 
(Ord. No. 4629, § 1, 12-12-11) 
Sec. 5-806. - Minimum standards; exterior grounds. 
(a)  Sanitation. All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition. All portions of a building or structure shall be removed from the site within ten (10) days if the building or structure is demolished. 
(b)  Grading and drainage. No filling, excavation or other improvement shall be performed or constructed on any property which will have an adverse effect on an existing drainage pattern on an adjacent property. 
(c)  Trees, shrubs and plants. 
(1)  Trees, shrubs, and plants shall not obstruct the access to or from any door or window of any structure which is used, or is required by city codes and ordinances to be used, for ingress or egress. 
(2)  Trees, shrubs, or plants that are dead and which are hazardous to persons or property shall be removed. 
(d)  Nuisances . All properties shall be maintained free of any nuisances. 
(e)  Erosion control. The unpaved areas of the front yard shall be maintained with grass, ground cover, or other type of landscaping to such an extent that the soil, when wet, will not be picked up and spread to sidewalks or adjacent private or public property and is not subject to erosion during rains. 
(f)  Antennas, towers, stacks, etc. Antennas, towers, stacks, satellite dishes, and similar structures must be maintained structurally sound, free of deterioration, firmly secured, and must comply with applicable requirements of the City of Denison Zoning Ordinance, as amended. 
(g)  Accessory structures. Carports, awnings, patio covers, garages, sheds, storage buildings, and other accessory structures shall be maintained structurally sound, and free of deterioration. 
(h)  Swimming pools and spas. Swimming pools, spas, and similar structures shall be maintained safe, secure, free of stagnant water, and structurally and mechanically sound in accordance with the City of Denison Code of Ordinances. 
(i)  Graffiti. It shall be unlawful for any person who shall be in any place, public or private, to deface, write or mark, cut, print, stamp, indent or display any word, sentence, symbol, or figure on public or privately owned buildings, permanent structures, or places located on or within the city without the authorization of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 4629, § 1, 12-12-11) 
Sec. 5-807. - Minimum standards; exterior structure maintenance. 
(a)  General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained structurally sound. 
(b)  Structural members. All supporting structural members of all structures shall be kept structurally sound, free of deterioration, and maintained capable of safely bearing the dead and live loads upon them. 
(c)  Exterior surfaces. The foundation, exterior wall, floor, roof, and all exterior surfaces of every structure shall be maintained in a state of repair sufficient to exclude rats, rodents, birds, vermin, and other animals. The exterior wall surface materials of every structure shall be maintained weatherproof or the surface protected as required to prevent deterioration. 
(d)  Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to safely carry applicable dead and live loads that are imposed upon the foundation walls. 
(e)  Exterior walls. The exterior wall of every structure shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the interior of the structure. The exterior wall surface materials of every structure shall be maintained weatherproof or the surface protected as required to prevent deterioration. 
(f)  Roofs. The roof of every structure shall be structurally sound, tight, and free of leaks, and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rain water from causing dampness in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof coverings shall not be composed of tarps, plastic sheets or other materials not designed for permanent use. 
(g)  Decorative features. The cornices, entablatures, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features of every structure shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(h)  Exterior attachments. All exterior canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, rain gutters, exhaust ducts and similar overhang extensions attached to a structure shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a safe and sound condition, and their exterior surface materials shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be surface coated or protected as required to prevent deterioration. 
(i)  Chimneys. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe, sound, properly mortared and in good repair, and their exterior surface materials shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be surface coated or protected as required to prevent deterioration. 
(j)  Stairs and porches. Every stair, porch, balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, and their exterior surface materials shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be surface coated or protected as required to prevent deterioration. 
(k)  Window and door frames. The windows, doors, and frames of every habitable structure shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely as possible from entering the dwelling or structure. 
(l)  Weather-tight. The windows and exterior doors of every habitable structure shall be fitted in their frames so as to be reasonably weather-tight and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(m)  Glazing. Every window and/or window sash shall be fully supplied with approved glazing materials which are without open cracks and holes. A window and/or window sash may be temporarily secured and/or closed with alternate materials approved by the enforcement authority for periods during actual construction, remodeling, or repairs, provided the period of time does not exceed thirty (30) days. The enforcement authority may grant extensions of time due to extenuating circumstances. When such an extension is granted, the material covering the window must be painted to match the exterior of the building. 
(n)  Door hardware. The exterior doors, door hinges, and door latches of every habitable structure shall be maintained in good condition. Door locks in exterior doors of dwelling units shall be maintained in good repair and capable of tightly securing the door. A door may be temporarily secured and/or closed with alternate materials approved by the enforcement authority for periods during actual construction, remodeling, or repairs, provided the period of time does not exceed thirty (30) days. The enforcement authority may grant extensions of time due to extenuating circumstances. 
(o)  Burglar bars. Burglar bars shall comply with requirements of the building code and other codes or ordinances of the city. Burglar bars on windows of bedrooms of residential structures shall be constructed and mounted in such a way so as to be operable and openable from the interior of the residence without special knowledge or the need of tools. 
(p)  Garage doors. Garage doors shall be capable of being closed reasonably plumb, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(q)  Unauthorized entry. Regardless of its structural condition, a building that is unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees shall be adequately secured to prevent unauthorized entry or use by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children. 
(Ord. No. 4629, § 1, 12-12-11; Ord. No. 4701, § 4(gg), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 5-808. - Securing of buildings or structures. 
(a)  All vacant or unoccupied structures or parts of structures completely secure from unauthorized entry. Minimum standards for securing a structure are: 
(1)  All openings in a structure, including all floor levels, shall be secured to prevent entry by unauthorized persons. One (1) building entrance may be secured with a door of either solid core wood or steel construction, having no window in the door, and the door shall be securely locked to allow access only to authorized persons. Said door shall be secured with a through-bolted hasp and padlock if the door swings in; 
(2)  If plywood materials are used to secure buildings, such materials shall be no less than one-half (1/2) inch thick, exterior grade. Particle board, wafer board, masonite, or other similar materials shall not be used for purposes of boarding-up a building; 
(3)  Mechanical fasteners used for wood board-up materials shall be round-headed, non-slotted carriage bolts no less than three-eighths-inch in diameter with washers and nuts on the interior face; 
(4)  The primary method of securing plywood boards shall be by the use of through-bolt compression fastening, using plywood on the exterior face and wood bracing constructed of minimum two-inch by four-inch (nominal) lumber installed on the interior side of the opening to be secured, perpendicular to the long dimension of the opening. Such bracing shall extend at least six (6) inches beyond the edge of the opening on each side in order to be securely braced against the building structure; 
(5)  Wood construction used to secure a structure opening shall contain at least one (1) bolt in each corner and additional bolts no more than four (4) feet on center continuously along the perimeter. Each bolt shall fully penetrate the wood bracing on the interior side of the opening; and 
(6)  The surfaces of such securing materials exposed to the weather shall be protected with the application of exterior grade paint, or a similar weather resistant finish, which blends with the background color of the building. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to the requirement of through-bolt compression fastening that such fastening is impossible due to the construction or condition of the opening. In such event, the opening shall be covered with plywood secured with minimum three-inch-long wood screws fastened on four-inch centers around the circumference of the opening. 
(c)  Nothing in the minimum standards of this section shall preclude an owner or responsible person from utilizing superior materials, such as metal, masonry, or concrete, or proprietary systems such as VPS systems, which exceed the durability and reliability of the foregoing standards, to secure a vacant structure or portion of a structure. 
(d)  In the event that a structure becomes unsecure after compliance with the standards in this section, the owner or responsible person shall resecure immediately and maintain said building in a secure manner. 
(Ord. No. 4629, § 1, 12-12-11) 
Sec. 5-809. - Substandard property; repair; vacate. 
(a)  Any structure, building or premises in violation of the minimum standards set forth herein is substandard and declared to be a nuisance. The failure of the owner or tenant to maintain any premises or structure in accordance with the minimum standards set forth in this code shall be grounds for the enforcement authority to declare the property substandard. 
(b)  All buildings or portions thereof which are determined to be substandard as defined in this code are declared to be prima facia public nuisances to the extent of such substandard condition, and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal, in accordance with the procedure provided in this code. 
(c)  Whenever an occupied structure, building or property is determined to be substandard and is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property, safety, or welfare of the public or of the occupants, the enforcement authority shall order such building, structure or property vacated. 
(Ord. No. 4629, § 1, 12-12-11) 
Sec. 5-810. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 4(hh) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 5-810 in its entirety. Former § 5-810 pertained to enforcement procedures; appeal, and derived from Ord. No. 4629, § 1, adopted Dec. 12, 2011. 
Sec. 5-811. - Recovery of costs; lien. 
(a)  If a notice describing the violation and the city's rights to impose a lien on the property without further notice as provided for herein is delivered to the owner of such real property, and he fails or refuses to comply with such demand for compliance within ten-day time period established herein, the aforementioned charges shall be, in addition to a charge to and personal liability of said owner, a privileged lien upon and against such real property, including all fixtures and improvements thereon. 
(b)  To perfect the lien against the real property, the city secretary shall file a written statement of such charges with the county clerk of the county for filing in the county land and deed records. Said statement shall be deemed sufficient if it contains the following minimum information; however, it may also contain such other information deemed appropriate by the mayor, the chief building official or their respective designee, or his duly appointed representative: 
(1)  The name of the owner of the real property, if known; 
(2)  A legal description of the real property; 
(3)  A statement of the charges incurred by the city in doing or in having such work done as necessary to bring the real property into compliance with this article; and 
(c)  All such charges shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the date of payment by the city. The lien obtained is security for the expenditures made and is inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The city may bring suit to collect the charges, institute foreclosure proceedings, or both. The written statement of such charges provided for herein, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the city's claim for charges or right to foreclose the lien. The owner of the real property or any other person claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of the real property shall be jointly and severally liable for such charges. 
(d)  This remedy is in addition to any penal provision provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 4(ii), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 4(ii) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 5-811, entitled "Recovery of costs," and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 5-811 derived from Ord. No. 4629, § 1, adopted Dec. 12, 2011. 
Sec. 5-812. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief building official or his duly appointed representative to give a minimum of ten (10) days' official notice to such person violating the terms of this article, subject to the provisions herein stated. The notice shall be in writing and may be served on such person violating the terms of this section by: 
(1)  Delivering it to him in person; 
(2)  By letter or written notice addressed to such person at the person's address as recorded in the appraisal district in which the property is located and delivered by United States regular mail; or 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained: 
a.  By publication once within seven (7) consecutive days in the city's official newspaper; 
b.  By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violations relates; or 
c.  By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings. 
(b)  If such person violating the terms of this article fails or refuses to comply with the demand for compliance contained in the aforementioned notice, within ten (10) days after the date of notification as provided herein, the city may go upon such property and do or cause to be done in order to obtain compliance with this article. All costs, charges and expenses (hereinafter "charges") incurred in doing or in having such work done shall be a charge to, and a personal liability of, such person. 
(c)  If the city mails a notice to the property owner in accordance with subsection (b) of this section and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as refused or unclaimed, the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(d)  If the owner does not take the ordered action within the allotted time, the municipality shall make a diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder having an interest in the building or in the property on which the building is located. The municipality shall personally deliver or send by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each identified mortgagee and lienholder a notice containing: 
(1)  Identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property on which it is located; 
(2)  Description of the violation of municipal standards that is present at the building; and 
(3)  Statement that the municipality will vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within a reasonable time. If the order of the enforcement authority is not complied with, the city, after appropriate notice and hearing, may vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the occupants at its own expense. 
(e)  Prior to the issuance of a citation issued for failure of a person to remove graffiti from property under his or her control under the provisions of this chapter, the owner must be given notice of the violation. Notice may be made personally to the owner in writing or by publication in the official newspaper at least twice within seven consecutive days. If no action is taken by the owner, a citation may be issued seven days after notification of violation. 
(Ord. No. 4629, § 1, 12-12-11; Ord. No. 4701, § 4(jj), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 4(jj) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, changed the title of § 5-812 from "Notice of violation; abatement" to "Notice of violation." 
Sec. 5-813. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 4(kk) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 5-813, which pertained to public hearing, and derived from Ord. No. 4629, § 1, adopted Dec. 12, 2011. 
Secs. 5-814-5-829. - Reserved. 
PART B. - DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE STRUCTURES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4879, § 1, adopted June 5, 2017, amended part B in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former part B, §§ 5-830-5-840 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 4629, § 1, adopted Dec. 12, 2011; and Ord. No. 4701, § 4, adopted June 17, 2013. 

Sec. 5-830. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building official shall mean the building official of the city or their authorized agents, assistants, deputies or representatives. 
    Dilapidated structure means a building or structure which has been neglected of repairs or maintenance necessary to keeping the building or structure in compliance with the applicable building and housing codes of the city, the extent of such neglect being that the cost of necessary repairs to gain compliance with such codes exceeds the present value of the building or structure without regard to the value of the land. 
    Director of public works shall mean the director of the public works department of the city or their authorized agents, assistants, deputies or representatives. 
    Fire chief shall mean the chief of the fire department of the city or their authorized agents, assistants, deputies or representatives. 
    Nuisance means a nuisance in fact and, if left unabated, endangers the possession or use of adjoining property or creates and unreasonable danger to the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 4879, § 1, 6-5-17) 
Sec. 5-831. - Purpose of part B. 
    It is the purpose of this part B. to provide a just, equitable and practicable method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy available at law, whereby buildings or structures which are dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous, unsanitary, or are a menace to the life, limb, health, property, safety and general welfare of the people of the city, or which constitute a fire hazard, may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 4879, § 1, 6-5-17) 
Sec. 5-832. - Declaration of nuisance; duty of building official. 
(a)  In the event of an emergency which, in the opinion of the building official, creates imminent danger to human life or health, the building official may declare building or structure, which is structurally unsafe, a fire hazard or otherwise dangerous, to be a hazard to the public health and safety. 
(b)  The building official shall promptly cause such building, structure or portion thereof to be made safe or removed. For this purpose, they may at once enter such structure or land on which it stands, or abutting land or structures, with such assistance and at such cost as he may deem necessary. He may vacate adjacent structures and protect the public by appropriate fence or such other means as may be necessary, and for this purpose, may close a public or private way. Such costs incurred shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and shall be collected in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 4879, § 1, 6-5-17) 
Sec. 5-833. - Dangerous buildings designated. 
    For the purpose of this article, any building or structure that has one (1) or more of the following conditions or defects is a dangerous building: 
(1)  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit, in case of fire or panic, for all person housed or assembled therein who would be required to, or might, use such door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit. 
(2)  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause in such a manner that the structural strength or stability thereof is appreciably less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the city building code for a building of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(3)  Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fall or to become detached or dislodged or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(4)  Whenever any portion thereof has settled to such an extent that the walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of new construction. 
(5)  Whenever the building or structure or any portion thereof, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction or because of the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building or portion thereof, or some other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning is likely to fall or giveaway. 
(6)  Whenever for any reason whatsoever the building or structure or any portion thereof is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used. 
(7)  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle third of the base. 
(8)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play therein to their danger, or as to afford a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful or immoral act. 
(9)  Any building or structure which has been constructed or which now exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure of the building regulations of this city as set forth in the building code or of any provisions of the fire prevention ordinances, when so determined and reported by the fire marshal, or of any law or ordinance of this state or city relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings. 
(10)  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposed, because of dilapidation, decay, damage or faulty construction or arrangement or otherwise, in unsanitary or unfit for human habitation or is in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease, when so determined by the health officer, or is likely to work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living within. 
(11)  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, has light, air, and sanitation facilities inadequate to protect the health, safety or general welfare of persons living within. 
(12)  Whenever any building or structure, by reason of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, electric wiring, gas connections, heating apparatus or other cause, is in such condition as to be a fire hazard and is so situated as to endanger life or provide a ready fuel supply to augment the spread and intensity of fire arising from any cause. 
(13)  Roofs. The roof of every structure shall be structurally sound, tight, and free of leaks, and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rain water from causing dampness in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof coverings shall not be composed of tarps, plastic sheets or other materials not designed for permanent use. 
(14)  Weather tight. The windows, doors, and frames of every habitable structure shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely as possible from entering the dwelling or structure. 
(15)  Whenever any building or structure is: 
a.  Dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare; 
b.  Regardless of its structural condition, unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children; or 
c.  Boarded up, fenced, or otherwise secured in any manner if: 
1.  The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or 
2.  The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use of the building in the manner described by section 5-833(15)b. 
(Ord. No. 4879, § 1, 6-5-17) 
Sec. 5-834. - Notice and order to repair, vacate or demolish generally. 
(a)  Generally. Upon their own finding that a building or structure is a fire hazard or is unsafe or is dilapidated or is dangerous or is a hazard to public safety or health, or upon the complaint to the building official by any person that a building or structure is a fire hazard or is unsafe or is dilapidated or is dangerous or is a hazard to the public safety or health, the building official shall deliver a notice in writing stating in detail the conditions which render the building or structure, or portion thereof, to be unsafe, dangerous or a hazard, and ordering the repair, vacation and repair or demolition thereof by a specific date. The building official may, when it is determined that additional time will be necessary to complete the work ordered, extend such time upon the application of the owner or person charged with the duty of complying with such order. 
(b)  Notice of hearing. The building official shall set the matter for hearing before the city council. Notice of the date, hour and place of the hearing shall be posted and served at least ten (10) days before the date set for the hearing in the manner and upon the persons specified in this section. The notice shall order all interested parties who desire to be heard to appear and show cause, if any they have, why the building or structure or portion thereof involved in the proceedings should not be repaired, vacated and repaired, or demolished. 
(c)  Identification of property. To determine the identity of a property owner, mortgagee, or lienholder, the building official shall: 
(1)  Search the following records: 
a.  County real property records of Grayson County; 
b.  Appraisal district records of Grayson County; 
c.  Records of the secretary of state, if the property owner or lienholder is a corporation, partnership, or other business association; 
d.  Assumed name records of Grayson County; 
e.  Tax records of the City of Denison; and 
f.  Utility records of the City of Denison. 
(2)  Have a title search performed by a title company. 
(d)  Upon whom to be served. Notice of all proceedings before the city council must be given by: 
(1)  Certified mail, return receipt requested, deliver by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, or personally deliver to the record owner of the affected property, and each mortgagee and holder of a recorded lien against the affected property, as shown by the records of the office of the County Clerk of Grayson County; 
(2)  And to all unknown owners, by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each improvement situated on the affected property or as close to the front door as practicable. 
(3)  The notice shall be posted and mailed on or before the tenth day before the date of the hearing before the city council and must state the date, time, and place of the hearing. In addition, the notice must be published in newspaper of general circulation in the City of Denison on one (1) occasion before the tenth day before the date fixed for the hearing. 
(4)  When a notice is mailed in accordance with this section to a property owner or lienholder and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed", the validity of the notice is not affected and is considered delivered. 
(e)  Contents of notice. The notice must contain the following information: 
(1)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property on which it is located; 
(2)  A description of the violation of municipal standards that is present at the building; 
(3)  A statement that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the ordinance and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work; and 
(4)  A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within a reasonable time. If the order of the building official is not complied with, the city, after appropriate notice and hearing, may vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the occupants at its own expense. 
(f)  Filing in property records. The city may file notice of the hearing in the official public records of real property in the county in which the property is located. The notice shall contain the name and address of the owner of the affected property if that information can be determined, a legal description of the affected property and a description of the hearing. The filing of the notice is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholder or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of the notice, and constitutes notice of the hearing on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who acquired such interest after the filing of the notice. 
(g)  Affidavits as to service and posting, receipt card. Upon giving notice as provided herein, the building official shall file with the city clerk an affidavit thereof certifying to the time and manner in which such notice was given and posted. He shall also file therewith any receipt card that may have been returned to him in acknowledgement of the receipt of such notice by registered or certified mail. 
(Ord. No. 4879, § 1, 6-5-17) 
Sec. 5-835. - Hearing. 
(a)  At the time stated in the notice, the city council shall hold a hearing and hear and consider any relevant evidence offered by the fire chief or the building official, or both, as well as the owner, occupant or person in charge and control, mortgagee or beneficiary under any deed of trust, lessee or any other person having any estate or interest in the building or structure, pertaining to the matters set forth in the notice to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish. 
(b)  Findings of fact and decision/order of the city council. After hearing evidence from any interested party the council may: 
(1)  Find that the structure is not dangerous, substandard, dilapidated, unfit for human habitation or a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare, and refer the matter to the building official for appropriate action. 
(2)  Find that the structure is dangerous, substandard, dilapidated, unfit for human habitation, or a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare and order: 
a.  Demolition of the structure within a reasonable time; 
b.  Repair or correction of the structure within a specified period of time; 
c.  Require the relocation of occupants in a reasonable time; 
d.  Repair or correction of the structure within a specified period of time and demolition of the structure if the repair or correction is not timely effected; 
e.  Repair or correction of the structure by the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder within a specified period of time and repair, demolition, or correction by the city if not timely effected by the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder; 
f.  An action be brought in district court in accordance with Tex. Local Govt. Code, § 214.003 for the appointment of a receiver of the property. 
(c)  Within ten (10) days after the date that the order is issued, the city shall: 
(1)  File a copy of the order in the office of the city clerk; and 
(2)  Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city in which the building is located a notice containing: 
a.  The street address or legal description of the property; 
b.  The date of the hearing; 
c.  A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and 
d.  Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(d)  The city may file a copy of the order in the official public records of real property in the county in which the property is located. The filing of the notice is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholder or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of the order, and constitutes notice of the hearing on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who acquired such interest after the filing of the order. 
(e)  After the hearing, the city shall promptly mail by certified mail with return receipt requested, deliver by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, or personally deliver a copy of the order to the owner of the building and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the building as determined in accordance with section 5-834. When a notice is mailed via certified mail, return receipt requested, to a property owner or lienholder and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed", the validity of the notice is not affected. 
(f)  Remediation. 
(1)  If the city council declares a building substandard or requires repairs to be made to the building, the repair work or demolition, such work shall be completed not more than thirty (30) days from the date of the order. 
(2)  If the city council allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than thirty (30) days to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the city council shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property, as required by this Code, to prevent unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined by the city council. The order may require that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the council or council's designee to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules. 
(3)  The city council may not allow the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to repair, remove, or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee: 
a.  Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and 
b.  Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within ninety (90) days because of the scope and complexity of the work. 
(4)  If the city council allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days pursuant to [subsection] (f)(3) above to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove or demolish the building, the city shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the municipality to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the council or council's designee to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules. If the owner, lienholder or mortgagee owns property, including structures or improvements on property, within the city boundaries that exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in total value, the council may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to post a cash or surety bond in an amount adequate to cover the cost of repairing, removing or demolishing a building. In lieu of a bond, the council may require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to provide a letter of credit from a financial institution or a guaranty from a third party approved by the commission. The bond must be posted, or the letter of credit or third party guaranty provided not later that the 30th day after the date the council issues the order. 
(g)  The order issued by the city council may specify a reasonable time as provided by the time limits described in section 5-835 herein for the building, structure, or improvement to be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished by the owner or for the occupants to be relocated by the owner and an additional reasonable time for the ordered action to be taken by any of the mortgagees or lienholders in the event the owner fails to comply with the order within the time provided for action by the owner. Under this subsection, the city is not required to furnish any notice to a mortgagee or lienholder other than a copy of the order provided pursuant to section 5-835(d) in the event the owner fails to timely take the ordered action. 
(Ord. No. 4879, § 1, 6-5-17) 
Sec. 5-836. - Appeal of city council decision. 
    Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee or record jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the city council may present a petition to a district court, duly verified, setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the legality. The petition must be filed by an owner, lienholder, or mortgagee within thirty (30) calendar days after the date a copy of the final decision of the city council is mailed by first class mail, certified, return receipt requested or is personally delivered, to all persons to whom notice is required to be sent. If no appeals are taken from the decision of the city council within the required period, the decision of the city council shall, in all things, be final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 4879, § 1, 6-5-17) 
Sec. 5-837. - Failure to comply with orders given under article; penalty for violation. 
(a)  The owner or other person having charge and control over any building or structure determined by the building official or, upon appeal, by the city council to be unsafe and a public nuisance, who shall fail to comply with any order to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish such building or structure or any portion thereof, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. 
(b)  The occupant or lessee in possession, who fails to comply with any order to vacate any building or structure or any portion thereof in accordance with any order given as provided for in this article, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. 
(c)  Whenever in this article an act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 4879, § 1, 6-5-17) 
Sec. 5-838. - Action by city. 
(a)  Authority to vacate or demolish. Whenever an order to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish any building or structure or any portion thereof has not been obeyed within the time set by the city council, the chief building official or the city council shall have the power, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, to: 
(1)  Cause the building or structure ordered to be repaired or to be vacated until such time as the necessary repairs have been made. Repair of a structure may be accomplished by the city but only to the extent necessary to bring the structure into compliance with minimum standards and only if the structure is a residential structure with not more than ten (10) dwelling units. No person shall thereafter occupy or permit to be occupied any such building, until and unless the necessary repairs have been made and the building inspector has approved same and issued a permit to reoccupy such building or structure; 
(2)  Request the director of public works to cause the building or structure to be demolished and the land restored to a reasonably clear and level condition, including the filling of any excavation to the finished grade of the surrounding area. The demolition of any building or structure, and the sale of the materials thereof, may be by a contract awarded, following advertisement for bids, to the best bidder; or when time is of the essence, the demolition maybe be accomplished with force account labor or any other reasonable means at the discretion of the city council. 
(b)  Report of demolition. Upon completion of the demolition of any building or structure or any portion thereof under this section, the director of public works shall cause to be prepared and filed with the city council a report specifying: 
(1)  The work done; 
(2)  The cost of the work and incidental direct expenses; 
(3)  A description of the real property upon which the building or structure was located; 
(4)  The names and addresses of the persons entitled to notice pursuant to section 5-834; 
(5)  Administrative cost in complying with and accomplishing the purposes and procedures of this article; and 
(6)  The total assessment against the lot and legal owner(s) proposed to be levied to pay the cost thereof. 
(c)  Hearing on report and assessment of costs. Upon filing of the report of the director of public works, as provided in (b) above, the city council shall, by resolution, fix the day, hour and place when it will hear and pass upon the report, together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any property owner liable to be assessed for the cost of such demolition, and any other interested persons. At least ten (10) days before the date set for the hearing, the director of public works shall cause copies of their report and notice of the filing of their report and of the day, hour and place when the city council will hear and pass upon the report, and any objections or protests thereto, to be posted and served in the manner and upon the persons specified in section 5-835. A copy of the notice shall be published once, at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing, in the official newspaper of the city. The council may make such revisions, corrections or modifications in the report as it may deem just, and the report, as submitted or as revised, corrected and modified, together with the assessment, shall be confirmed by ordinance. The decision of the council on the report and the assessment and all protests or objections shall be final and conclusive. 
(d)  Contest of assessment. The validity of any assessment levied under the provisions of this section shall not be contested in any action or proceeding unless the same is commenced within thirty (30) days after the assessment is confirmed. 
(e)  Assessment as lien on property. The amount of the cost of abating such nuisance upon the various lots or parcels of land, including incidental expenses, as confirmed by the city council, shall constitute special assessments, respectively, until paid. Such lien shall, for all purposes, take priority over all other liens except tax liens and/or paving assessment liens. The city clerk shall cause a certified copy of such special assessment lien to be filed with the county clerk in the deed records of the county. Such special assessment liens shall bear interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the date of filing of the same with the county clerk until paid in full, and such lien shall be collected in the same manner as other assessment liens are collected under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 4879, § 1, 6-5-17) 
Sec. 5-839. - Removal of orders or notices posted under article. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any notice or order posted as required in this article. 
(Ord. No. 4879, § 1, 6-5-17) 
Sec. 5-840. - Interfering with enforcement of article. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, agent or employee of the city or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building or structure or any portion thereof which has been ordered to be repaired, vacated and repaired, or demolished, or with any person to whom such building or structure has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this article, whenever any such officer, agent, employee, purchaser or person having an interest or estate in such building or structure pursuant to the provisions of this article, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work, or authorized or directed pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 4879, § 1, 6-5-17) 
Sec. 5-841. - Abrogation. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to repeal by implication any provisions of the fire department code, the building code or any other ordinance of the city, and the adoption hereof shall not be deemed to affect or diminish the power or authority of any officer or employee of the city to condemn any building or structure erected or maintained in violation of any provision of the fire prevention ordinances, the building code or any other ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4879, § 1, 6-5-17) 
Secs. 5-842-5-849. - Reserved. 
PART C. - MINIMUM MAINTENANCE STANDARDS: INTERIOR PREMISES 

Sec. 5-850. - Title and purpose. 
(a)  Title. This part C. shall be known as the "Minimum Interior Property Standards Code: Interior Premises" and shall be hereinafter referred to in this part as the "code." 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to protect the health, safety, morals, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Denison by establishing minimum interior standards applicable to the use, occupancy and maintenance of all structures, buildings and properties. Minimum standards are established with respect to utilities, facilities, and other, physical components essential to make structures safe, sanitary, and fit for human use and habitation. It is further declared to be the purpose and intent of this code to regulate and control public nuisances and other conditions or circumstances that adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of the general public. It is not intended that this code be interpreted or enforced to require the city to intervene in matters which are primarily personal or private in nature and which may appropriately be resolved between or among private interests without material damage to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(c)  Compliance. This code is found to be remedial and essential to the public interest, and it is intended that this code be liberally construed to effect its purpose. All structures within the city on the effective date of this code, or constructed thereafter, must comply with the provisions of this code. 
(d)  Scope . This code shall apply to all zoning districts, land, properties, structures, and buildings within the city, including all vacant, occupied, residential, nonresidential, improved or unimproved land, properties, structures and buildings. 
(e)  Other ordinances. If any other ordinances or codes of the city conflict with this code and the standards or regulations established herein, the higher or stricter standard or regulation shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 4802, § 1, 12-14-15) 
Sec. 5-851. - Definitions. 
(a)  Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. Structure shall include but is not limited to any residential building, non-residential building, dwelling, condominium, townhouse, apartment unit, detached garage, shed, awning, fence, screening wall, sign, swimming pool, excavation. 
(b)  Tenant means any person or their agent who occupies a structure or property. 
(c)  Landlord means any person or their agent who owns a structure or property for rental purposes. 
(d)  Unauthorized means without the permission of the landlord or the person in control of the property, whether public or private. 
(Ord. No. 4802, § 1, 12-14-15) 
Sec. 5-852. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The enforcement authority for this code shall be the Chief Building Official of the City of Denison or his/her designee. 
(b)  The enforcement authority is authorized at reasonable times to inspect: 
(1)  Premises which contain no structure; and 
(2)  The exterior of a structure and premises which contain a structure, provided, however, if such structure is occupied, the enforcement authority shall first present proper credentials and request entry on the premises; and 
(3)  Premises occupied upon the written request of the tenant or property landlord. 
(c)  The enforcement authority shall have the power to obtain search warrants allowing the inspection of any specified premises to determine the presence of a health hazard or unsafe building condition, including but not limited to any structural, property, or utility hazard, or in violation of any health or building regulation, statute, or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4802, § 1, 12-14-15) 
Sec. 5-853. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  In addition to imposing a criminal penalty in accordance with section 1-12 of this Code of Ordinances, the city may, in accordance with the state law bring a civil action against a person violating a provision of this Code. The civil action may include, but is not limited to, a suit to recover a civil penalty authorized by state law for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed or continued. 
(b)  The civil penalties provided for in section, and any criminal penalties are in addition to any other enforcement remedies including injunctive relief that the city may have under city ordinances and state law. 
(Ord. No. 4802, § 1, 12-14-15) 
Sec. 5-854. - Responsibility. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, film or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any premises, building or structure, or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code. 
(b)  Every landlord and tenant of any premises shall maintain such premises in compliance with this code and in a clean, sanitary, and safe condition; and shall dispose of rubbish, garbage, junk or other waste in a lawful manner. 
(c)  A Landlord shall not let, rent, or lease any premises for occupancy or use which does not comply with this code. 
(Ord. No. 4802, § 1, 12-14-15) 
Sec. 5-855. - Minimum standards: Interior premises. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code: Interior Premises of the City of Denison, in the State of Texas for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all regulations provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City of Denison, Texas are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation, with the deletions and changes prescribed in section 5-856. 
(Ord. No. 4802, § 1, 12-14-15) 
Sec. 5-856. - Minimum standards: Interior premises (deletions). 
(a)  The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, are not adopted: 
(1)  Section 103 Department of Property Maintenance Inspection 
(2)  Section 108 Unsafe Structures and Equipment 
(3)  Section 110 Demolition 
(4)  Section 111 Means of Appeal 
(b)  Any section or part of a section of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012, that the Chief Building Official of the City of Denison or his/her designee deems to be unreasonable to enforce or in conflict with currently adopted fire prevention ordinances, the building code, or any other ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4802, § 1, 12-14-15) 
Sec. 5-857. - Mandatory registration, fee. 
(a)  A mandatory rental property registration and fee will be required for any landlord found to be in violation of minimum standards: interior premises within a one-year period at: 
(1)  two (2) or more one- or two-family rental property locations; or 
(2)  a multi-family dwelling with two (2) or more units. 
(b)  The mandatory registration and fee is in place to ensure landlords with multiple properties or units in multi-family properties in violation address health and safety issues. 
(c)  The registration fee shall be: 
(1)  One hundred dollars ($100.00) for each one- or two-family rental property; 
(2)  One hundred dollars ($100.00) plus twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per unit in violation for each multi-family complex with more than two (2) units. 
(d)  A registration is valid for one (1) year. Should a change of ownership occur, the new landlord will have thirty (30) days to file a new registration with the City of Denison and pay a new registration fee. 
(e)  The registration will expire on the later of one (1) year from the date of the completed registration form or one (1) year from the date the property violation is brought into compliance with the article. 
(f)  The registration shall be on a form prescribed by the chief building official or his/her designee, and shall at a minimum contain the following information: 
(1)  Rental property landlord name, trade name, physical address, and business address. 
(2)  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the landlord, property manager, resident manager, or registered agent of the rental property. 
(3)  The name and physical address of designated employees or authorized representatives who shall be assigned to respond to emergency conditions, and a telephone number where such a person can be contacted during any twenty-four-hour period. Emergency conditions shall include fire, natural disaster, flood, burst pipes, collapse hazard, violent crime, or any condition deemed a health and safety issue by the City of Denison. A post office box shall not suffice for address requirements. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to fail to register a rental property as required by this chapter. Violation of this chapter shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-12 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 4802, § 1, 12-14-15) 
Sec. 5-858. - Abrogation. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to repeal by implication any provisions of the fire department code, the building code or any other ordinance of the city, and the adoption hereof shall not be deemed to affect or diminish the power or authority of any officer or employee of the city to condemn any building or structure erected or maintained in violation of any provision of the fire prevention ordinances, the building code or any other ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4802, § 1, 12-14-15) 
Secs. 5-859-5-900. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Section 4(nn) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed the former art. IX, §§ 5-901-5-909, and enacted a new art. IX as set out herein. The former art. IX, §§ 5-901-5-909, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 4246, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2004. 

Sec. 5-901. - Owner to number buildings. 
    Buildings shall be addressed per the regulations contained in chapter 7 of this Code, entitled "Fire Prevention and Protection." 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 4(nn), 6-17-13) 
Secs. 5-902-5-1000. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 5-1001. - General provisions. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to establish an alarm registration process and encourage alarm users and alarm businesses to maintain operational reliability, to properly use alarm systems and to reduce or eliminate false alarms. 
(b)  This chapter governs alarm systems intended to summon police, fire or medical responses, requires registrations, provides for penalties for violations, establishes a system of administration, and sets conditions for suspensions or revocation of permits. 
(Ord. No. 4685, § 1, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 5-1002. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act of God: Under the legal definition of same, is generally an inevitable accident, a casualty or power surge caused by power outage, or any accident produced by any physical cause which is irresistible, such as lightning, tempest, perils of the seas and inundation, or earthquake; not preventable by human care, skill or foresight, but resulting from natural causes. 
    Alarm administrators: 
(1)  Security alarm administrator -Chief of police or his/her designee. 
(2)  Fire alarm administrator -Fire chief or his/her designee. 
    Alarm company: Any person, company, or corporation engaged in the activity of selling, leasing, renting, installing, inspecting, maintaining, repairing, monitoring and/or responding to alarm systems within the city. An alarm company, in this instance, shall not include any business which sells on a retail basis from a fixed location or that manufactures or distributes alarm equipment at wholesale, unless said business also installs, services, monitors and/or responds to alarm systems within the city. 
    Alarm notification: A notification intended to summon the police, fire, ambulance, or other emergency services which is designed either to be initiated purposely by a person or by an alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of a fire, unauthorized intrusion, or other emergency situation. 
    Alarm system: A device or system that emits, transmits, or relays a signal intended to summon to a residence or business, or that would reasonably be expected to summon police, fire, ambulance or other emergency services of the city, including, but not limited to, local alarms. 
    Alarm system registration: A certificate of authorization issued by the security alarm administrator or the fire alarm administrator to the owner, agent, or responsible person in control of the property, which authorizes the operation of a security or fire alarm system at the alarm site. 
    Criminal offense: A criminal offense as defined in the Texas Penal Code. 
    False alarm: Any activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, negligence of the owner, agent or person in charge of the property, or negligence of the alarm business operator or its employees or agents, or any other activation to which a police or firefighter responds and no emergency exists for which the alarm system was designed to give notice. However, for the purpose of this chapter false alarm shall not include alarm system activation caused by utility line mishaps, tornadoes, earthquakes, natural causes or act of God. 
    System owner: The person designated in the registration application who shall be the owner or lawful tenant of the alarm site or his authorized representative. 
    Person: An individual, corporation, partnership, association, aggregation of individuals or similar entities subject to the provisions of this article. 
    Responsible person: System owner holder or person(s) designated by the registration holder to respond to the alarm and take action to secure the alarm and/or specified property. 
(Ord. No. 4685, § 1, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 5-1003. - Registration required. 
    All residential and business owners with audible and/or monitored alarm systems shall register the system with the city prior to activation of the system. 
(a)  In the event of construction, reconstruction or remodeling of any structure requiring a building permit, the plans and specifications for the system shall be included in the plans and specifications filed with the chief building official as a part of the building permit application process. 
(b)  Regarding existing security and fire alarm systems, the building owner shall register the existing system with the city within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this article and no registration fee is required. 
(c)  Any person failing to register a newly installed security or fire alarm system within forty-five (45) days of installation shall be in violation of this article for which an appropriate penalty may be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 4685, § 1, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 5-1004. - Failure to register existing system. 
(a)  Failure to register within the timeframe herein provided is a violation of this article and subjects the property owner of the penal provision provided herein. 
(b)  Each non-registrant is entitled to one false alarm without penalty Thereafter alarm owners with no registration are subject to a fine for any alarm notification without such registration. In addition, each false alarm the police or fire department responds to at an unregistered alarm address may be subject to a fine for each false alarm. The fine for each false alarm at an unregistered residence or business is one hundred dollars ($100.00) per alarm for the first four (4) false alarms. Thereafter, the court may impose such penalty as may be consistent with section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4685, § 1, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 5-1005. - False alarms-Registered systems. 
    Each registered alarm holder is allowed up to four (4) false alarms annually before being subject to fine. Beginning with the 5th false alarm, the resident or business owner will be subject to a fine for the 5th and each subsequent false alarm. Any resident or business that reaches ten (10) false alarms within a 12-month period is subject to having the alarm registration revoked by the chief of police or his/her designee. Once the registration is revoked, the alarm holder must provide adequate proof the false alarm problem has been remedied before reinstating the registration. Registration reinstatement charge is fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 4685, § 1, 3-18-13) 
Sec. 5-1006. - System owner obligations. 
    When an alarm is activated, the alarm holder or a responsible person for the residence or business with the alarm is required to respond to the alarm. Police officers shall not stand watch or wait for a property owner to ensure the property is secure. If the building or residence is not secure and no alarm holder or responsible person responds, the officers will try to secure the property as best as possible and then leave the scene. False alarms caused by inclement weather or acts of God will not count towards an alarm holder's number of annual false alarms allowed. Alarm registration and annual false alarms status of each alarm holder in the city will be documented and maintained in a manner acceptable to the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 4685, § 1, 3-18-13) 
Chapter 6 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Former Ch. 6 was deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 3229, adopted June 18, 1990. Sections 1-8 of the ordinance were included as §§ 6-1-6-8 at the editor's discretion. The provisions of former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1-6-10, pertained to emergency management and derived from Code 1965, §§ 7-1-7-9 and 7-21. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; planning, Ch. 17; traffic, Ch. 25. 
State Law reference- Texas disaster act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - Organization. 
    There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(1)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director; 
(2)  The director shall be responsible for program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He/she may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(3)  The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 3229, § 1, 6-18-90) 
Sec. 6-2. - Emergency management director; powers and duties. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(3)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city clerk. 
(4)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city clerk. 
(5)  Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(6)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(7)  Maintenance of liaison which other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal, emergency management organizations. 
(8)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city of aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(9)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(10)  Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of, all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(11)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(12)  Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein. 
(13)  Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act 1975 (V.T.C.S. Article 6889-7). 
(Ord. No. 3229, § 2, 6-18-90) 
Sec. 6-3. - Emergency management plan. 
    A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provision of this chapter. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency management of this state. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during the time of the disaster. 
(Ord. No. 3229, § 3, 6-18-90) 
Sec. 6-4. - Interjurisdictional program. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the county in the formation of an emergency management council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as the program may affect the city. 
(Ord. No. 3229, § 4, 6-18-90) 
Sec. 6-5. - Emergency orders, rules and regulations supersede existing ordinances, orders, etc. 
    At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 3229, § 5, 6-18-90) 
Sec. 6-6. - Exemption from liability of damages resulting from activities under chapter. 
    This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of such activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 3229, § 6, 6-18-90) 
Sec. 6-7. - Commitment of funds. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. 
(Ord. No. 3229, § 7, 6-18-90) 
Sec. 6-8. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter. 
(d)  Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1000.00). 
(Ord. No. 3229, § 8, 6-18-90) 
Chapter 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Specific code enforcement authority, § 2-126; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; fire limits established, § 5-1; residential occupancies in the central fire district, § 5-83; dangerous and unsafe buildings, § 5-311 et seq.; emergency management, Ch. 6; food and food establishments, Ch. 9; housing, Ch. 10; blasting restricted, § 11-4; fireworks restricted, § 11-6; HUD-code manufactured home and recreational vehicle facilities, Ch. 12; nuisances, Ch. 13; oil and gas wells, Ch. 14; solid waste, Ch. 20; traffic, Ch. 25. 
State Law reference- Safety, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9201; fire prevention and protection, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.011 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 5(a) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former art. I, §§ 7-1-7-3, and enacted a new art. I as set out herein. Former art. I pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 10-3-10-5. 

Sec. 7-1. - Arson reward. 
(a)  The city will pay a reward of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to any person giving evidence or information which leads to the arrest and conviction for the crime of arson committed within the corporate limits of the city, as such crime is described and defined in the state penal code. 
(b)  The offer of reward provided for herein shall not apply to regular members of the police and fire departments of the city, nor to the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(a), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 7-2. - Unlawful taking or use of fire department equipment. 
    No person shall, under any pretext whatsoever, take or use any of the implements, tools, or apparatus belonging to the fire department, without first obtaining permission and consent of the chief of such department. It shall be the duty of every fireman knowing of a violation of this section to report the same to the fire chief, and the chief shall make complaint to the chief of police, who shall take action in the matter. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(a), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 7-3. - Fees for fire service. 
    Fees for fire service may be set from time to time for fair, usual and customary fees set by the City Council of Denison. Fee schedule will be provided upon request. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(a), 6-17-13) 
Secs. 7-4-7-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Certain employees to have emergency medical certification, § 7-170; civil service for firefighters and police officers, § 16-26 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 7-26-7-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE MARSHAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Departments, § 2-126 et seq.; personnel, Ch. 16. 

Sec. 7-41. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4235, § 1, adopted Sept. 7, 2004, repealed § 7-41, which pertained to office created; independent of other departments and derived from Code 1965, § 10-16. 
Sec. 7-42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4235, § 1, adopted Sept. 7, 2004, repealed § 7-42, which pertained to appointment, qualifications and removal and derived from Code 1965, § 10-17. 
Sec. 7-43. - Duty to investigate fires. 
    The fire marshal or his or her designee shall have the authority to investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of any fire, explosion or other hazardous condition. Information that could be related to trade secrets or processes shall not be made part of the public record, except as directed by a court of law. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(b), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 5(b) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 7-43, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 7-43 derived from the 1965 Code, § 10-18. 
Sec. 7-44. - Taking of testimony generally. 
    The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing. 
(Code 1965, § 10-19) 
Sec. 7-45. - Authority to summon witnesses, require production of evidence and administer oaths. 
    The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is, by the provisions of this division, a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. 
(Code 1965, § 10-20) 
Sec. 7-46. - Investigations may be private; separation of witnesses. 
    All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Code 1965, § 10-21) 
Sec. 7-47. - Duty when evidence indicates crime in connection with fire. 
    If the fire marshal shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with any fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense, or either of them, and shall furnish the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Code 1965, § 10-22) 
Sec. 7-48. - Misconduct of witnesses summoned by fire marshal. 
    Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear and testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of such investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. It shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. 
(Code 1965, § 10-23) 
Sec. 7-49. - Inspection of premises; ordering removal or repair of dangerous conditions. 
(a)  The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, or without complaint, shall have the right, at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city. It shall be his duty as often as necessary to enter upon and make or cause to be entered upon and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. 
(b)  Whenever the fire marshal shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting device or system, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to firefighters, public or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of the building or premises. 
(c)  If the owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five (5) days, appeal to the appeals board as prescribed in the code, which shall hear the cause of the complaint and, unless by its authority that order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant. 
(d)  Any owner or occupant who fails to comply with such order shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(c), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 5(c) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 7-49, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 7-49 derived from the 1965 Code, § 10-24; and Ord. No. 4474, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 4, 2008. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to provide for condemnation and removal of structures constituting fire hazards, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 342.012. 
Sec. 7-50. - Right of entry. 
    The fire marshal shall have the authority, at all times of day or night, when necessary in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this division, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(Code 1965, § 10-25) 
Sec. 7-51. - Record of fires to be kept. 
    The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires investigated, together with all facts statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this division. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(d), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 5(d) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 7-51, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 7-51 derived from the 1965 Code, § 10-26. 
Sec. 7-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 5(d) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 7-52, which pertained to monthly reports to state fire marshal, and derived from the 1965 Code, § 10-27. 
Secs. 7-53-7-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Departments, § 2-126 et seq.; personnel, Ch. 16. 

Sec. 7-66. - Establishment and supervision of bureau of fire prevention. 
    There is hereby established in the fire department of the city a bureau of fire prevention to be operated under the supervision of the fire marshal. 
(Code 1965, § 10-1) 
Secs. 7-67-7-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 7-86. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4631, § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 2012, repealed the former § 7-86, which pertained to International Fire Code adopted and derived from Code 1965, § 10-38; Ord. No. 3285, § 1, adopted July 15, 1991; Ord. No. 3509, § 1, adopted Jan. 16, 1995; Ord. No. 4114, §§ 1, 3, adopted May 20, 2002. The user's attention is directed to § 5-307. 
Sec. 7-87. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 5(e) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 7-87 which pertained to definitions, and derived from the 1965 Code, § 10-39. 
Sec. 7-88. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4114, § 1, adopted May 20, 2002, repealed § 7-88, which pertained to amendments to the Standard Fire Prevention Code and derived from Code 1965, § 10-40. 
Sec. 7-89. - International Fire Code adopted. 
(a)  The International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, and the whole thereof, except such portions as may hereinafter be amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length herein, and from and after the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions therein shall be controlling within the area of jurisdiction of the city. A copy of the International Fire Code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk for inspection during normal business hours. 
(b)  The International Fire Code, 2012 Edition is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Denison, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Section 103.1 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 103.1 General. The department of fire prevention is established within the jurisdiction under the direction of the fire code official (fire marshal). The function of the department shall be the implementation, administration and enforcement of the provisions of the code. 
(3)  Section 105.6.27 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 105.6.27 LP- gas. An operational permit is required for: 
1.  Storage and use of LP-gas. 
Exception: A permit is not required for individual containers with a 100-gallon (378 L) water capacity or less or multiple containers systems having an aggregate quantity not exceeding 100 gallons (378 L), serving occupancies in Group R-3. 
2.  Operation of cargo tankers that transport LP-gas. 
(4)  Section 105.7.17 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
105.7.17 Electronic access control systems. Construction permits are required for the installation of modification of an electronic access control system, as specified in Section 503 and Section 1008. A separate construction permit is required for the installation or modification and does not require a permit. 
(5)  Section 307.1.2 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
307.1.2 Outdoor burning. Outdoor Burning within the City is restricted to trench burning only following the issuance of a burn permit issued by the fire marshal. The fire marshal shall promulgate, from time to time, the standards for permit application, terms and conditions, and such additional detail as may be necessary for the protection of the public health and safety. The fee for the permit issued pursuant to this local amendment shall be established by the City Council and collected by the City at the time of issuance of the permit. 
(6)  Section 307.2 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
307.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, or open burning. Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled. 
Examples of state or local law, or regulations referenced elsewhere in this section may include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Texas Commission on Environmental Quality guidelines and/or restrictions. 
2.  State, County, or Local temporary or permanent bans on open burning. 
3.  Local written policies as established by the fire code official. 
(7)  Section 307.4 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
307.4 Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 500 feet (152.4 m) from any structure or public way as established by local written policy. 
(8)  Section 311.5 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
311.5 Placards. The fire code official is authorized to require marking of any vacant or abandoned buildings or structures determined to be unsafe pursuant to section 110 of this code relating to structural or interior hazards, as required by Section 311.5 through 311.5.5. 
(9)  Section 503.2.1 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 24 feet (7315 mm), exclusive of shoulders, except for approved security gates in accordance with section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet (4267 mm). 
(10)  Section 503.3 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
503.3 Marking. Striping, signs, or other markings when approved by the fire code official, shall be provided for the fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. Striping, signs, and other markings shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility. 
1.  Striping - Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by painted lines of red traffic paint six inches (6") in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words "NO PARKING FIRE LANE or FIRE LANE NO PARKING" shall appear in four inch (4") white letters at 25 feet intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes. Where a curb is available, the striping shall be on the vertical face of the curb. 
2.  Signs - Signs shall read "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" and shall be 12" wide and 18" high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than 2" lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6'6") above the finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart along both sides of the fire lane. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the Fire Chief. 
(11)  Sections 505.1 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
505.1 Address identification. Approved numerals of a minimum of 5" height and of a color contrasting with the background designating the address shall be placed on all new and existing buildings or structures in a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property and from all alleyways/access. 
Where buildings do not immediately front a street, approved 6 inch height building numerals or addresses and 3-inch height suite/ apartment numerals of a color contrasting with the background of the building shall be placed on all new and existing buildings or structures. Numerals or addresses shall be posted on a minimum 20 inch by 30 inch background on border. 
Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. The minimum stroke shall be 0.5 inches. 
Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. 
Exception: R-3 Single family occupancies shall have approved numerals of a minimum 3 inches in height and a color contrasting with the background clearly visible and legible from the street fronting the property and the rear alleyway where such alleyway exists. 
All gas and electric meters shall be clearly marked with a suite number or address number where multiple meters are used. 
(12)  Section 907.1.4 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
907.1.4 Design Standards. All alarm systems, new or replacement, shall be analog intelligent addressable fire detection systems. 
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building remodel or expansion initiated after the effective date of this code, as adopted exceeds 30% of the building. When cumulative building remodel or expansion exceeds 50% of the building, it must comply within eighteen (18) months of the permit application. 
(13)  Section 907.1.5 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
907.1.5 Point Addressable Systems. When a fire alarm is required by this section or by the fire code official, the system shall be point addressable; providing the type and location of the alarm. The alarm type and location must display on the alarm panel and provide type and location information to the Denison Fire Department dispatch. 
(14)  Section 907.4.2.7 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
907.4.2.7 Audio-visual Notification Devices. Where any fire alarm system is installed or any supervised sprinkler system is installed, audio-visual notification devices shall be installed to provide complete coverage as required by the fire code official. 
(15)  Section 912.2.3 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
912.2.3 Hydrant distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the fire department connection as the fire hose lays. 
(16)  Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above ground tanks are prohibited. The storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside above ground tanks is prohibited within each and every zoning district within the City of Denison with the exception of those districts which are zoned for light industrial zoning use. Installation of above ground tanks in other than light industrial zoning districts shall be permitted at the discretion of the Fire chief following his review of the proposed installation location, and the fire protection for the storage area. Tanks shall not be located within one hundred feet (100') of the property line of any Group E, I or R occupancies. 
(17)  Section 5706.2.4 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 5706.2.4.4 Locations where above ground tanks are prohibited. The storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside above ground tanks is prohibited within each and every zoning district within the City of Denison with the exception of those districts which are zoned for light industrial zoning use. Installation of above ground tanks in other than light industrial zoning districts shall be permitted at the discretion of the Fire chief following his review of the proposed installation location, and the fire protection for the storage area. Tanks shall not be located within one hundred feet (100') of the property line of any Group E, I or R occupancies. 
(18)  Section 5806.2 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 5806.2 Limitations. The storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited within each and every zoning district within the City of Denison with the exception of those districts which are zoned for light industrial zoning use. Installation of stationary containers containing flammable cryogenic fluids in other than light industrial zoning districts shall be permitted at the discretion of the Fire Chief following his review of the proposed installation location, and the fire protection for the storage area. Tanks shall not be located within one hundred feet (100') of the property line of any Group E, I or R occupancies. 
(19)  Section 6104.2 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. The manufacturing of LP-gas shall be prohibited in each and every zoning district of the City of Denison. The storage and use of LP-Gas shall be allowed only in industrial zoned districts of the City of Denison and as allowed in specific uses outline in Section 6104. Storage shall not be located within one hundred feet (100') of the property line of E, A, I, or R occupancies. 
(20)  Section 6104.3.3 of the 2012 International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 6104.3.3 Spas, Pool Heater and Other Listed Devices. Where natural gas service is not available, an LP-Gas container is allowed to be used to supply spa and pool heaters or other listed devices. Such containers shall not exceed 250-gallon water capacity per lot. See Table 6104.3 for location of containers. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(e), (f), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4701, §§ 5(e) and (f), adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 7-89, and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 7-89 pertained to modifications, and derived from the 1965 Code, § 10-41. 
Sec. 7-90. - Enforcement. 
    The fire prevention code adopted by this article shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention. 
(Code 1965, § 10-42) 
Sec. 7-91. - Permits in addition to those required by code. 
    The city council, the chief of the fire department and the fire marshal shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire prevention code adopted by this article. The fire marshal shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
    Fees for fire permits and inspection service shall be set by the city council from time to time and such fees shall be fair, reasonable and customary. Required fire permits and fee schedule will be provided upon request. 
    Required construction permits according to the current adopted fire code. 
    Required operational permits according to the current adopted fire code. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(g), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 5(g) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 7-91, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 7-91 derived from the 1965 Code, § 10-43. 
Sec. 7-92. - Appeals under code. 
    Whenever the fire marshal disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for under the fire prevention code adopted by this chapter, or when it is claimed that the provisions of such code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the fire marshal to the building appeals board within five (5) days of the decision appealed. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(h), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 5(h) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 7-92, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 7-92 derived from the 1965 Code, § 10-44; and Ord. No. 4631, § 2, adopted Jan. 17, 2012. 
Sec. 7-93. - Recommendations as to amendments. 
    The fire marshal shall recommend any amendments to the fire prevention code adopted by this article which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(h), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 5(h) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 7-93, entitled "Annual report of proceedings under code, and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 7-93 derived from the 1965 Code, § 10-45. 
Sec. 7-94. - Violations. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article or the code adopted herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and each and every day any such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(h), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 5(h) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former §§ 7-94, 7-95, and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former §§ 7-94 and 7-95, pertained to recommendations as to amendments; violations, and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 10-46, 10-47. 
Secs. 7-95-7-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Flammable liquids, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9201. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-116. - Containers for quantities of five gallons or less. 
(a)  Construction of section and definitions. This section shall be construed so as to effectuate its general purpose to prohibit and prevent the sale of gasoline or other flammable liquids in quantities of five (5) gallons or less, except in an approved container meeting the standards set forth in this section, and to prohibit the keeping of flammable liquids in or upon any premises in quantities of five (5) gallons or less unless it is kept in an approved container meeting the standards as herein described, thereby protecting the public safety and welfare. As used in this section, the words approved container mean either a metal automatic self-closing type container so sealed by means of a lid or other device that neither liquid or vapor will escape from it at ordinary temperatures, or a metal container properly equipped and fitted with a metal lid or the equivalent thereof in such a manner and to the extent that the contents thereof will not spill if dropped or turned over, and the contents will not ignite when exposed to open flame or ignition and the liquid and vapor will escape from it at ordinary temperatures and so designed for safety purposes against the danger of fire. 
(b)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispense or cause to be sold or dispensed any quantity of gasoline or other flammable liquid in quantities of five (5) gallons or less, except in an approved container meeting the standards set forth in subsection (a). It shall likewise be unlawful for any property owner or occupant or tenant of property to purchase or keep any flammable liquid in or upon the premises in quantities of five (5) gallons or less, unless such flammable liquid is kept in an approved container meeting the standards described in subsection (a). 
(c)  Violations. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, on conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined as prescribed in section 1-12 of this Code. Any violation of this section by an agent, servant, employee or representative of the owner or person selling or dispensing gasoline or other flammable liquid shall be deemed a violation by such owner or person. 
(Code 1965, § 10-2) 
Secs. 7-117-7-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Liquefied petroleum gas, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 113.001 et seq. 

Sec. 7-131. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them: 
    Building official shall mean and include the chief building official or his or her authorized representative. 
    Distribution shall mean to deliver, apportion or dispense liquefied petroleum gas from a tank (whether stationary or mobile) larger than eight thousand (8,000) gallons by volume. 
    Fire marshal shall mean and include the city fire marshal and any authorized deputy or assistant of the fire marshal of the city. 
    Liquefied petroleum gas shall mean and include any material which is composed predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons or mixtures thereof: propane, propylene, butanes (normal butane or iso-butane) and butylenes. 
    Premises shall mean and refer to the grounds, as well as all buildings and appurtenances pertaining thereto, and any adjacent premises, if directly or indirectly under the control of the same person. 
    Railroad commission shall mean the state railroad commission or any regularly authorized deputy or agent thereof. 
    Vehicle shall mean any automobile, truck or trailer and all appurtenances pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(i), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 5(i) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 7-131, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 7-131 derived from the 1965 Code, § 10-58. 
Sec. 7-132. - Compliance with article and commission regulations. 
    No person shall keep, store, retain, handle, haul, transport, dispense, distribute, use or consume, within the corporate limits of the city, any liquefied petroleum gas except upon full compliance with the requirements of this article, the adopted fire code and with the requirements and regulations of the interstate commerce commission and of the railroad commission. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(i), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 5(i) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 7-132, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 7-132 derived from the 1965 Code, § 10-59. 
Sec. 7-133. - Distribution from vehicles filled outside the city. 
    The distribution of liquefied petroleum gas may be allowed from trucks or vehicles filled outside of the corporate limits of the city to any user whose use thereof is permitted within the city by the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(i), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 5(i) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 7-133, entitled "Sale or distribution installations prohibited," and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 7-133 derived from the 1965 Code, § 10-60. 
Sec. 7-134. - Permit for installation or repair of facilities. 
    No person shall install or repair any tank, container or equipment for the storage and/or consumption of liquefied petroleum gas, or install any piping for the distribution or use of liquefied petroleum gas on any premises within the city, until he secures a permit from the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(i), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 5(i) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 7-134, entitled "Distribution from vehicles filled outside city," and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 7-134 derived from the 1965 Code, § 10-61. 
Sec. 7-135. - Approval of plans and specifications for equipment for industrial and similar uses. 
    Piping, pipe fittings, appliances and other equipment designed or intended for the distribution and utilization of liquefied petroleum gas for industrial and similar uses, other than for domestic and small commercial uses, shall not be installed, repaired, extended or altered until a detailed set of plans and specifications for such use and equipment has been filed in the office of the building official and approved by him. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(i), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 5(i) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 7-135, entitled "Permit for installation or repair of facilities," and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 7-135 derived from the 1965 Code, § 10-63. 
Sec. 7-136. - Requirements for equipment for domestic and small commercial uses. 
    Piping, pipe fittings, appliances, and other equipment designed and intended for the distribution and utilization of liquefied petroleum gas for domestic and small commercial uses shall not be installed, repaired, extended or altered, unless it is made to comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All piping, appliances, and equipments shall be installed in full compliance with the ordinances of the city regulating installations for natural gas, except where otherwise specifically required by this division and by the regulations of the railroad commission. 
(2)  Liquefied petroleum gas at pressure in excess of one (1) pound per square inch shall not be permitted inside buildings without specific approval of the building official and fire marshal. 
(3)  All piping shall comply with the cities adopted fuel gas code and/or the Texas Railroad Commission. If piping is to be placed underground, it shall be buried not less than eighteen (18) inches underground in a trench used for no other purposes. 
(4)  When an existing natural gas piping system is to be used for liquefied petroleum gas, all piping of the existing system is to be used for liquefied petroleum gas, all piping of the existing system shall be removed and installed in the manner prescribed for new liquefied petroleum gas installations. 
(5)  All appliances used with liquefied petroleum gas shall be designed and adapted for use with the particular mixture of liquefied petroleum gas normally supplied to the piping system. Automatic appliances having a pilot light shall have an approved automatic safety cutoff. 
(6)  Floor furnaces shall not be permitted on liquefied petroleum gas systems. 
(7)  Liquefied petroleum gas piping, appliances and equipment shall not be permitted in basements or pits or any other low places where such gas can collect to form a dangerous inflammable mixture. 
(8)  Houses having continuous foundations shall have suitable vents from under such houses if liquefied petroleum gas piping is installed under such houses. 
(9)  Rubber or leather, including rubber hose, shall not be used where in any manner exposed to the solvent action of liquefied petroleum gas. 
(10)  Liquefied petroleum gas piping shall not be installed underneath a concrete foundation or slab. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(i), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 5(i) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 7-136, entitled "Approval of plans and specifications for equipment for industrial and similar uses," and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 7-136 derived from the 1965 Code, § 10-64. 
Sec. 7-137. - Inspection and approval of piping, appliances and other equipment. 
    Piping, pipe fittings, appliances and other equipment for the distribution and utilization of liquefied petroleum gas shall not be placed in service or used until after the same has been tested, inspected and approved by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(i), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 5(i) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 7-137, entitled "Requirements for equipment for domestic and small commercial uses," and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 7-137 derived from the 1965 Code, § 10-65. 
Sec. 7-138. - Inspection and approval of consumer tanks and containers. 
    Liquefied petroleum gas tanks and containers shall not be placed in service or filled upon the premises of the ultimate user, or, when placed underground, tanks shall not be covered over, until the work of installation has been inspected and approved by the building official and/or fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(i), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 5(i) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 7-138, entitled "Inspection and approval of piping, appliances and other equipment," and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 7-138 derived from the 1965 Code, § 10-66. 
Sec. 7-139. - Inspection and approval of consumer tanks and containers. 
    Liquefied petroleum gas tanks and containers shall not be placed in service or filled upon the premises of the ultimate user, or, when placed underground, tanks shall not be covered over, until the work of installation has been inspected and approved by the plumbing inspector. 
(Code 1965, § 10-67) 
Sec. 7-140. - Odorization required. 
    In order that the danger of escaping combustible gas may be minimized and to facilitate the quick detection of gas leaks, all liquefied petroleum gas shall be effectively odorized so as to indicate positively, by a distinctive odor, the presence of gas down to concentration in air of as much as one-half of one (1) percent by volume. 
(Code 1965, § 10-68) 
Sec. 7-141. - Adjustments or changes in accessories, regulators, etc. 
    Adjustments, changes or alterations in the accessories, devices, regulators and safety devices of liquefied petroleum gas containers shall not be made except by persons licensed by the state railroad commission to do such work. 
(Code 1965, § 10-69) 
Sec. 7-142. - Storage inside buildings. 
    No liquefied petroleum gas shall be stored or retained inside of any structure within the city, except in interstate commerce commission containers in sizes of sixteen (16) pounds of gas or less, which containers may be used inside of buildings by obtaining written permission from the fire marshal. 
(Code 1965, § 10-70) 
Sec. 7-143. - Remedying defective equipment. 
    Whenever within the city, or outside the city for a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet from the city limits, liquefied petroleum gas equipment is found to be defective or improperly installed, or is being handled or operated in such a manner as to become a menace to public safety or welfare, the same may be deemed a nuisance by the building official or fire marshal by serving of a written notice upon the owner thereof, or upon the person having control thereof on the premises, whereupon the matter covered in such notice shall be immediately remedied or abated. 
(Code 1965, § 10-71) 
Sec. 7-144. - Construction of article. 
    This article is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public health, safety and welfare through provisions for safety to life and property from fire and other hazards incident to the handling, retaining and use of liquefied petroleum gas within or on buildings and premises within the corporate limits of the city. This article shall be construed to be supplemental to the laws of the state and of the regulations of the railroad commission applying to liquefied petroleum gas as now or hereafter existent or promulgated in conformity with the laws of the state. 
(Code 1965, § 10-72) 
Sec. 7-145. - Containers to conform to state law and regulations of railroad commission. 
    All containers used for hauling or transporting liquefied petroleum gas upon or over any premises or upon any street, alley or public thoroughfare within the city shall be designed, constructed and operated in a manner as required by the laws of the state and all special regulations of the railroad commission, as now or hereafter promulgated in conformity with the laws of the state. 
(Code 1965, § 10-78) 
Sec. 7-146. - Inspection and approval of carriers, containers, etc. 
    The city shall have the right, at any reasonable time, to have a competent inspector examine all carriers, containers and other property and equipment used in the transportation of liquefied petroleum gas and in the filling of containers, and if any of such property, upon inspection, is found defective or does not comply with all safety standards, such property shall immediately be taken out of service, and shall remain out of service until repaired and approved by the fire marshal. All new carriers and containers to be used in the future shall, before being placed in service, be examined and approved by the fire marshal as to its safe condition. 
(Code 1965, § 10-79) 
Sec. 7-147. - Vehicle design, construction and operation standards. 
    All vehicles used for the transportation or removal of liquefied petroleum gas over the streets, alleys or public thoroughfares of the city shall be designed, constructed and operated in accordance with the published regulations for the design, construction and operation of automobile tank trucks and tank trailers for the transportation of liquefied petroleum gas, adopted by the National Board of Fire Underwriters and the National Fire Protection Association, which regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the building official and may be examined and inspected by the public at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1965, § 10-80) 
Sec. 7-148. - Maintenance of vehicles, tanks and containers. 
    All vehicles, tanks or containers used for transporting liquefied petroleum gas shall be kept in good condition at all times, and if found in use when in a hazardous condition or in need of repair, such use and condition shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 10-81) 
Sec. 7-149. - Unloading of railroad cars, trucks and trailers. 
    Railroad cars and trucks and trailers transporting liquefied petroleum gas shall not be loaded or unloaded within the corporate limits of the city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this division. 
(Code 1965, § 10-82) 
Sec. 7-150. - Routes to be used. 
    Vehicles hauling or transporting liquefied petroleum gas shall not be driven in the city except on designated highways or truck routes and routes designated by the fire marshal. In the event of any breakdown or other mechanical difficulty where such vehicle is unable to proceed, the driver thereof shall immediately notify the fire department. 
(Code 1965, § 10-83) 
Sec. 7-151. - Parking of vehicles. 
    No vehicle containing liquefied petroleum gas shall be parked or stored on streets, alleys, public thoroughfares, or at any other point in the city, except as follows: 
(1)  Such vehicle may be parked at the point where the commodity is to be delivered and such delivery shall be made without undue delay. 
(2)  Such vehicle may be parked for a period not exceeding ten (10) minutes at gasoline filling stations for the purpose of taking on fuel, water, oil, and other emergency servicing. 
(Code 1965, § 10-84) 
Sec. 7-152. - Repair of vehicles. 
    No vehicle used for hauling or transporting liquefied petroleum gas or vehicle using the same for fuel shall be repaired or placed in any garage for repair until the truck tank or fuel tank is empty of gas, including the pump and hose, and all master valves have been closed. The owner of such garage or repair place shall check these facts before making any repairs thereto. In instances where emergency repairs are necessary, the fire marshal shall be notified immediately and the repairs made under his supervision. 
(Code 1965, § 10-85) 
Sec. 7-153. - Transfer of load from one vehicle to another. 
    No liquefied petroleum gas shall be transferred from one (1) vehicle to another on any street, alley, public thoroughfare or any point except that, in case of emergency, such transfer may be made under the supervision of the fire marshal. 
(Code 1965, § 10-86) 
Secs. 7-154-7-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3520, § 1, adopted March 6, 1995, repealed the provisions of former Art. V, § 7-170, 7-172-7-181, relative to emergency medical service, which derived from Code 1965, §§ 91/2-1-91/2-11. Section 2 of said Ord. No. 3520 enacted new provisions relative to similar subject matter, which have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as a new Div. 2 of Art. V. Former § 7-171, relative to certification requirements, has been retained as a separate section within Div. 1 of this article. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-171. - Certification required of certain employees. 
    The city council does hereby authorize the civil service commission of the city to recommend rules and regulations to the city council for adoption related to the required certification of all personnel employed by the fire department after June 19, 1989. The civil service commission of the city shall be authorized to take any and all steps necessary to implement those rules as adopted by the city council and set out in the civil service rules and regulations so that such requirements are effective as to all new employees of the department hired after June 19, 1989. 
(Ord. No. 4888, § 3, 8-7-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4861, § 2(2.03), adopted April 3, 2017, repealed former § 7-171 which pertained to certification required of certain employees, and derived from Ord. No. 4701, § 5(j), adopted June 17, 2013. 
 Subsequently, Ord. No. 4888, § 3, adopted Aug. 7, 2017, enacted provisions to read as herein set out. 
Secs. 7-172-7-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DENISON EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to Article V hereof. 

Sec. 7-181 - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Emergency medical services or emergency services shall mean services used to respond to an individual's perceived need for immediate medical care and to prevent death or aggravation of physiological or psychological illness or injury. 
    Non-emergency medical services shall mean any circumstance in which a patient is transported by a licensed emergency medical services provider using an emergency medical services vehicle under circumstances which are or have been represented to be of a non-emergency nature. 
    Non-emergency medical services provider or provider shall mean a person, corporation, or other entity performing non-emergency medical services or emergency medical services within the City of Denison, other than the Denison Fire Rescue or Denison Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. 4861, § 2(2.01), 4-3-17) 
Sec. 7-181.1. - Service created, name; to be operated within and as part of the fire department; emergency medical calls exclusive. 
    There is hereby created a service to the people of Denison to be called the Denison Emergency Medical Service ("Denison EMS"), which service shall be operated within and as a part of Denison Fire Rescue, except as expressly authorized by this article. The primary purpose of such service shall be to provide emergency medical service and transportation of injured or ill persons and persons suffering life threatening conditions to an appropriate certified emergency medical facility. 
    All calls for emergency medical services ("EMS") that originate within the city limits of the City of Denison, or in the primary response area of the City of Denison, shall be directed to Denison Fire Rescue via City of Denison Communications Center (9-1-1) and responded to solely by the Denison EMS. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, registered provider under this article, provider that is not registered under this article, or any company, service or corporation, affiliated or in partnership with the foregoing to knowingly, intentionally, or recklessly furnish, operate, advertise or otherwise engage, or profess to be engaged in the service or operation of emergency medical services from a point originating within the corporate limits of the City of Denison or in the primary response areas of the Denison EMS unless provided by: 
(a)  Denison EMS through the City of Denison Fire Department; 
(b)  A person or entity providing service to an address located outside of the city limits or primary response area of the Denison EMS and going to a hospital located inside of the city limits; or 
(c)  A person or entity meeting requirements of the State of Texas Department of State Health Services for emergency medical services personnel, vehicles and equipment, and where required meeting the department of state health services regulations for mobile intensive care unit level, who responds to a request of the City of Denison Communications Center (9-1-1), Denison Fire Rescue, Denison EMS or City of Denison's Director of Emergency Management to lend assistance when a major disaster or other occurrence results in emergency calls exceeding the capacity of Denison EMS. 
(Ord. No. 4861, § 2(2.01), 4-3-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4861, § 2(2.01), adopted April 3, 2017, repealed former § 7-181, and enacted new provisions designated as §§ 7-181 and 7-181.1 to read as herein set out. Former § 7-181 pertained to service created, name; to be operated within and as part of the fire department, and derived from Ord. No. 4701, § 5(k), adopted June 17, 2013. 
Sec. 7-182. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4861, § 2(2.04), adopted April 3, 2017, repealed former § 7-182 which pertained to invalid coach and patient transfer service, and derived from Ord. No. 3520, § 2(31/2-2), adopted March 6, 1995. 
Sec. 7-183. - Availability of service generally; contract required for service outside city limits. 
    The said emergency medical service shall be available to all persons within the city limits of the City of Denison. The service may also be available to persons in other portions of Grayson County under contracts for said services in existence or as may be entered into between the City of Denison and other affected governing bodies. 
(Ord. No. 3520, § 2(31/2-3), 3-6-95) 
Sec. 7-184. - Rate schedule. 
    Any person who uses the ambulance service of the City of Denison, whether such person requested the same or not, shall pay for service in accordance with the rate schedule adopted and amended from time to time by the city council and such fees shall be reasonable and customary for the service provided. Fee schedule will be provided upon request. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(l), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 5(l) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 7-184, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 7-184 derived from Ord. No. 3520, § 2(31/2-4), adopted March 6, 1995. 
Sec. 7-185. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 5(l) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 7-185, which pertained to when service fees due and payable, collection, billing of charges, delinquent accounts, and derived from Ord. No. 3520, § 2(31/2-5), adopted March 6, 1995. 
Sec. 7-186. - Registration required for business providing emergency medical services and non-emergency medical services; prohibited acts. 
(a)  Registration required. The business of providing medical transportation service, both emergency medical services and non-emergency medical services, is a business affected with the public interest, health, safety and welfare, and no person shall operate such business within the city limits of the City of Denison or the primary response areas of the City of Denison (except on a mission with a patient through the area, or from a pick up point outside the primary response area of the City of Denison to a destination with the City of Denison) without first obtaining the registration granted by the City of Denison under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Misrepresentation prohibited; notification of 9-1-1. It shall be unlawful for a person, a registered provider under this article, a provider that is not registered under this article, or any company, service or corporation, affiliated or in partnership with the foregoing, to provide, offer to provide, or represent itself as the Denison EMS or an employee, affiliate, agent, or representative of Denison EMS. Furthermore, if a private or public non-emergency medical services provider receives an emergency call from any source to respond in the city limits of the City of Denison, or the primary response area of the Denison EMS, such provider shall immediately notify the City of Denison EMS Communications Center (9-1-1) by utilizing the City of Denison Fire Department's primary dispatch channel and shall not respond to such call unless requested to do so by the City of Denison EMS dispatcher. 
(c)  Duplication of emergency medical services prohibited. Duplication of emergency medical services shall be unlawful. Duplication of emergency medical services occurs when a provider intentionally or knowingly responds to a call for emergency medical services within the corporate limits of the City of Denison or within the primary response areas of the Denison EMS and such response is without the request or express authorization of the City of Denison EMS dispatcher or other authorization under section 7-181 of this article. 
(d)  Registration requirements-Applicant. Any person or entity seeking to provide non-emergency medical services within the corporate limits or the City of Denison or the primary response area of the Denison EMS shall first register and obtain a certificate of inspection from the City of Denison. An application for registration shall be obtained from, and filed with the City of Denison's Office of the City Manager. In order to be registered within the city, a non-emergency medical services provider shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Vehicles. Each vehicle owned, leased or used by the applicant must be authorized by the Texas Department of State Health Services, or its successor, as a basic life support vehicle or higher, and may be operated only when such vehicle meets all conditions required by Chapter 773 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended. 
(2)  Equipment. Each vehicle owned, leased or used by the applicant shall be furnished with all of the equipment (and qualified personnel) required by the Texas Department of State Health Services, or its successor, for an advanced life support vehicle and shall be properly permitted by appropriate licensing agencies to operate as such. All equipment must be clean, in working order and available in sufficient quantity to provide safe transport and care of sick and injured persons, and no vehicle may be operated as an advanced life support vehicle or higher unless it meets the foregoing requirements. 
(3)  Insurance. Each vehicle owned, leased or used by the applicant shall be covered by a public liability insurance policy on that ambulance vehicle, such insurance policy to be issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas. At minimum, such insurance policy: 
a.  Shall provide automobile liability coverage for claims for damages resulting from an automobile accident resulting in damage and/or personal injury or death in an amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence; professional liability coverage for damages resulting from professional malpractice in an amount of not less than three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) per occurrence; general liability umbrella coverage in an amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00); and workers' compensation coverage at the state minimum based upon payroll; and 
b.  Shall not contain a passenger liability exclusion. 
(e)  Requirements for a registered non-emergency services provider. Registered non-emergency services providers shall comply with each of the following requirements: 
(1)  Inspection sticker. Each vehicle owned, controlled or used by a registered non-emergency medical service provider within the City of Denison or primary response area of Denison EMS shall display a current and valid City of Denison registration sticker in a place on the vehicle that is clearly visible from the outside of the vehicle. The City of Denison Fire Chief, or his designee, or the Denison Police Department shall have the right to inspect the provider's vehicles, equipment and personnel, at any time without prior notice, to ensure compliance with local, state and federal regulations and to ensure compatibility with City of Denison radio systems. 
(2)  Records. A registered non-emergency services provider shall maintain an accurate record of all calls answered and patients transported, including all pertinent facts regarding the services rendered and shall make such records available at any reasonable time for inspection by the City of Denison. The provider shall notify the City of Denison in writing of all complaints received by and any corrective or disciplinary actions taken by the Texas Department of State Health services concerning the provider. 
(3)  Licensed physician. The provider shall retain the services of a State of Texas licensed physician to function as its medical control physician to supervise the quality of service delivered by the provider as required by state law and regulation. 
(f)  Registration period. The registration provided under this article shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance by city and shall remain in effect for such one-year period, unless revoked as provided herein. The registration granted by city under this article shall not be assigned, sublet or otherwise transferred by the provider. 
(g)  Revocation. The City of Denison reserves the right to immediately revoke the registration of any service provider who violates this article or any other local, state or national laws, and the city shall send written notice of such revocation to the person designated for notice on the provider's application for registration. Any provider whose registration is revoked may appeal that determination by filing a written appeal to the city manager within ten (10) days of the date of city's written notice of revocation. Such appeal shall set forth the basis for the appeal in detail and request for re-instatement or renewal of registration. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(h)  Registration fee. To compensate the City of Denison for administrative costs of registration and compliance with the requirements of this article, a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be submitted with each application for registration under this article. An application for which required payment has not been submitted shall be considered incomplete and will not be processed until the appropriate fee is paid by the applicant. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4861, § 2(2.02), adopted April 3, 2017, repealed former § 7-186, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former § 7-186 pertained to franchise required for business providing non-exclusive medical transportation services, and derived from Ord. No. 3520, § 2(31/2-6), adopted March 6, 1995; and Ord. No. 4815, § 1, adopted June 6, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 4861, § 2(2.02), 4-3-17) 
Sec. 7-187. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4861, § 2(2.05), adopted April 3, 2017, repealed former § 7-187 which pertained to rules, regulations applicable to operation of ambulances, and derived from Ord. No. 4701, § 5(m), adopted June 17, 2013. 
Sec. 7-188. - Authority of city manager to promulgate and effect rules and regulations. 
    The city manager is authorized and directed to promulgate and effect reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith, including, but not excluding additional charges for services not included herein. 
(Ord. No. 3520, § 2(31/2-8), 3-6-95) 
Sec. 7-189. - False reports. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully inform the fire department, any fire department official, the police department, any police department official, or any person calculated to cause such departments or officials to be falsely informed, that an ambulance or more than one ambulance is needed at any location or address, or that emergency service is needed at any location or address when only transfer service is needed, when such person knows that such report is false. 
(Ord. No. 3520, § 2(31/2-9), 3-6-95) 
Sec. 7-190. - Refusal, failure to pay for service. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person using the ambulance service to refuse, or fail, to pay for such service after use. 
(Ord. No. 3520, § 2(31/2-10), 3-6-95) 
Sec. 7-191. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article or the code adopted herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and each and every day any such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 5(n), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 5(n) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 7-191, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 7-191 derived from Ord. No. 3520, § 2(31/2-11), adopted March 6, 1995. 
Chapter 8 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 4813, adopted May 16, 2016, repealed Ch. 8 in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 8, §§ 8-1-8-23 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 4567, § 2, adopted June 21, 2010. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq.; specific code enforcement authority, § 2-126; housing, Ch. 10; HUD-code manufactured home and recreational vehicle facilities, Ch. 12; planning, Ch. 17; public property, Ch. 18; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; subdivision regulations, Ch. 22; swimming pools, Ch. 23; utilities, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 28. 

ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS 

Sec. 8-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City of Denison, Texas does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The drainage ways, creeks and flood hazard areas of Denison are subject to periodic inundation, which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(c)  Land development can cause large quantities of soil to be displaced and transported to downstream locations. Erosion can contaminate water supplies and resources. A buildup of sediment degrades water quality, damages or destroys valuable environmental resources and clogs watercourses, which can cause flooding, thereby damaging public and private lands and property. 
(d)  Creeks and floodplain areas are valuable resources deserving protection in that they provide recreational opportunities, improve the aesthetics of the community, convey storm water runoff and filter some water quality pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health and property; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges due to flooding and erosion; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood-prone areas; 
(7)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard. 
(8)  Ensure that those occupying special flood hazard areas assume responsibility for their actions; 
(9)  Minimize development in floodplains to preserve the natural beauty and aesthetics of the community; 
(10)  Control and manage stormwater runoff, the sediment load and pollutant load from points and surfaces within developments; and 
(11)  Establish a reasonable standard of design for development to minimize potential flood and erosion damage. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the conveyance of flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 8-5. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter it's most reasonable application. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year, also called the base flood. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is an application consisting of the elements required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for prior approval of a project in a special flood hazard area. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building , for insurance purposes, is a non-basement building that: 
(1)  In the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water or by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters; and 
(2)  Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. 
    Equal conveyance reduction means proposed floodplain alterations reducing stream conveyance should allow a corresponding conveyance reduction on the opposite stream bank. The right of equal conveyance reduction applies to all owners and uses and may be relinquished only by written agreement. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is the federal agency charged with review and approval of projects in special flood hazard areas. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). See "Flood elevation study." 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway. See "Regulatory floodway." 
    Fully developed flow is the amount of storm water runoff anticipated from a drainage basin after full development based on the city's future land use map for a particular design storm frequency. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special flood hazard area. See "Area of special flood hazard." 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Storm drainage design manual , [means] an administrative manual approved and amended by the city manager or his designee that provides direction for design of storm drainage facilities and for development within floodplains. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see CFR 44 Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the city's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required herein is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation (WSE) means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    The chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard, or areas that will impact areas of special flood hazard as determined by the city floodplain administrator, within the jurisdiction of the City of Denison. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-7. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Grayson County, Texas and Incorporated Areas," dated September 29, 2010, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps dated September 29, 2010, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-8. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-9. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-11. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: (a) considered as minimum requirements; (b) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (c) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under federal, state, and local laws, statutes, ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-12. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 8-13. - Designation of the administrator. 
    The mayor or designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance-National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-14. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Review permit applications to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation or require a detailed study to delineate the boundaries. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Require that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with article III, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article V. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood at any point within the community unless such increase is less than six (6) inches and is demonstrated to be completely contained within the property being developed or evidence is provided by the developer of written permission from all impacted property owners, with the form of the permission being approved by the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-15. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. All developers, owners or builders shall obtain a floodplain development permit before beginning any projects in floodplain areas, such as constructing new buildings and infrastructure, substantially improving existing structures, filling land and altering watercourses. Construction or renovation projects shall not begin until the city issues a floodplain development permit. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential flood-proofed structure shall meet the flood-proofing criteria of section 8-18(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development including grading plans with contours not more than a two-foot interval or as required for sufficient detail as determined by the floodplain administrator; 
(5)  The location and elevation of the base flood for both existing conditions and fully developed conditions. The location and elevation of the existing conditions base flood may be based on the city's FIRMs for areas that have been studied in detail and no floodplain alteration is proposed. Both the existing and fully developed base flood location and elevation shall be based on a detailed study as part of an application for a CLOMR where no detailed study of the floodplain exists and where floodplain alterations are proposed unless otherwise stated in writing by the floodplain administrator; 
(6)  An engineering report shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Storm Drainage Design Manual for all subdivisions and new construction in floodplains and said report shall be reviewed and approved by the floodplain administrator; 
(7)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 8-14(1). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(c)  No application for a floodplain development permit shall be reviewed which is not complete and accompanied by payment of the floodplain development permit fees as established by resolution of the city council. 
(d)  The floodplain development permit shall automatically expire after the expiration of two (2) years from the date of the permit unless development has commenced. 
(e)  Permits required to be obtained from all state and federal regulatory bodies with jurisdiction in such matters shall be obtained prior to the issuance of the floodplain development permit. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-16. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The appeal board, hereby established as the planning and zoning commission, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter and 44 C.F.R. Part 60. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the final decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half-acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 8-15(b) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half-acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (section 8-3), such conditions may include, but are not limited to, modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities, limitations on periods of use and operation, operation controls and bonding or other forms of surety, requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees, and other protective and flood proofing measures. 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) showing a good and sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation at an elevation less than two (2) feet above the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in section 8-16(a)-(i) are met; and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(l)  Variances and appeals can only be considered upon submittal of an appeal letter or request for variance to the floodplain administrator. 
(1)  Applicants may be required to submit additional information which the floodplain administrator may deem necessary to review the appeal or request for variance. 
(2)  Each appeal or request for variance shall be accompanied by an appeal/variance review fee as established by resolution of the city council, payable to the city, no party of which shall be refundable, unless the appeal or request for variance is withdrawn by the applicant prior to the floodplain administrator's review of the appeal or request, in which case the fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(3)  Upon receipt of the appeal or request for variance, the floodplain administrator shall review and determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter and applicable policies. 
(m)  Prior to the request being considered, the variance review fee and, at minimum, the following supporting information shall be forwarded to the Floodplain Administrator for review and recommendations: 
(1)  Plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the property, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, floodproofing measures and the relationship of the above to the location of the channel and floodway and the minimum building elevation. 
(2)  Furnish the following additional information as is deemed necessary by the floodplain administrator for the evaluation of the effects of the proposed use upon flood flows and other factors necessary to render an opinion on the suitability of the proposed use: 
a.  Cross-sections showing the channel of the stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, and cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development. 
b.  A site plan showing elevations or contours of the ground, pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing streets, water supply, sanitary facilities, soil types and other pertinent information. 
c.  Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream. 
d.  Hydraulic information including water surface profiles for a minimum of the 25- and 100-year events for existing and proposed improvements. 
e.  Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of materials, water supply, and sanitary facilities. 
f.  Photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation upstream and downstream. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
ARTICLE V. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 8-17. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during the base flood. 
(8)  All new construction and improvements to existing construction of storm sewers, culverts, channels, creeks and drainage courses shall be designed to convey the fully developed base flood of the area contributing to the facility with at least one (1) foot of freeboard. 
(9)  All new developments shall utilize regional detention and or retention facilities as directed by the floodplain administrator to help collect silt from stormwater runoff, to minimize increases in flood elevations from development and increased runoff. 
(10)  Preserve the existing conveyance capacity of floodplains and allow no rise as a result of a floodplain development project. A rise of less than six (6) inches may be allowed if it is demonstrated to only impact the subject development tract and that the principle of equal conveyance reduction has been applied. 
(11)  Floodplains may be reclaimed provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the city, during the occurrence of the base flood discharge and FEMA has approved a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR). In addition, development shall not reduce total valley storage for all special flood hazard areas on the city's FIRMs. The only exception that will be considered is an increase confined to being within the limits of the property that is proposed for reclamation, and such rise will be limited to a maximum of six (6) inches within the subject tract, as described in section 8-14(9). 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-18. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) section 8-7; (ii) section 8-14(8); or (iii) section 8-19(c), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 8-15(a)(1), is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are flood-proofed shall be provided to and maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are constructed with the lowest floor at or below the base flood elevation shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area below the base flood elevation shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters and will not be blocked or become clogged. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at two (2) feet above the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or (iii) meet the permit requirements of section 8-15(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-19. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 8-2, 8-3, and 8-4 of this chapter. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 8-8; section 8-15; and the provisions of article V of this chapter. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data and fully developed base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than twenty-five (25) lots or three (3) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 8-7 or section 8-14(8) of this chapter. 
(d)  Base flood elevation data, with the establishment of a floodway, shall be generated by a detailed engineering study for all Zone A areas, within one hundred (100) feet of the contour lines of Zone A areas, and other streams not mapped by FEMA, as indicated on the community's FIRM. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(f)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate damage from the base flood event. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-20. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-7, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures; 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 8-15 are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-21. - Floodways. 
    Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-7, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge and FEMA has approved a conditional letter of map revision. 
(2)  If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article V. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulation, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-22. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-23. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this court order and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this court order by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this court order or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day a violation occurs is a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 8-24. - Permitted floodplain uses. 
    To minimize possible losses of life and property, the following uses and structures are permitted in a floodplain area and other similar uses as approved by the floodplain administrator, provided they are also permitted in the underlying zoning district; 
(1)  Farm or ranch; 
(2)  Local utilities, electrical substation, water reservoir or pumping station and water treatment plant if protected from damage during times of flood; 
(3)  Public park or playground, private recreation club or area, private community center and golf course, if provided with controlled access during time of flood; 
(4)  Parking lots designed in accordance with this chapter; 
(5)  Radio, television or microwave tower and amateur communications tower protected from flood damage and with a conditional use permit; 
(6)  Open private recreation clubs or areas and private centers without exterior walls are permitted in floodplain areas. Private and public facilities listed above with enclosed walls that would incur damage are not permitted in floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 4813, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Chapter 9 - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Specific code enforcement authority, § 2-126; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; animals, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; nuisances, Ch. 13; peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 15; mobile or roadside vendors, § 15-56 et seq.; signs, Ch. 19; solid waste, Ch. 20; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; utilities, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference- Milk and milk regulations, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 165-3 et seq.; milk grading and pasteurization, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 165-3; food generally, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4474 et seq.; Texas Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, art. 4476-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 9-1-9-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATION OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Sections 1-10 of Ord. No. 4009, adopted Dec. 18, 2000, was not specifically amendatory to the Code. The editor has treated these new provisions as superseding Article II. Food Service Establishments, §§ 9-26-9-40, which contained similar provisions as the new ordinance and which derived from the Code of 1965, §§ 11-15 and Ord. No. 3160, § 1, adopted Aug. 21, 1989. 

Sec. 9-26. - Adopting of Texas food establishment rule. 
(a)  The City of Denison adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules, as amended by the Texas Board of Health found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 228 regarding the regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction. 
(b)  Definitions: 
    Authorized agent or employee means the employees of the regulatory authority. 
    Food establishment shall mean a food service establishment, a retail food store, a mobile food unit, and/or a roadside food vendor. 
    Municipality of Denison in this article shall be understood to refer to the City of Denison. 
    Regulatory authority means the Grayson County Health Department. 
    State rules means the state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, Sections 161 through 171 and sections 173 through 175. These rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(Ord. No. 4009, § 1, 12-18-00; Ord. No. 4800, § 1, 12-14-15) 
Sec. 9-27. - Permits and exemption. 
    A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferable from one (1) person to another or from one (1) location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by this article. A valid permit must be posted in or on every food establishment regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 4701, §§ 6(a), (b), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4701, §§ 6(a), (b), adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 9-27, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 9-27 derived from Ord. No. 4009, § 2, adopted Dec. 18, 2000. 
Sec. 9-28. - Review of plans. 
(a)  Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that twenty (20) percent or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The plans and specifications will be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by this article. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion. 
(b)  Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension, revocation, or suspension of operations. 
(Ord. No. 4701, §§ 6(a), (b), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4701, §§ 6(a), (b), adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 9-28, entitled "Application for permit and fees," and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 9-28 derived from Ord. No. 4009, § 3, adopted Dec. 18, 2000; and Ord. No. 4126, §§ 1-3, adopted Aug. 19, 2002. 
Sec. 9-29. - Food sanitation training. 
(a)  No person shall operate a food establishment unless the manager of the establishment, or if multiple shifts are worked, the manager of each shift has a valid current food service manager's certificate issued by the regulatory authority certifying that the bearer has attended the food sanitation program for managers approved by the regulatory. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or manager of any food establishment to employ or permit any food handler to work therein unless such food handler has the permit required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 4701, §§ 6(a), (b), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4701, §§ 6(a), (b), adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 9-29, entitled "Review of plans," and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 9-29 derived from Ord. No. 4009, § 4, adopted Dec. 18, 2000. 
Sec. 9-30. - Suspension of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (b) of this section. When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within twenty (20) business days of receipt of a request for a hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for hearing is filed within ten (10) business days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. 4701, §§ 6(a), (b), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4701, §§ 6(a), (b), adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 9-30, entitled "Food sanitation training," and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 9-30 derived from Ord. No. 4009, § 5, adopted Dec. 18, 2000. 
Sec. 9-31. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten (10) business days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period. 
(b)  If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-business-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 4701, §§ 6(a), (b), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4701, §§ 6(a), (b), adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 9-31, entitled "Application for permit and fees," and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 9-31 derived from Ord. No. 4009, § 6, adopted Dec. 18, 2000. 
Sec. 9-32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4701, §§ 6(a), (b), adopted June 17, 2013, added new provisions to the Code designated as § 9-31, entitled "Revocation of permit." In order to avoid duplication and at the discretion of the editor, § 9-32, entitled "Revocation of permit" has been repealed. Said § 9-32 derived from Ord. No. 4009, § 7, adopted Dec. 18, 2000. 
Sec. 9-33. - Administrative process. 
(a)  A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(b)  The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 4009, § 8, 12-18-00) 
Sec. 9-34. - Remedies. 
(a)  Any person who violates a provision of these rules and any person who is the permit holder of or otherwise operates a food service establishment that does not comply with the requirements of these rules and any responsible officer of that permit holder or those persons shall be fined an amount determined by the city council. 
(b)  The regulatory authority may seek to enjoin violations of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 6(c), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4701, § 6(c), adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 9-34, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 9-34 derived from Ord. No. 4009, § 9, adopted Dec. 18, 2000. 
Sec. 9-35. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4009, § 10, 12-18-00) 
Secs. 9-36-9-40. - Reserved. 
Chapter 10 - HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; specific code enforcement authority, § 2-126; animals, Ch. 4; animals prohibited from running at large, § 4-9; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; dangerous and unsafe buildings, § 5-311 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8; posting advertising matter on property without consent of owner prohibited, § 11-1; HUD-code manufactured home and recreational vehicle facilities, Ch. 12; nuisances, Ch. 13; weeds, rubbish, water, etc., § 13-26 et seq.; junked, wrecked, abandoned property, § 13-51 et seq.; planning, Ch. 17; solid waste, Ch. 20; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; utilities, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 28. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Housing standards. 
    The standards of chapter 5 of this Code shall determine the minimum standards for habitable buildings and structures within the city. The provisions therein shall be controlling in the use, maintenance and occupancy of all dwellings, dwelling units and/or structures. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 7(a), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4701, § 7(a), adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 10-1, entitled "Southern Standard Housing Code adopted," and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former § 10-1 derived from the 1965 Code, § 151/2-1). 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; dangerous and unsafe buildings, § 5-311 et seq. 
Sec. 10-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 10-2 has been repealed, inasmuch as it appears to have been superseded by Ord. No. 4701, § 7(a), codified as § 10-1. Former § 10-2 pertained to amendments to Standard Housing Code, and derived from the 1965 Code, § 151/2-2. 
Secs. 10-3-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING 

Sec. 10-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under section 10-27, 10-28 or 10-29. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence by one (1) or more families on any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
    Family includes a single individual. 
    To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1965, § 151/2-21) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-27. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
    Except as exempted by section 10-30, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, sex, religion, or national origin; 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, sex, religion, or national origin; 
(3)  Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, sex, religion or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination; 
(4)  Represent to any person because of race, color, sex, religion or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; 
(5)  For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, sex, religion or national origin; 
(6)  For profit, or with the hope or expectation of profit, to influence or attempt to influence, by any words, acts, or failure to act, any seller, purchaser, landlord or tenant of a dwelling so as to promote the maintenance or racially segregated housing or so as to retard, obstruct or discourage racially integrated housing. 
(Code 1965, § 151/2-22) 
Sec. 10-28. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part of the making of commercial or residential real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against any such person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, brokerage points, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of: 
(1)  The race, color, sex, religion or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance; or 
(2)  The race, color, sex, religion, or national origin of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings for which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Code 1965, § 151/2-23) 
Sec. 10-29. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation on account of race, color, sex, religion or national origin. 
(Code 1965, § 151/2-24) 
Sec. 10-30. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  There shall be exempted from the application of section 10-27 all transactions involving: 
(1)  The rental of units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and occupies one (1) of such units as his residence; 
(2)  The rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than one (1) family, if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains and occupies the remainder of such dwelling as his residence, and not more than four (4) such rooms are offered; 
(3)  The sale or rental of any single house by a private individual who owns such house, provided that: 
a.  The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman or person; 
b.  The sale is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of (c) below (this shall not prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer title); 
c.  The owner does not own more than three (3) single-family houses at the time of the sale; 
d.  The owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one (1) time; 
e.  If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of sale or was not the most recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one (1) such sale within any twenty-four-month period. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, or national origin. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a bona fide private club, not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose, provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which a room or rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing accommodation. 
(Code 1965, § 151/2-25) 
Sec. 10-31. - Fair housing administrator. 
    The city manager or his or her designee shall act as a fair housing administrator (hereinafter referred to as "administrator"), who shall have the responsibility for implementing this article. The administrator may delegate his authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other city employees under his direction. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 7(b), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4701, § 7(b), adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 10-31, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 10-31 derived from the 1965 Code, § 151/2-26). 
Sec. 10-32. - Complaints. 
(a)  Only the person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring (hereafter referred to as "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the administrator. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The administrator shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request. 
(b)  If at any time the administrator shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person has committed or is committing a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed, the administrator may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(c)  The administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to (a) above. 
(d)  All complaints shall be filed within sixty (60) days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the person or persons named therein who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The accused may file an answer to the complaint within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written complaint. 
(e)  All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(Code 1965, § 151/2-27) 
Sec. 10-33. - Investigation. 
(a)  Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the administrator shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint. 
(b)  During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaint, the administrator shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this article. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the administrator, by the complainant, or by any other party to the proceedings without the written consent of all persons concerned. 
(c)  Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator, but within thirty (30) days of the filing of the complaint with the administrator, if the efforts of the administrator to secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, and if the administrator has made a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, the administrator shall recommend to the city attorney that such violation be prosecuted in the municipal court. With such recommendation, the administrator shall refer his entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall, within thirty (30) days after such referral, make a determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of such complaint in municipal court. If the city attorney determines to prosecute, he shall institute a complaint and prosecute same to conclusion within thirty (30) days after such determination, or as soon thereafter as practicable. 
(Code 1965, § 151/2-28) 
Sec. 10-34. - Cumulative legal effect. 
    This article is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal remedies which the person aggrieved may pursue. 
(Code 1965, § 151/2-29) 
Sec. 10-35. - Unlawful intimidation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group or business because he or they have complied with the provisions of this article, because he or they have exercised his or their rights under this article, or enjoyed the benefits of this article, or because he or they have made a charge, testified, or assisted in any manner in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder, or have made any report to the administrator. 
(Code 1965, § 151/2-30) 
Sec. 10-36. - Cooperation with secretary of housing and urban development. 
    The administrator and the city attorney are authorized to cooperate with the Secretary for Housing and Urban Development and the U.S. Attorney General pursuant to the provisions of the Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and may render such service to the secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of the article. 
(Code 1965, § 151/2-31) 
Sec. 10-37. - Education and public information. 
    In order to further the objectives of this article, the administrator may conduct educational and public information programs. 
(Code 1965, § 151/2-32) 
Secs. 10-38, 10-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION PROCESS 

Sec. 10-40. - Policy. 
    It is the policy of the City of Denison, pursuant to the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, the Americans with Disabilities Act and applicable state laws, to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodations (including modifications and exceptions) in the city's zoning and development regulations, building regulations, rules, policies and procedures when needed to provide an individual with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. This section provides a procedure for making requests for accommodations to comply fully with the intent and purpose of applicable laws, including federal laws, in making a reasonable accommodation. Nothing in this section shall require the City of Denison to agree to requested accommodations that are unreasonable. 
(Ord. No. 4894, § 2, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 10-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means the eligible individual that requests an accommodation. 
    Director means the development services department head or city official with authority to administer, implement, or enforce a requirement that is the basis of the request for a reasonable accommodation. 
    Disabled individual means a person or persons who have a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, a person who is regarded as having that type of impairment, or a person who has a record of that type of impairment. The term "disabled" includes persons recovering from addiction, but such term does not include current, illegal use of, or addiction to a controlled substance (as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802). 
    Property means the dwelling, facility, structure or property for which a reasonable accommodation is sought. 
    Reasonable accommodation means a change, exception, or adjustment to a requirement in the city's land use, zoning, permit and processing procedures. 
    Requirement means a provision of the City Code or an administrative policy, program or procedure. 
(Ord. No. 4894, § 2, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 10-42. - Effect. 
    A reasonable accommodation shall control over a conflicting city requirement. 
(Ord. No. 4894, § 2, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 10-43. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall apply to the requirements adopted by the city. 
(b)  A reasonable accommodation is specific to the disabled individual and does not run with the property. The reasonable accommodation shall be in force and effect as long as the disabled individual for whom the reasonable accommodation was sought, resides on the property that is the subject of the reasonable accommodation. It is the duty of the owner of the property subject to the reasonable accommodation to notify the director if the property is sold, or an interest in ownership changes, causing the disabled individual to stop residing on the property. The city shall allow the new owner an opportunity to renew and/or modify a granted reasonable accommodation in accordance with this article. If the reasonable accommodation is not renewed or modified within sixty (60) days from the date of change in ownership or tenancy, the reasonable accommodation shall automatically lapse and the property shall comply with all requirements of this article. 
(c)  A reasonable accommodation does not alter an individual's obligation to comply with other applicable federal, state, and city requirements. 
(d)  This article shall not be construed as to require the city to expend any funds to achieve a reasonable accommodation except and to the extent required by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 4894, § 2, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 10-44. - Director's authority. 
(a)  The director is authorized to grant a reasonable accommodation under this article. An accommodation is deemed "reasonable" when the accommodation is necessary to afford an individual with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a property or obtain the housing of their choice. 
(b)  The director may request further information from the applicant so long as such request is consistent with applicable laws, specifying in detail the additional information that is required. Any information related to the disability status identified by the applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to protect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection unless required by the Texas Public Information Act. Any information received regarding the disability status identified, including but not limited to medical records, will be returned to the applicant within ten (10) days of the decision of the director. 
(c)  The director is authorized to grant an alternative reasonable accommodation. 
(d)  The director shall deny a request for an unreasonable accommodation. An accommodation is deemed "unreasonable" when the accommodation imposes an undue financial or administrative burden on the city, or if the impact of the requested use on its surroundings is greater than that of other uses permitted in the district, or requires a fundamental alteration in the nature of the city's land use and zoning regulations. 
(e)  The director shall have such other authority as expressly set forth in this article or as provided in any other applicable city ordinance, or by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 4894, § 2, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 10-45. - Request process. 
(a)  A request for reasonable accommodation may be made to the director by any person with a disability, their representative or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities. The request shall state the reason for the accommodation from the zoning and development regulations and the basis for the request. 
(b)  The applicant or applicant's representative shall provide the following: 
(1)  Information indicating that the applicant qualifies as a disabled individual under this article. 
(2)  Statement with supporting facts that demonstrates whether the accommodation is both reasonable and necessary. An accommodation under this section is "necessary" if without the accommodation, the applicant will be denied an equal opportunity to obtain the housing of his or her choice. 
(3)  Address of the property for which the accommodation is requested, name and address of the person or entity requesting accommodation and if the applicant is applying on behalf of a person with a disability, the name and address of the person with a disability shall also be provided. 
(c)  The director shall grant the request for reasonable accommodations unless the accommodation is unreasonable under the standards set forth in section 10-44(d) of this article or the denial of the requested accommodation is otherwise authorized by or consistent with the regulations adopted in this article or any other applicable city ordinance, state or federal law. 
(d)  The director shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the application, and may either grant, grant with alterations or conditions, or deny a request for an accommodation. Such decision shall be sent by certified mail, regular mail, and if requested by the applicant, by electronic mail. The decision shall at minimum indicate the following: 
(1)  Whether the property, which is the subject of the requested accommodation, will be used by an individual with a disability protected under the applicable laws; 
(2)  Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to afford an individual with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy the property; 
(3)  Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city; and 
(4)  Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the city's land use and zoning regulations or if the impact of the requested use on its surroundings is greater than that of other uses permitted in the district. 
(e)  If the director fails to issue a written decision on the request for accommodation within the thirty (30) calendar days of the application, the accommodation request shall be deemed granted. 
(f)  A request for accommodation stays all proceedings in furtherance of the enforcement of any requirement that is the subject of the request. An accommodation request does not affect an applicant's obligation to comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation. 
(g)  A reasonable accommodation for an increase in the number of residents terminates if the property ceases to be operated as housing for disabled persons as defined by the Fair Housing Amendment Act. 
(h)  The director shall retain, for the duration of the accommodation and at least five (5) years thereafter, written records of each request and all related records, medical records excepted, including the city's responses and decisions. 
(Ord. No. 4894, § 2, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 10-46. - Appeals. 
    An applicant, or a person on whose behalf an application was filed, may appeal the director's written decision to deny or to grant an accommodation with alterations or conditions or to deny the accommodation no later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date the written decision of the director is mailed, or is received if sent by email. An appeal must be in writing and submitted to the city manager's office. 
(1)  An appeal shall be decided by the city manager or his designee. In considering an appeal of a decision of the director, the city manager or his designee shall consider: 
a.  The application requesting the accommodation; 
b.  The decision issued by the director; 
c.  The applicant's written statement of the basis for the appeal; 
d.  Consultation with the city attorney; and 
e.  The provisions of this article and applicable law, in order to determine whether the director's decision was consistent with applicable fair housing laws. 
(2)  If a written decision on the appeal is not rendered within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the appeal is received, the requested accommodation shall be deemed granted as requested. 
(3)  The decision of the city manager or his designee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 4894, § 2, 8-7-17) 
Chapter 11 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Effective with Supplement 33 of this Code, Ch. 11 was reorganized to provide a more consistent delineation of sections, and specific articles were added to facilitate the description of chapter sections within the Code. Section 11-13 pertaining to loud vehicular noise, which was derived from Ord. No. 3466, § 1, adopted June 20, 1994, was resequenced as § 11-12 and placed under Art. I, In General. Section 11-12 pertaining to curfew hours for minors, which derived from Ord. No. 3471, § 1, adopted July 18, 1994, was redesignated as Art. II, § 11-13. Art. III was established for Drug Free Church Zones, §§ 11-14-11-16. 
Cross reference- General penalty, § 1-12; police department, § 2-141 et seq.; Nuisances, ch. 13. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Advertising matter-Posting on property without consent of owner. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint, tack or otherwise attach any notice or other advertising matter to any fence, wall, building or other property, public or private, without first obtaining the consent of the owner of such property. 
(Code 1965, § 16-2) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; housing, Ch. 10; HUD-code manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 12; nuisances, Ch. 13; peddlers and solicitors and certain other sales, Ch. 15; public property, Ch. 18; signs, Ch. 19; solid waste, Ch. 20; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; zoning, Ch. 28. 
Sec. 11-2. - Same-Posting on utility poles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint, tack or otherwise attach any notice or advertising matter to any telegraph, telephone, electrical or other utility pole situated within the city. There is a rebuttable presumption that the person responsible for violation of this section shall be the person named in the notice or advertisement as the candidate, sponsor or organization for which it relates. 
(Code 1965, § 16-3) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 21; utilities, Ch. 26. 
Sec. 11-3. - Airguns, discharge prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any BB gun, airgun or air rifle of any description within the city. 
(Code 1965, § 16-4) 
Sec. 11-4. - Blasting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to blast, or cause to be blasted, any rock, earth or other material within this city, without having the orifice at the time of setting off the blast securely covered on all sides with good, sound plank of sufficient length, width and thickness so as to prevent fragments of such material from ascending into the air. 
(Code 1965, § 16-6) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7. 
Sec. 11-5. - Firearms and handguns generally. 
(a)  Definitions. In this section the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Firearm means any device designed, made, or adapted to expel a projectile through a barrel by using the energy generated by an explosion or burning substance or any device readily convertible to that use. Firearm does not include a firearm that may have, as an integral part, a folding knife blade or other characteristics of weapons made illegal by this chapter and that is: 
a.  An antique or curio firearm manufactured before 1899; or 
b.  A replica of an antique or curio firearm manufactured before 1899, but only if the replica does not use rim fire or center fire ammunition. 
(2)  Governmental body means elected or approved representatives of the State of Texas, and its political subdivisions created pursuant to the Texas constitution and the general or special laws of the State of Texas and the committees, subcommittees, boards and commissions of the State and such political subdivisions. 
(3)  Handgun means any firearm that is designed, made, or adapted to be fired with one hand. 
(4)  Municipally-owned premises means any building or property owned or leased by the City of Denison excluding public streets and rights-of-way, but including and not limited to, the following: 
- City Hall, 500 W. Chestnut; 
- City Hall Annex, 430 W. Chestnut; 
- Denison Police Department, 108 W. Main; 
- Denison Public Library, 300 W. Gandy; 
- Senior Citizens Center, 531 W. Chestnut; 
- Central Fire Station, 700 W. Chestnut; 
- West End Fire Station, 2720 W. Morton; 
- Southside Fire Station, 3306 S. Park Avenue; 
- Raynal Anex, 526 E. Maple Row; 
- Denison Garage and Maintenance facility, 810 N. Travis; 
- Fairview-Maplegrove, Oakwood or Magnolia cemeteries; 
- Paw or Grayson Airport wastewater treatment plans; 
- Denison water plant or Lake Randell, excluding the parking lots, streets and sidewalks adjacent thereto; 
- Emergency medical vehicles; 
- Public safety vehicles. 
(5)  Public meeting means the assembly of a governmental body pursuant to notice required by V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 551. 
(6)  Public park means recreational areas owned and maintained by the City of Denison including, but not limited to, Forrest Park, Waterloo Lake Regional Park, T-Bar Softball Complex, Munson Park, Raynal Park, Katy Practice Fields, Ray Park, Forest Park, Jones Park, George Hopkins Park, Mini-Park, Martin Luther King Park, Heritage Park and Katy Plaza, but does not mean Lake Randell. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any firearm: (1) while within the boundaries of a public park, except a person licensed to carry a handgun in accordance with V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 411, subch. H, may carry a handgun if not prohibited by other law; (2) while attending or in the presence of a public meeting except a person licensed to carry a handgun in accordance with V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 411, subch. H, may carry a handgun if not prohibited by other law; (3) on the premises of any government court or offices utilized by the court, unless pursuant to written regulations or written authorization of the court; (4) while attending a political rally, political parade or official meeting of a political party or interest group; or (5) while attending a nonfirearms-related school, college or professional athletic event. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a firearm or handgun while on municipally-owned premises, except a person licensed to carry a handgun in accordance with V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 411, subch. H, may carry a handgun if not prohibited by other law. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm of any description within the city limits. This section shall not apply to the discharge of shotguns at Randell Lake in accordance with section 18-139 of this Code. 
(e)  Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the possession of a firearm by individuals licensed as law-enforcement officers of the state and its political subdivisions. 
(f)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished in the manner provided by section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1965, § 16-11; Ord. No. 3598, § 1, 12-4-95; Ord. No. 4701, §§ 8(a)-(c), 6-17-13; Ord. No. 4809, §§ 2, 3, 4-18-16) 
Sec. 11-6. - Fireworks, firecrackers or pyrotechnics, sale prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or the agent or employee of any person to sell, offer to sell, or offer for sale any firecrackers, fireworks or pyrotechnics of any nature, or any article or thing used as, and regarded as, firecrackers, fireworks or pyrotechnics, whether specifically named herein or not, within the city. 
(Code 1965, § 16-11.1) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7. 
Sec. 11-7. - Public utility rates. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any public utility or any officer or employee of any public utility to assess or charge for services any rate other than the rate fixed by the city council. 
(b)  Within the meaning of this section, a public utility is any individual, firm or corporation engaged in regularly supplying the public within the corporate limits of the city with some commodity or service which is of special consequence and need, such as electricity, gas, transportation and telephone service. 
(Code 1965, § 16-25) 
Cross reference- Utilities, Ch. 26. 
Sec. 11-8. - Shooting arrows, throwing stones, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any arrow or throw, shoot or otherwise propel any stone, rock, stick or other missile at any person or over or across any street, alley or other property not his own. 
(Code 1965, § 16-26) 
Sec. 11-9. - Sleeping on public property, railroad cars, vehicles, etc. 
    It is unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to be found asleep in any public square, street, sidewalk, or alley, or in any railroad car, vehicle, doorway or building not his own, without the consent of the owner or person having the proper charge, control or possession of the same. 
(Code 1965, § 16-26.1) 
Cross reference- Public places, Ch. 18; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21. 
Sec. 11-10. - Sale of merchandise in residential districts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to continuously sell or continuously offer for sale any new or used merchandise in a residential district as defined by the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city. For the purposes of this section, continuous sales shall be defined as the selling or offering for sale by any person which lasts for more than four (4) consecutive days or includes two (2) or more weekends within any thirty-day period. Any person found to be in violation of this provision shall be punished in a manner consistent with section 1-12 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1965, § 16-28) 
Cross reference- Peddlers and solicitors and certain other sales, Ch. 15; public property, Ch. 18; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; zoning, Ch. 28. 
Sec. 11-11. - Smoking. 
(a)  Definitions. In this section: 
(1)  Bar means an area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. A "bar" includes those facilities located within a hotel, motel or other similar transient occupancy establishment. 
(2)  Electronic cigarette or E-cigarette means any electronic device composed of a mouthpiece, heating element, battery and electronic circuits that provides, or is manufactured or intended to provide a vapor of liquid nicotine and/or other substances mixed with propylene glycol and/or other substances delivered or deliverable to the user that he/she can inhale in simulation of smoking. This term shall include every version and type of such devises whether they are manufactured or marketed as electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes, electronic cigars, e-cigars, electronic pipes, e-pipes or under any other produce name or description. 
(3)  Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by walls, windows, or other barrier (exclusive of door or passage ways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling. 
(4)  Food establishment means a place that provides prepared food for consumption on or off the premises. 
(5)  Fraternal organization shall mean an associated group of persons that are members governed by a board of representatives, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose solely for the benefit of its members and guests, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages and offers food sales and service incidental to its operation. 
(6)  Patio means an improved and defined unenclosed outside area associated with a food service establishment or bar used for purposes of dining or entertainment, provided that walkways are not considered patios. 
(7)  Place of employment means any area under the control of a public or private employer which employees may frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, private offices, work areas, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and class rooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, enclosed portions of construction sites, temporary offices and vehicles. A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a child day care, adult day care or household care facility. 
(8)  Public place means: 
a.  Any enclosed, indoor area that is used by the general public, or that is a place of employment, and includes, but is not limited to, food establishments, stores, offices and other commercial, professional and financial establishments, bars, nightclubs, sexually oriented businesses, billiard halls, bingo halls, bowling centers, public transportation facilities and vehicles, reception areas, elevators, libraries, museums, theaters, waiting rooms, public and private institutions of higher education, health care facilities, nursing and convalescent homes and government subsidized senior citizen residential facilities; or 
b.  Any public swimming pool owned or operated by the city, inclusive of the entire area with the enclosure device; or 
c.  Any public park owned and operated by the city. 
(9)  Retail electronic vaping store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of electronic vaping devices, accessories, and/or electronic vaping liquid or any other article or product that is for use in an electronic vaping device and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
(10)  Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
(11)  Smoke(s) or smoking includes the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar, electronic cigarette or e-cigarette, cigarette or any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or device, and the lighting of, emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar, electronic cigarette, or cigarette of any kind. 
(b)  Smoking prohibited. Smoking shall be prohibited in all public places or within twenty-five (25) feet of any door, operable window/vent, or other opening to an enclosed area, other than a door exclusively serving a patio. 
(c)  Signs. The owner, lessee or other person in charge of a public place where smoking is prohibited shall place a sign or signs, visible at each entrance to the premises, notifying persons entering the premises that smoking is prohibited. The manner of such posting shall be at the discretion of the owner, lessee or other person in charge of a public place so long as the signs are conspicuous and state that smoking is prohibited and that an offense is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(d)  Penalty. Any individual knowingly, intentionally, or recklessly violating any portion or provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefor, shall be punished by the assessment of a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(e)  Exemptions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this section: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as a child day care, adult day care or household care facility; 
(2)  Personal automobiles; 
(3)  Retail tobacco stores and electronic vaping stores in stand-alone physical facilities; 
(4)  Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests and designated as smoking rooms. All smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under provisions of this section; 
(5)  Outdoor places of employment except within twenty-five (25) feet of any door, operable window/vent or other opening to an enclosed area, other than a door exclusively serving a patio; 
(6)  Buildings owned and operated, or leased by, fraternal organizations and used solely for the benefit of its members and guests; or 
(7)  Patios. 
(Ord. No. 3408, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 4087, § 1, 2-4-02; Ord. No. 4126, § 7, 8-19-02; Ord. No. 4736, § 1, 3-3-14; Ord. No. 4862, § 2, 4-3-17; Ord. No. 4959, § 2, 8-20-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4862, § 2, adopted April 3, 2017, changed the title of § 11-11 from "Smoking in public places" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 11-11.5. - Possession, purchase, consumption or receipt of electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine by minors. 
(a)  Definitions. In this section: 
(1)  Electronic cigarette or e-cigarette has the meaning assigned in section 11-11 of this article. 
(2)  Liquid nicotine means any liquid product composed either in whole or in part of pure nicotine and propylene glycol and/or any other substance and manufactured for use with electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes. 
(3)  Minor means a person younger than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(4)  Possess(es), possessing or possession means actual care, custody, control or management. 
(5)  Retailer means a person, place of business or retail and service establishment, who/which engages in the practice of selling cigarettes, tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine to consumers and includes, without limitation, the owner of an open display unit. 
(6)  Smoke(s) or smoking means, in the context of retail sale of electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine, the open display, including, without limitation, the use of an open display unit of electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine, whether packaged or otherwise, for direct retail customer access and handling prior to purchase with or without the intervention of assistance of the retailer or retailer's owner, employee or agent. 
(b)  A person who is younger than eighteen (18) years of [age] commits an offense if the individual: 
(1)  Possesses, purchases, consumes or accepts an electronic cigarette, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine; or 
(2)  Falsely represents himself or herself to be eighteen (18) years of age or older by displaying proof of age that is false, fraudulent or not actually proof of the individual's own age in order to obtain possession of, purchase or receive an electronic cigarette, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine. 
(c)  A person or retailer commits an offense if the person or retailer with criminal negligence: 
(1)  Sells, gives, or conveys or causes to be sold, given, or conveyed, an electronic cigarette or e-cigarette or liquid nicotine to someone who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age; or 
(2)  Sells, gives, conveys or causes to be sold, given, or conveyed an electronic cigarette or e-cigarette or liquid nicotine to another person who intends to deliver it to someone who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(d)  If an offense under this section occurs in connection with a sale by an employee of the owner of a store in which electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine is/are sold at retail, the employee is criminally responsible for the offense and is subject to prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 4736, § 2, 3-3-14) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 4736, adopted March 3, 2014, enacted provisions designated as § 11-13. Inasmuch as § 11-13 already exists, said provisions have been redesignated as § 11-11.5 at the authorization of the city. 
Sec. 11-12. - Sound amplification systems in vehicles. 
(a)  No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street, highway, alley, parking lot, or driveway, whether public or private property, shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system from within the vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) or more feet from the vehicle. 
(b)  "Sound amplification system" means any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loudspeaker, or other electronic device used for the amplification of sound. 
(c)  "Plainly audible" means any sound produced by a sound amplification system from within the vehicle which clearly can be heard at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more. Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based on direct line of sight. Words or phrases need not be discernible, and bass reverberations are included. The motor vehicle may be stopped, standing, parked or moving on a street, highway, alley, parking lot, or driveway, on either public or private property. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the sound amplification system and that any of the following apply: 
(1)  The system was being operated to request medical or vehicular assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition; 
(2)  The vehicle was an emergency or public safety vehicle; 
(3)  The vehicle was owned and operated by a public utility company, including the City of Denison; or 
(4)  The system or vehicle was used in an authorized public activity, such as a parade, fireworks, sporting event, musical production, or other activity which has the approval of the city council or a department of the city authorized to grant such approval. 
(Ord. No. 3466, § 1, 6-20-94; Ord. No. 4701, § 8(d), 6-17-13) 
Note- See Editor's Note at the beginning of this chapter. 
Sec. 11-12.1. - Urinating and/or defecating in public. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he or she urinates and/or defecates: 
(1)  In or on a public street, alley, sidewalk, yard, park, building, structure, plaza, or utility right-of-way, or other public place; or 
(2)  In public view. 
(b)  A person may not be found guilty of an offense under this section if the person proves as an affirmative defense that the person was in a restroom or in a portable structure designated as a restroom. 
(c)  Any person violating provisions of this section shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 4881, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4881, § 2, adopted June 19, 2017, enacted new provisions designated as § 11-13. Inasmuch as § 11-13 already exists, said provisions have been redesignated as § 11-12.1 at the discretion of the editor. 
ARTICLE II. - CURFEW FOR MINORS 

Sec. 11-13. - Curfew hours for minors. 
(a)  Definitions. In this section: 
(1)  Curfew hours means: 
a.  11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
b.  12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday. 
(2)  Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
(3)  Establishment means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
(4)  Guardian means: 
a.  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
b.  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
(5)  Minor means any person under seventeen (17) years of age who has not had the disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code ch. 31 or who is not legally married at the time. 
(6)  Operator means any individual, employee, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
(7)  Parent means a person who is: 
a.  A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person; or 
b.  At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
(8)  Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
(9)  Remain means to: 
a.  Linger or stay; or 
b.  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
(10)  Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(b)  Offenses. 
(1)  A minor commits an offense if the minor remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(2)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if the parent of guardian knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(3)  The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if such person knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(c)  Defenses. 
(1)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (b) that the minor was: 
a.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
b.  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop provided the minor possesses a signed note from the minor's parent or guardian; 
c.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
d.  Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
e.  Involved in an emergency; 
f.  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
g.  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of Denison, the Denison Independent School District, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of Denison, the Denison Independent School District, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
h.  Attending a function or event sponsored and supervised by an establishment that prohibits ingress and egress to the establishment during curfew hours and the management of the establishment has registered the function or event with the city at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance. 
i.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
j.  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code. 
(2)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(3) that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(d)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection (c) is present. 
(2)  A police officer taking into custody a person younger than seventeen (17) years of age for violation of subsection (b) shall, without unnecessary delay: 
a.  Release the minor to the minor's parent or guardian; 
b.  Take the minor before a justice or municipal court to answer the charge; or 
c.  Take the minor to a place designated as a juvenile curfew processing office by the head of the law enforcement agency having custody of the minor. 
(3)  A "juvenile curfew processing office" shall comply with article 45.059, as amended, of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedures. 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(2)  Any minor taken into custody for a violation of this chapter shall be held in accordance with article 45.059, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended. 
(3)  When required by V.T.C.A., Family Code § 51.08, as amended, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates subsection (b)(1) of this section and shall refer the minor to juvenile court. 
(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 7-18-94; Ord. No. 4046, § 1, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 4174, § 1, 8-4-03; Ord. No. 4701, § 8(e), 6-17-13; Ord. No. 4929, § 2, 2-5-18) 
Note- See Editor's Note at the beginning of this chapter. 
ARTICLE III. - DRUG FREE CHURCH ZONES 

Sec. 11-14. - Definitions. 
    In the reading and interpretation of this chapter, the following words and/or phrases shall have the meaning assigned. 
    Alcoholic beverage means those beverages defined and regulated by the V.C.T.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
    Church means a church or religious organization as defined by V.A.T.S Insurance Code, § 21.21-9. 
    Controlled substance means any and all substances enumerated and regulated by the Texas Controlled Substance Act of the State of Texas, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 481. 
    Drug free church zone means all church owned property and the area within two hundred (200) feet of such property. 
(Ord. No. 4031, § 1, 3-19-01; Ord. No. 4701, § 8(f), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 11-15. - Drug free church zones created. 
(a)  At the option of a church, there is hereby created within the City of Denison Drug Free Church Zones. When created, designated and signage erected in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Code, the penalty for conviction of an offense involving controlled substances, drug paraphernalia, alcoholic beverages or the consumption thereof over which the Municipal Court of the City of Denison now or hereafter has jurisdiction shall be enhanced in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(b)  A church may elect to designate its real property as a drug free church zone by delivering its written notice of intent to participate, signed by the church's highest ranking local official, to the chief of police. The written notice shall clearly set forth by legal description or street address the real property to be so designated. All property held for religious purposes may be included in the written notice of intent. 
(c)  The real property so designated shall be marked by one or more signs marking the perimeter of the church's real property. The church shall bear the cost of providing signs identifying the property designated by the church as being included in the drug free church zone. Such sign may be placed in the public right-of-way behind the curb, if any. Only the perimeter of the real property adjacent and contiguous to public street right-of-way need be marked by signs. 
(d)  Such signs shall be provided by the city at its cost and the church shall reimburse the city for its cost in making and installing the sign in a manner consistent with this section. 
(Ord. No. 4031, § 1, 3-19-01) 
Sec. 11-16. - Drug free church zones enforced. 
    Upon erection of the signs required by the preceding sections, an offense otherwise punishable as a Class C misdemeanor over which the municipal court has jurisdiction, and of the kind enumerated in section 11-15(a), shall be punished by the maximum fine permitted for the offense in question, if it is shown at the trial of the offense that the offense was committed in, on or within two hundred (200) feet of the church real property participating and qualifying under this chapter as a drug free church zone. 
(Ord. No. 4031, § 1, 3-19-01) 
Secs. 11-17-11-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESIDENTIAL RESTRICTIONS OF SEX OFFENDERS 

Sec. 11-21. - Regulation of sex offenders. 
    The city council of the City of Denison finds that sex offenders who are required to register under state law as lifetime registrants present an extreme threat to the health, safety and welfare of children. It is the intent of this article to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain registered sex offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residency. 
(Ord. No. 4517, § 1, 6-15-09) 
Sec. 11-22. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, words and the derivations thereof shall have the meaning given herein: 
    Child means any person under the age of seventeen (17). 
    Child care facility as defined by the city zoning ordinance. 
    Child care institution as defined by city zoning ordinance. 
    Child safety zone means public parks or playgrounds, private and public schools, public library, public swimming pools, child care facility, child care institution, public or private youth soccer or baseball field, crisis center or shelter, skate park, public or private youth center, and offices for child protective services. 
    Database means the Texas Department of Public Safety's sex offender database or the sex offender registration files maintained by the sex offender registration officer of the city police department. 
    Park or playground means any land, including improvements to the land that is administered, operated or managed by the city for the use of the general public as a recreational area. 
    Permanent residence means a place where the person abides, lodges or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days. 
    School means a private or public pre-school, private or public elementary school or private or public secondary school. 
    Sex offender means an individual who has been convicted of or placed on deferred adjudication for a sexual offense and is required to register as a sexual offender under chapter 62 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
    Temporary residence means a place where a person abides, lodges or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate, during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 4517, § 1, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 4701, § 8(g), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 11-23. - Sex offender prohibition. 
    It is unlawful and an offense for a sex offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the real property comprising a school, child care facility, child care institution, park or playground or other places defined herein as a child safety zone. 
(Ord. No. 4517, § 1, 6-15-09) 
Sec. 11-24. - Evidentiary matters. 
(a)  It shall be prima facie evidence that this article applies to such a person if that person's record appears in/on the database and the database indicates that the victim was less than seventeen (17) years of age. 
(b)  The distance of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet shall be measured on a straight line from the closest boundary line of the sex offender's residence to the closest boundary line of the school, child care facility, child care institution, park or playground or other places defined herein as a child safety zone. 
(c)  In the case of multiple residences on one (1) property, measuring from the nearest property line of the residences to the nearest property line of the school, child care facility, child care institution, park or playground or other places defined herein as a child safety zone. 
(d)  In cases of a dispute over measured distances, it shall be incumbent upon the person(s) challenging the measurement to prove otherwise. Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this section. 
(e)  A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be created by the city and maintained by the city police department. The city shall review the map annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public at the city police department or available on the city website or city police department website. 
(Ord. No. 4517, § 1, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 4701, § 8(h), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 11-25. - Exceptions. 
    The following exceptions shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this article: 
(1)  The person required to register in/on the database established the permanent residence or temporary residence and residency has been consistently maintained and the person has complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas, prior to the date of the adoption of this article; or 
(2)  The place defined herein as a child safety zone and within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register on/in the database was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the state; or 
(3)  The information on/in the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this section would not apply to the person who was erroneously listed on/in the database; or 
(4)  The person required to register on/in the database was a minor when he or she committed the offense requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult; or 
(5)  The person required to register is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility or other correctional institution located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the real property comprising a school, child care facility, child care institution, park or playground or other places defined herein as a child safety zone; or 
(6)  The person required to register is under eighteen (18) years of age or a ward under a guardianship, who resides with a parent or guardian; or 
(7)  The person required to register has been exempted by a court order from registration as a sex offender under state law; or 
(8)  The person required to register has had the offense for which the sex offender registration was required reversed on appeal or pardoned; or 
(9)  The person's duty to register on/in the database has expired. 
(10)  Nothing in this provision shall require any person to sell or otherwise dispose of any real estate or home acquired or owned prior to the conviction of the person as a sex offender. 
(Ord. No. 4517, § 1, 6-15-09) 
Sec. 11-26. - Penalty for violation. 
    Whenever in this article an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in this article the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 4517, § 1, 6-15-09) 
Sec. 11-27. - Illegal smoking materials. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Illegal smoking material shall mean any substance, however marketed, which can reasonably be converted for smoking purposes whether it is presented as incense, tobacco, herbs, spices or any blend thereof if it includes any of the following chemicals or a comparable chemical: 
a.  Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
b.  2-[(lR,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phen01 (also known as CP47,497) and homologues; 
c.  (6aS, 1 OaS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 1 0,1Oatetrahydrobenzo[c]cbromen-1-01 (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol); 
d.  I-pentyl-3-(l-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018); 
e.  l-butyl-3-(l-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073); or 
f.  1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-081). 
Products containing some or all of the above substances are currently being marketed under the following commercial names: 
"K-2", "K-2 SUMMIT", "K-2 SEX", "GENIE", "DASCENTS", "ZOHAI", "SAGE", "SPICE", "KO KNOCK-OUT 2", "SPICE GOLD", "SPICE DIAMOND", "YUCATAN FIRE", "SOLAR FLARE", "PEP SPICE", "FIREN' ICE", AND "SALVIADIVINORUM". 
Any product containing any of the chemical compounds set forth above shall be subject to the provisions of this section, regardless of whether they are marketed under alternative names. 
(2)  Illegal smoking material paraphernalia shall mean any paraphernalia, equipment or utensil that is used or intended to be used in ingesting or inhaling illegal smoking materials and may include, but is not limited to: 
a.  A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; 
b.  A water pipe; 
c.  A carburetion tube or device; 
d.  A smoking or carburetion mask; 
e.  A chamber pipe; 
f.  A carburetor pipe; 
g.  An electric pipe; 
h.  An air-driven pipe; 
i.  A chillum; 
j.  A bong; or 
k.  An ice pipe or chiller. 
(3)  Person shall mean an individual, a group of two (2) or more individuals, proprietorship, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, association or other legal entity, or any licensed or unlicensed business. 
(b)  Illegal smoking materials: Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to prohibit the sale or delivery of illegal smoking materials as defined herein within the city limits of Denison and to prohibit the possession of illegal smoking materials within the city limits of Denison. Any form of delivery to include a simple gift constitutes a violation of this section. 
(1)  Sale, delivery, offer, or gift. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, deliver to or to give any illegal smoking material to any person. 
(2)  Use or possession of illegal smoking material. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession or to use illegal smoking materials within the corporate limits of Denison. 
(3)  Use or possession of illegal smoking paraphernalia. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession any illegal smoking paraphernalia with the intent to use it, to ingest, inhale or otherwise consume illegal smoking material. If a person is found in possession of this type of paraphernalia it will be a violation of this section if appropriate forensic testing is done on the paraphernalia and traces of illegal smoking material are present on the device. 
(c)  Defenses to prosecution. 
(1)  It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section if the use of the illegal smoking material is at the direction or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to prescribe controlled substances within the State of Texas. 
(2)  It shall be a defense to prosecution under the terms of this section if any person charged with a violation can provide proper and complete historic documentation that the use of such materials is a portion of a religious undertaking or activity of a religious denomination in which they have long standing historic membership supported by documentation from clergy or spiritual leader recognized by the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 4590, § 2, 1-17-11) 
Chapter 12 - HUD-CODE MANUFACTURED HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE FACILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4103-B, adopted May 6, 2002, amended Ch. 12 in its entirety to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 12 pertained to HUD-code manufactured homes and recreational vehicles and derived from Code 1965, §§ 161/2-1-161/2-5, and §§ 161/2-8-161/2-11; Ord. No. 3703, §§ 1, 3, adopted March 3, 1997; and Ord. No. 3704, § 4, adopted March 3, 1997. 
Cross reference- Specific code enforcement authority, § 2-126; animals, Ch. 4; animals prohibited from running at large, § 4-9; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8; specific standards for manufactured housing, § 8-47; housing, Ch. 10; posting advertising matter on property without consent of owner prohibited, § 11-1; junked, wrecked and abandoned vehicles, § 13-66 et seq.; nuisances, Ch. 13; planning, Ch. 17; signs, Ch. 19; swimming pools, Ch. 23; utilities, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 28; off-street parking of recreational vehicles, § 28-185. 

ARTICLE I. - HUD-CODE MANUFACTURED HOME PARK 

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of interpreting this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
    Camper or recreational vehicle or RV means a vehicle, either self-propelled or towed, which is not classified as a travel trailer or HUD-code manufactured home that is so constructed to permit occupancy for sleeping purposes. 
    HUD-code manufactured home or home means a structure, constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and as defined by Article 5221f, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, now or as hereinafter amended. 
    HUD-code manufactured home park or park means any plot of ground upon which two (2) or more HUD-code manufactured homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. The term contemplates single ownership of all spaces and facilities of the park and is to be distinguished from the HUD-code manufactured home subdivision that not only contemplates public dedication of streets and other facilities, but also individual ownership of "spaces" or "lots" within the subdivision. 
    HUD-code manufactured home space or space or lot means a plot of ground within a HUD-code, manufactured home park designed for the accommodation of one (1) HUD-code manufactured home. 
    Travel trailer means any vehicle or similar portable structure which is not more than eight (8) feet wide or longer than forty (40) feet and can be legally moved on state highways without a special permit, and having no foundation other than wheels, jacks, or skirting, and so designed or constructed as to permit occupancy for sleeping purposes. 
    Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be construed in accordance with customary usage in municipal standards of construction and planning with particular reference to the city subdivision, zoning, plumbing, electrical, and fire prevention and protection ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Sec. 12-2. - Compliance with article. 
    Any person seeking approval to construct or operate a HUD-code manufactured home park shall be required to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Sec. 12-3. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the orderly, safe, healthful development and operation of HUD-code manufactured home parks within the city and the extraterritorial area jurisdiction of the city, as defined by Chapter 42, Texas Local Government Code, as follows: 
(1)  Promote health, safety and general welfare of the HUD-code manufactured homes and surrounding community; 
(2)  Provide safeguards to the interest of the city government, the HUD-code manufactured home park owners and/or operators, the individual HUD-code manufactured home owner, and the community at large. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Sec. 12-4. - Application of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to, govern and regulate the location, site, streets, lot layout, electrical service, plumbing and sanitary service, drainage, sanitation, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) as a fuel or source of energy, and fire protection in HUD-code manufactured home parks. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Sec. 12-5. - Use of HUD-code manufactured homes, etc. as dwelling. 
    A HUD-code manufactured home, recreational vehicles and any vehicle as defined by the Transportation Code of the State of Texas shall not be permitted to be located on any real property within the city to be used as a permanent or temporary dwelling, except as provided for in Chapter 28 of this Code. HUD-code manufactured homes or recreational vehicles may be used as temporary offices at construction sites for a period commensurate with the need upon the contractor receiving written authorization from the chief building official of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Sec. 12-6. - Applicability of subdivision regulations to parks; plat fees. 
(1)  The relevant portions of the city subdivision ordinance are applicable to any lot, tract, or parcel of land situated within the corporate or extraterritorial limits of the city which is divided into two (2) or more lots or sites for the immediate or future purpose of development as a HUD-code manufactured home park. The standards of the subdivision ordinance are applicable to the HUD-code manufactured home park and support facilities except as established in this article. 
(2)  A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) is assessed and shall be collected by the planning and zoning administrator, or his/her designated representative, when a preliminary plat is submitted to the city for approval. The plat will not be reviewed or considered in any respect until such fee has been collected. No additional fee is due for final plat review and approval. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the planning and zoning director from consolidating the preliminary and final plat review process. 
(3)  Nothing herein shall be construed to cause or require the recording of the plat contemplated herein in the plat records of the Grayson County Clerk's Office. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Sec. 12-7. - General standards for parks. 
    The developer of a HUD-code manufactured home park shall place the following minimum improvements in all new or enlarged parks within the city limits, or those that are located within the extraterritorial limits of the city. These parks shall be located and improvements shall be designed and constructed to standards required by the subdivision ordinance and applicable city codes except as specifically provided herein. 
(1)  Location of park. The park shall have access to a public street or road by directly abutting thereon. Access to HUD-code manufactured home spaces in the park shall be from interior park roads only. Vehicle access to HUD-code manufactured home spaces shall not be permitted from public roads or streets. 
(2)  Construction plans and specifications for HUD-code manufactured home parks. Prior to the construction of any roads, utility systems, drainage systems or support facilities, the park developer shall furnish three (3) complete sets of prints or plans and specifications for said construction to the planning and zoning administrator. The documents shall be transmitted to the administrator by the developer in writing and will be reviewed by the planning and zoning administrator, or his representative, for conformity with this article and the city standards. The plans and specifications shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements for such documents as specified in the subdivision ordinance. 
(3)  HUD-code manufactured home space. Each space, a plot of land in the park for the accommodation of not more than one (1) HUD-code manufactured home, shall contain not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet of area and shall be not less than sixty (60) feet in width. The boundary lines of such spaces shall be plainly and permanently marked. 
a.  The HUD-code manufactured home shall be placed on the space so that there is at least a ten-foot side clearance between the home and any side lot line. This distance shall be measured from the maximum projection of an extended porch, platform or stoop, whether integral with or as a supplement to the home. With homes placed with rears end-to-end, the end-to-end clearance between HUD-code manufactured homes shall be not less than twenty (20) feet. An unobstructed passageway shall be provided and maintained around homes of not less than six (6) feet. 
b.  Distances from permanent park buildings to HUD-code manufactured homes shall be not less than thirty (30) feet. 
c.  A HUD-code manufactured home owned by the park owner when placed and fixed upon a space shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Chapter 28 of this Code, including but not limited to, the age requirement for the HUD-code manufactured home. 
d.  Each space shall have a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces served by a driveway connecting to the park road or street. The parking spaces and driveway shall be constructed of all-weather and dust free surface consisting of not less than a double bituminous surface treatment with hard cover aggregates for each course. 
(4)  Park roads or drives. The park shall be provided with entrance and internal roads in a configuration that will insure safe vehicular access to, egress from, and circulation within the park, including fire protection equipment. The roads or drives shall be not less than thirty-one (31) feet wide from back-of-curb to back-of-curb and consist of not less than the following: 
a.  Sub-grade meeting or exceeding city standards; 
b.  Compacted flexible base meeting or exceeding city standards; 
c.  All-weather and dust-free surface consisting of not less than a double bituminous surface treatment with hard cover aggregates for each course; 
d.  The use of low and flat-type curbs and gutters constructed of concrete; 
e.  Appropriate park road names and space numbering compatible with the city's enhanced 911 system and the signage of the road names and space numbering; and 
f.  Fire lanes and restricted parking areas shall be clearly marked and signage installed. 
(5)  Electrical service and equipment. All electrical supply and service in and to the park shall be underground. The provisions of the city electrical code are applicable to the electric conductors and equipment installed within the HUD-code manufactured home park. 
(6)  Plumbing installation standards for HUD- code manufactured home parks. The requirements set forth in the current edition of the plumbing code shall apply specifically to all new HUD-code manufactured home parks, and to additions to existing parks, and are to provide the minimum standards for sanitation and plumbing installation within these parks for HUD-code manufactured homes. Wherever the requirements of the provisions of the plumbing code and this paragraph differ, the requirements of this paragraph shall apply as follows: 
a.  Fees for permits and inspections are as specified in the city plumbing code. 
b.  The minimum size water main is six (6) inches and the park's water system shall be constructed with fire hydrants spaced so that each space within the park is within five hundred (500) feet of a fire hydrant. 
c.  The minimum size sewer main is six (6) inches. The minimum size sewer service line shall be four (4) inches and no more than one (1) home [and] one (1) sewer main tap shall be allowed. 
d.  Individual septic systems may not be installed or used within the park. If a privately owned and operated sanitary sewage treatment system is to be installed, the plans for such system shall be approved by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission prior to submitting the final plat for approval of the planning and zoning commission. 
e.  In accordance with the rules and regulations of the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission, all water and sanitary sewer mains shall be constructed so as to meet the minimum space and separation requirements and constructed of American Water Works Association-approved materials. 
(7)  Gas systems, natural and/or liquefied petroleum gases. In HUD-code manufactured home parks in which gas distribution systems are installed, the installations shall conform to the requirements set forth in the current edition of the gas code. With respect to liquefied petroleum gases, should the requirements of the gas code and requirements of the state railroad commission or requirements of this paragraph differ, the requirements of the Texas Railroad Commission and of this paragraph shall apply. The following gaseous fuel systems will be permitted in HUD-code manufactured home and travel trailer parks when installed, operated, and maintained as specified herein: 
a.  Natural gas system. This shall be installed and connected to equipment and trailers in accordance with the requirements of the plumbing code. 
b.  Central supply liquefied petroleum (LPG) (butane and propane) gas system. This shall be installed as follows: 
i.  LPG piping in HUD-code manufactured home parks shall be installed and connected in accordance with requirements of the gas code. When a natural gas system also exists in the park, the two (2) systems shall not be interconnected in any way and the risers at the spaces shall be plainly identified. 
ii.  A central supply LPG tank may be used to serve any or all HUD-code manufactured homes. The tank shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) gallons (U.S.) capacity and shall be of a type and with equipment approved by the railroad commission for LPG service. The tank shall not be equipped with any type of device that would provide means of transferring liquid from this tank to other tanks. 
iii.  The central supply LPG tank shall be located such that it is not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any property line, street, roadway, homes or buildings. The tank shall be protected by steel railings of not less than two and one-half-inch pipe firmly anchored in concrete. The tank area shall be kept clear of all grass, trash and any combustible material of any type. 
iv.  The central tank shall not be charged with fuel by anyone except qualified personnel licensed by the Texas Railroad Commission from a Texas Railroad Commission-approved LPG transport or service truck. 
c.  Separate liquefied petroleum (LPG) tanks for individual HUD-code manufactured home or travel trailer. These shall be constructed, mounted and serviced in accordance with the Texas Railroad Commission regulations governing such tanks and this paragraph, as follows: 
i.  Each LPG container shall bear the mark or stamp of the ASME, ASME-API, or ICC codes; be equipped with a safety-relief device, pressure regulator and a flow valve (spew valve); and show no evidence that such tank has been altered as to render it noncompliant. No container shall be charged with fuel unless it bears the proper markings and is equipped with the required safety devices. 
ii.  The HUD-code manufactured home LPG container(s) shall not exceed twenty-five (25) gallons (U.S.) capacity for each tank, and there shall be not more than two (2) such tanks per home. 
iii.  Containers shall be not charged with fuel at or on the trailer but shall be charged by qualified service personnel at one (I) of the following: 
A.  A properly equipped LPG fuel charging plant. 
B.  A HUD-code manufactured home park location directly from a Texas Railroad Commission approved truck. The HUD-code manufactured home park shall provide and maintain a site, free of all combustible materials, which is located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any property line, street or roadway, homes or buildings. 
C.  No charged LPG container shall be connected to a home gas system and the system pressurized unless there is access to the interior of the home and appliances are inspected to ensure that all appliances are shut off or that pilots are functioning properly. Connections of the home to central supply lines or to re-connected tanks shall be tested for leaks by using a water and soap solution. 
D.  Gas, natural and/or LPG, piping shall terminate at the park spaces below ground surface in a box consisting of tile, concrete or metal to prevent damage when the space is not occupied. 
E.  Fees for permits and inspections are as specified in the city gas code. 
(8)  Solid waste collection. In consultation with the director of public works for the city, the park owner shall provide one or more solid waste collection facilities/stations within the park. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Cross reference- International Fuel Gas Code adopted, § 5-231; International Plumbing Code adopted, § 5-281. 
Sec. 12-8. - Operation and maintenance rules for parks. 
(1)  The HUD-code manufactured home park operator shall keep and maintain a register of all tenants of the park and retain such registration information for six (6) months after the tenant has departed. This registration information shall be made available to the city upon request, and consist of the following: 
(a)  Make, model, serial number and state of registration of the home; and 
(b)  Forwarding address of tenant upon departure. 
(2)  HUD-code manufactured home park fire protection equipment and park conditions shall be inspected periodically under the direction of the HUD-code manufactured home park operator and the city fire marshal. Roadways adjacent to all trailers shall be kept clear for firefighting apparatus. 
(3)  A copy of the most current plat of the park and its facilities shall be kept and maintained in the office of the park and shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Sec. 12-9. - Noncomplying and nonconforming uses. 
    Any HUD-code manufactured home park existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this article was derived that does not conform to the regulations prescribed in this article shall be deemed a noncomplying and nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Secs. 12-10-12-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLE CAMPS 

Sec. 12-21. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of interpreting this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
    Camper means a vehicle, either self-propelled or towed, which is not classified as a travel trailer or HUD-code manufactured home that is so constructed to permit occupancy for sleeping purposes. 
    Recreational vehicle or RV means camper, travel trailer, and all other vehicles, either self-propelled or towed, designed for temporary dwelling or sleeping purposes, but does not include a mobile home or HUD-code manufactured home. 
    Recreational vehicle camp or camp means any plot of ground upon which two (2) or more, or a combination of two (2) or more, travel trailers, recreational vehicles or campers occupied for temporary dwelling or sleeping purposes are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
    Recreational vehicle, camper, or travel trailer space or space means a plot of ground within a recreational vehicle camp designed for the accommodation of one (1) camper, travel trailer or recreational vehicle and one (1) towing vehicle. 
    Travel trailer means any vehicle or similar portable structure which is not more than eight (8) feet wide or longer than forty (40) feet and can be legally moved on state highways without a special permit, and having no foundation other than wheels, jacks, or skirting, and so designed or constructed as to permit occupancy for temporary dwelling or sleeping purposes. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Sec. 12-22. - Compliance with article. 
    Any person seeking approval to construct or operate a recreational vehicle camp, or to park or store recreational vehicles, travel trailers or campers shall be required to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Sec. 12-23. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the orderly, safe and healthful development and operation of recreational vehicle camps within the corporate limits of the city to promote health, safety and general welfare of the temporary occupants of such camps and to provide safeguards to the interest of the city, camp owners and/or operators, the individual recreational vehicle owner, and the community at large. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Sec. 12-24. - Application of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to, govern and regulate the location, street layout, site, electrical service, plumbing and sanitary service, drainage, sanitation, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) as a fuel or source of energy, fire protection, fees, registration of guests in recreational vehicle camp parking, and recreational vehicle camps. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Sec. 12-25. - Use of recreational vehicles, etc. 
    Recreational vehicles and any vehicle as defined by the Transportation Code of the State of Texas shall not be permitted to be located on any real property to be used as a permanent or temporary dwelling, except as provided for in Chapter 28 of this Code. Recreational vehicles may be used as temporary offices at construction sites for a period commensurate with the need upon the contractor receiving written authorization from the building official of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Sec. 12-26. - Plat fees. 
(1)  The relevant portions of the city subdivision ordinance are applicable to any lot, tract, or parcel of land situated within the corporate or extraterritorial limits of the city that is divided into two (2) or more lots or sites for the immediate or future purpose of development as a recreational vehicle camp. The standards of the subdivision ordinance are applicable to the recreational vehicle camp and support facilities except as established in this article. 
(2)  A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) is assessed and shall be collected by the planning and zoning administrator, or his/her designated representative, when a preliminary plat is submitted to the city for approval. The plat will not be reviewed or considered in any respect until such fee has been collected. No additional fee is due for final plat review and approval. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the planning and zoning director from consolidating the preliminary and final plat review process. 
(3)  Nothing herein shall be construed to cause or require the recording of the plat contemplated herein in the plat records of the Grayson County Clerk's Office. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Sec. 12-27. - General standards for camps. 
    The developer of a recreational vehicle camp shall place these minimum improvements in all new or enlarged camps within the city limits. 
(1)  Location of park. The camp shall have access to a public street or road by directly abutting thereon or by means of a private hard-surfaced road not less than thirty (30) feet wide. Access to recreational vehicle spaces in the park shall be from interior park roads only. Vehicle access to spaces shall not be permitted from public roads or streets. 
(2)  Construction plans and specifications for camps. Prior to the construction of any roads (interior or access), utility systems, drainage systems or support facilities, the park developer shall furnish three (3) complete sets of prints or plans and specifications for said construction to the planning and zoning administration. These documents shall be transmitted to the city in writing and will be reviewed by the planning and zoning administrator, or his representative, for conformity with this and the city standards. The plans and specifications shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements for such documents as specified in this article. 
(3)  Recreational vehicle space and parking. Each space, which refers to a plot of land in a recreational vehicle camp for the accommodation of not more than one (1) travel trailer and one (1) towing vehicle, shall contain not less than twenty-four hundred (2,400) square feet of area and shall be not less than thirty (30) feet in width. The boundary lines of such spaces shall be plainly and permanently marked. 
a.  Recreational vehicles shall be so situated on their specific unit that there shall be at least a fifteen-foot side clearance between recreational vehicles. This distance shall be measured from the maximum projection of an extended porch, platform or unit extension, whether integral with or as a supplement to the recreational vehicle. With recreational vehicles parked with rears end-to-end, the end-to-end clearance between recreational vehicles shall be not less than ten (10) feet. An unobstructed passageway shall be provided and maintained around recreational vehicles of not less than five (5) feet. 
b.  Distances from permanent camp buildings to recreational vehicles shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
(4)  Camp roads or drives. The recreational vehicle camp shall be provided with entrance and internal road in a configuration that will insure safe vehicle access to, egress from, and circulation within the camp, including fire-protection equipment. The roads or drives shall be not less than twenty-four (24) feet of unobstructed width and consist of not less than the following: 
a.  Suitable sub-grade meeting or exceeding city standards. 
b.  Compacted flexible base meeting or exceeding city standards. 
c.  All-weather and dust-free surface consisting of not less than a double bituminous surface treatment with hard cover aggregates for each course. 
d.  The use of low and flat-type curb and gutter, constructed of concrete, is encouraged for the owner's protection of his roads and drives. The use of such curbs and gutters is mandatory when trailer spaces and roads cannot be otherwise adequately drained, or when necessary to control erosion in roadside ditches. 
e.  Appropriate camp road names and space numbers and signage. 
(5)  Electrical service and equipment. The provisions of the city electrical code are applicable to the electric conductors and equipment installed within or on recreational vehicles. Conductors that connect the recreational vehicle to a supply of electricity shall be underground. 
(6)  Plumbing installation standards for camps. The requirements set forth in the current edition of the plumbing code shall apply specifically to all new recreational vehicle camps, and to additions to existing camps, and are to provide minimum standards for sanitation and plumbing installation within the camps for the accommodations, use and parking of recreational vehicles. Wherever the requirements of the provisions of the plumbing code and this paragraph differ, the requirements of this paragraph shall apply as follows: 
a.  The minimum size sewer is four (4) inches and not more than twelve (12) spaces will be permitted on any one (1) four-inch sewer. More than twelve (12) trailer spaces shall be served by a six-inch sewer. 
b.  If a sanitary sewage treatment system is to be installed, the plans for such system shall be approved by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission prior to submitting the final plat for approval of the planning and zoning commission. 
c.  In accordance with the provisions of the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission, all water and sanitary sewer mains shall be constructed so as to meet the minimum space and separation requirements and constructed of American Water Works Association approved materials. 
d.  The water meter box and an easement to accommodate the water box shall be situated and constructed on the premises of the recreational vehicle camp. 
(7)  Gas systems, natural and/or liquefied petroleum gases. A recreational vehicle camp shall not include a natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) distribution system to the spaces within the camp. 
a.  The camp may sell liquefied petroleum gas to its patrons through a supply LPG tank located such that it is not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any property line, street, roadway, recreational vehicle or building. The tank shall be protected by steel railings of not less than two and one-half-inch pipe firmly anchored in concrete. The tank area shall be kept clear of all grass, trash and any combustible material of any type. The supply tank shall not be charged with fuel by anyone except qualified personnel licensed by the Texas Railroad Commission from a Texas Railroad Commission approved LPG transport or service truck. 
b.  The camp owner/operator shall be responsible for inspecting recreational vehicles having a self-contained LPG system and/or tank entering the camp for compliance with minimum safety standards. Each LPG container shall bear the mark or stamp of the ASME, ASME-API, or ICC Codes; be equipped with a safety relief device, pressure regulator and a flow valve (spew valve); and show no evidence that such tank has been altered as to render it noncompliant with the above. No container shall be charged with fuel unless it bears the proper markings and is equipped with the required safety devices. The recreational vehicle LPG container(s) shall not exceed twenty-five (25) gallons (U.S.) capacity for each tank, and there shall be not more than two (2) such tanks per recreational vehicle. Containers shall be not charged with fuel at the recreational vehicle space, but shall be charged by qualified service personnel at location of the camp's supply tank only. 
(8)  Solid waste collection. In consultation with the director of public works for the city, the camp owner shall provide one or more solid waste collection facilities/stations within the park. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Cross reference- Electrical code, §§ 5-101-5-103; International Fuel Gas Code, § 5-231; and International Plumbing Code, § 5-281. 
Sec. 12-28. - Operation and maintenance rules for parks. 
(1)  The camp operator shall register all guests in the camp and retain such registration information for six (6) months after the guest has departed. This registration information shall be made available to the city upon request, and consist of the following: 
(a)  Name of guest and number of persons; 
(b)  Driver's license state and number; 
(c)  License state and number of recreational vehicle; 
(d)  License state and number of towing vehicle; 
(e)  Permanent or last address of guest; and 
(f)  Forwarding address of guest upon departure. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any guest of the recreational vehicle camp to remain and unlawful for the camp operator to permit a guest to remain in the camp for a period in excess of ninety (90) consecutive days or for a period greater than one hundred (100) days in any consecutive three hundred sixty-five-day period. 
(3)  The camp operator shall cause an inspection to be made of each recreational vehicle upon entry to determine hazardous conditions requiring correction. Corrective measures shall be taken promptly and the work inspected by the camp operator prior to admitting the recreational vehicle into the camp. A record of inspections, the corrective work ordered and the date work is completed shall be kept by the operator until the recreational vehicle has departed the park. Such records shall be available to the building inspector or his representative at any reasonable hour. 
(4)  Fire hydrants shall be placed at each entrance into the camp at the expense of the recreational vehicle camp owner. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Sec. 12-29. - Noncomplying and nonconforming uses. 
    Any existing recreational vehicle camp at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this article was derived that does not conform to the regulations prescribed in this article shall be deemed a noncomplying and nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 4103-B, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-02) 
Chapter 13 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 9 of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed the former ch. 13, §§ 13-26-13-36, 13-51, 13-52, 13-66-13-85, 13-96-13-102, 13-121-13-128, and enacted a new ch. 13 as set out herein. The former ch. 13 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; specific code enforcement authority, § 2-126; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; animals, Ch. 4; maintenance of premises where animals are kept, § 4-1; animals prohibited from running at large, § 4-9; barking dogs declared nuisance, § 4-33; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; dangerous and unsafe buildings, § 5-311 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; food and food establishments, Ch. 9; housing, Ch. 10; posting advertising matter on property without consent of owner prohibited, § 11-1; HUD-code manufactured home and recreational vehicle facilities, Ch. 12; public property, Ch. 18; signs, Ch. 19; solid waste, Ch. 20; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; traffic, Ch. 25; utilities, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference- Sanitation and health protection, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-1; nuisances, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-1, §§ 2-4; abatement of nuisances, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4436. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 13-1-13-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER, TRASH, WEEDS AND OTHER NUISANCES 

Sec. 13-10. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abate means to eliminate by removal, repair, rehabilitation, or demolition. 
    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
    Brush means scrub vegetation or dense undergrowth. 
    Carrion means the dead and putrefying flesh of any animal, fowl or fish. 
    Dump means to dispose, discharge, place, deposit, throw, leave, sweep, scatter, unload, toss or leak junk, garbage, refuse or trash and debris on or into land or water. 
    Filth means any matter in a putrescent state. 
    Garbage means any kitchen refuse, food stuffs or related material, including all decayable waste. 
    Impure or unwholesome matter means any putrescible or non-putrescible condition, object or matter which tends, may, or could cause injury, death or disease to human beings. 
    Litter means all worn out, worthless or discarded material, including, but not limited to, any of the following materials, or parts of said materials or any combination thereof: new or used iron, steel or nonferrous metallic scrap, brass or waste materials; used and/or inoperative household appliances, household electrical or plumbing fixtures, floor coverings and/or window coverings not currently in use; used lumber, brick, cement block, wire, tubing and pipe, tubs, drums, barrels, and/or roofing material not currently in use; air conditioning and heating equipment not currently in use; used vehicle components and parts not currently in use; used furniture other than that designed for outdoor use; used and/or inoperative residential lawn care equipment and machinery not currently in use; used pallets, windows or doors not currently in use; new or used sheet metal, structural steel and/or chain not currently in use; used and/or inoperable vending machines, radios and/or televisions not currently in use; and any other type of used and/or inoperable machinery or equipment not currently in use, used tires and other miscellaneous wastes or rejected matter. 
    Matter means that of which any physical object is composed. 
    Nuisance means any condition, object, material or matter that is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health; or that renders the ground, the water, the air or food a hazard or likely to cause injury to human life or health; or that is offensive to the senses; or that threatens to become detrimental to the public health; and shall include, but not be limited to: any abandoned wells, shafts or basements, abandoned refrigerators, stagnant or unwholesome water, sinks, privies, filth, carrion, rubbish, junk, trash, debris or refuse, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, any objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter of whatever nature. 
    Objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter means any matter, condition or object which is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary to a person of ordinary sensitivities. 
    Owner means any person or entity shown as the property owner on the latest property tax assessment rolls or any person having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest in the property, including any agent who is responsible for managing, leasing or operating the property. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, business, corporation or other entity. 
    Property means all privately owned, occupied or unoccupied property, including vacant land, and/or a building designed or used for residential, commercial, business, industrial or religious purposes. The term shall also include a yard, ground, wall, driveway, fence, porch, steps or other structure appurtenant to the property. 
    Putrescible means the decomposition of organic matter with the formation of foul-smelling, incompletely oxidized products. 
    Refuse means heterogeneous accumulation of worn out, used, broken, rejected or worthless materials, including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, paper or litter, and other decayable or nondecayable matter. 
    Structure means that which is built or constructed. 
    Vegetative growth means any grass, weeds, shrubs, trees, brush, bushes or vines. 
    Weeds means any vegetation that because of its height is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary, excluding: shrubs, bushes and trees, cultivated flowers, and cultivated crops. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-11. - Prohibited accumulations, dumping, stagnant water, trash, and other unsightly or unsanitary matter declared a nuisance. 
(a)  It is unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city, to permit or allow any stagnant or unwholesome water, sinks, refuse, filth, carrion, weeds, rubbish, brush and refuse, trash, debris, junk, garbage, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, or objectionable or unsightly matter of whatever nature to accumulate or remain upon any such real property or within any public easement on or across such real property or upon any adjacent public street or alley right-of-way between the property line of such real property and where the paved surface of the street or alley begins. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person to dump, or permit to be dumped, upon or along any drain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, street, park, right-of-way or vacant lot into or adjacent to water, or any other public or private property within the corporate limits of the city, any unwholesome water, refuse, rubbish, trash, debris, filth, carrion, weeds, brush, junk, garbage, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind or other objectionable or unsightly matter of whatever kind. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of all such persons to keep the sidewalks in front of their property free and clear of all such matter, and to fill up, drain or regrade any lots, ground or yards which shall have stagnant water thereon, and to cleanse and disinfect any house, building, establishment, lot, yard or ground from refuse, rubbish, trash, filth, carrion, or objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of any kind, or other impure or unwholesome matter of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-12. - Grass or weeds in excess of twelve inches in height declared a nuisance and prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city to fail to remove or mow any weeds or grass growing in excess of twelve (12) inches in height on said real property, including easements and rights-of-way. 
Exception: The cutting, pruning or elimination of trees, shrubs and vegetation located on property in a naturally vegetative state as determined by the chief building official. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, claiming, occupying, or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city to fail to remove or mow wildflowers after such time as seeds have matured following the final blooming of the majority of the plants, or native grasses after such time as the majority of a species have gone dormant. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city to fail to remove any weeds or grass growing in excess of twelve (12) inches in height on said real property, within one hundred (100) feet of any structure on parcels of land of five (5) or more acres. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any area greater than one hundred (100) feet from any open street or thoroughfare, as measured from the right-of-way line of such street or thoroughfare, and greater than one hundred (100) feet from any adjacent property under different ownership and on which any building is located or on which any improvement exists, as measured from the property line for lots, tracts, or parcels of land of five (5) or more acres. 
(e)  Hay grown for the purpose of cultivation which is a part of a predominantly homogeneous plant population must be mowed if within twenty (20) feet of an adjacent property under different ownership on which any building or improvement exists. It will be an affirmative defense to this subsection if no citizen complaint has been filed with the city. 
(f)  Property included as part of a conservation easement shall be exempt from these provisions. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-13. - Vegetation and dirt in alley, street or sidewalk. 
(a)  An owner, occupant, or person in control of any private premises abutting an alley, street, or sidewalk within the city commits an offense if he allows any vegetation, including, but not limited to, trees, shrubbery, bushes, and vines, to grow on the premises so as to project across the property line. 
Exception: 
(1)  Any vegetation that projects over or into an alley or street and is at a height of at least fifteen (15) feet above the alley or street pavement; or 
(2)  Any vegetation that projects over a public sidewalk and is at a height of at least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk pavement and does not obstruct the visibility of a traffic control sign, signal or device or interfere with garbage or trash collection adjacent to the sidewalk. 
(b)  An owner, occupant, or person in control of any private premises abutting an alley, street, or sidewalk within the city commits an offense if he allows any vegetation to grow over or upon the surface of an improved right-of-way. 
(c)  An owner, occupant, or person in control of any private premises abutting a public sidewalk within the city commits an offense if he allows dirt, garbage, rubbish or other matter that impedes the use of the public sidewalk to remain on the sidewalk. 
(d)  Vegetation growing in violation of this section is a nuisance and may be abated by the city in accordance with section 13-15 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-14. - Inspections. 
    For the purpose of ascertaining whether violations of this Code exist, the chief building official, or his designee, is authorized to inspect: 
(a)  The exterior of a structure and premises which contain no structure; and 
(b)  If entry onto the property is refused, the chief building official shall have every recourse provided by law, including, but not limited to, an administrative search warrant or an injunction to secure entry. If the owner, occupant, or person in control cannot be identified or located, the chief building official may enter the property to the extent allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-15. - Notice of violation and to abate; failure to comply; correction by city. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief building official or his duly appointed representative to give a minimum of seven (7) days' official notice to such person violating the terms of this article, subject to the provisions herein stated. The notice shall be in writing and may be served on such person violating the terms of this section by: 
(1)  Delivering it to him in person; 
(2)  By letter or written notice addressed to such person at the person's address as recorded in the appraisal district in which the property is located and delivered by United States regular mail; or 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained: 
a.  By publication once within seven (7) consecutive days in the city's official newspaper; 
b.  By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violations relates; or 
c.  By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings. 
(b)  If such person violating the terms of this article fails or refuses to comply with the demand for compliance contained in the aforementioned notice, within seven (7) days after the date of notification as provided herein, the city may go upon such property and do or cause to be done in order to obtain compliance with this article. All costs, charges and expenses (hereinafter "charges") incurred in doing or in having such work done shall be a charge to, and a personal liability of, such person. 
(c)  If the city mails a notice to the property owner in accordance with subsection (b) of this section and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as refused or unclaimed, the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(d)  The city, in the notice provided herein, may inform the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested or regular mail and a posting on the property that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of such notice, the city, without further notice, may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If the violation, covered by a notice under this subsection, occurs within said one-year period, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the city, without notice, may take any action permitted by subsection (a) of this section, and assess its expenses as provided by section 13-16. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-16. - Additional authority to abate nuisance. 
(a)  The city may abate, without notice, weeds that: 
(1)  Have grown higher than forty-eight (48) inches; and 
(2)  Are an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person in the opinion of the chief building official or the fire marshal. 
(b)  Not later than the tenth day after the date the city abates weeds under this section, the city shall give notice to the property owner. The notice shall contain: 
(1)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property; 
(2)  A description of the violations of the ordinance that occurred on the property; 
(3)  A statement that the city abated the weeds; 
(4)  An explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing about the city's abatement of the weeds; and 
(5)  A statement of the charges incurred by the city in doing or in having such work done as necessary to bring the real property into compliance with this article. 
(c)  If the property owner files a written request with the chief building official no later than thirty (30) days after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the city shall conduct an administrative hearing before the building and building appeals board on the abatement of weeds under this section. An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be conducted not later than the twentieth day after the date a request for a hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written information relating to the city's abatement of the weeds. The building appeals board shall determine what amount, if any, is owed by the property for the abatement of the violation. If the property owner fails to submit a written request for an administrative hearing within thirty (30) days of the abatement, the property owner forfeits any right to an administrative hearing and will be responsible for the cost of the abatement plus any administrative fees and interest as allowed by this chapter. 
(d)  The city may assess expenses and create liens under this section as it assesses expenses and creates liens under section 13-17. A lien created under this section is subject to the same conditions as a lien created under section 13-17. The authority granted the city by this section is in addition to the authority granted by section 13-17. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-17. - Expenses incurred by city; lien. 
(a)  If a notice describing the violation and the city's rights to impose a lien on the property without further notice as provided for herein is delivered to the owner of such real property, and he fails or refuses to comply with such demand for compliance within the seven-day time period established herein, the aforementioned charges shall be, in addition to a charge to and personal liability of said owner, a privileged lien upon and against such real property, including all fixtures and improvements thereon. 
(b)  To perfect the lien against the real property, the city secretary shall file a written statement of such charges with the county clerk of the county for filing in the county land and deed records. Said statement shall be deemed sufficient if it contains the following minimum information; however, it may also contain such other information deemed appropriate by the mayor, the chief building official or their respective designee, or his duly appointed representative: 
(1)  The name of the owner of the real property, if known; 
(2)  A legal description of the real property; 
(3)  A statement of the charges incurred by the city in doing or in having such work done as necessary to bring the real property into compliance with this article. 
(c)  All such charges shall bear interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the date of payment by the city. The lien obtained is security for the expenditures made and is inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The city may bring suit to collect the charges, institute foreclosure proceedings, or both. The written statement of such charges provided for herein, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the city's claim for charges or right to foreclose the lien. The owner of the real property or any other person claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of the real property shall be jointly and severally liable for such charges. 
(d)  This remedy is in addition to any penal provision provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-18. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the chief building official and his duly appointed representative, and it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or hinder the chief building official and his duly appointed representative in the exercise of their duties under this article. Notwithstanding any provisions contained herein to the contrary, the chief building official and his duly appointed representative are hereby granted the authority to issue immediate citations to persons violating any provision of this article in their presence. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-19. - Penalty upon failure to comply. 
(a)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of this article, who continues to violate or fail to comply with same after seven (7) days after notice is given and received as set forth in section 13-15, shall also be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), such offenses being violations of the health and safety ordinance of the city. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur. This section shall be in addition to and cumulative of the provisions for abatement of the nuisance by the city and charging the cost of same against the owner of the property. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any violation of any provision of this article which constitutes an immediate danger or threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the city for such purpose. 
(c)  In addition to any other remedies or penalties contained herein, the city may enforce the provisions of this article pursuant to the applicable provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 214, which chapter provides for the enforcement of municipal ordinances. 
(d)  Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this article. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Secs. 13-20-13-24. - Reserved. 
Sec. 13-25. - Swimming pool nuisances. 
    The following shall be considered public nuisances: 
(a)  A swimming pool that does not contain a fence surrounding it that is at least four (4) feet in height, has a self-closing and self-latching gate and has no openings in the fence that would allow the passage of a four-inch diameter sphere. 
Exception: If the pool contains a cover over the entire swimming pool that cannot be removed by child. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person allows or permits water within a swimming pool to become stagnant to the point that the bottom of the pool is not clearly visible or the water has an offensive odor. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-26. - Disposal of litter or refuse. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person disposes or allows or permits the disposal of litter or refuse at a place that is not an approved solid waste site, including a place on or within three hundred (300) feet of a public highway, on a right-of-way, on other public or private property. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person receives litter or refuse for disposal at a place that is not an approved solid waste site, regardless of whether the litter or the land on which the litter is disposed is owned or controlled by the person. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if the person transports litter or refuse to a place that is not an approved solid waste site for disposal at the site. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if the person throws or deposits litter or refuse in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city, except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles each of which shall have serviceable covers in good repair. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if the person in control of any private property fails to maintain the premises free of litter and refuse. Provided, however, that this paragraph shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection nor prohibit the appropriation of yard trimmings, leaves or similar materials from the property to a beneficial use, such as, but not limited to, composting. 
(f)  A person commits an offense if the person sweeps into or deposits in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter or refuse from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter and refuse. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-27. - Litter or refuse on property. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person keeps, stores or accumulates litter or refuse on a premises unless the refuse is entirely contained in a closed receptacle. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person keeps, stores or accumulates litter or refuse on a premises for ten (10) days or more. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-28. - Outside storage. 
    Open storage is prohibited unless specifically allowed within the zoning district in which the property is located. 
Exception: Firewood, BBQ grills, recreational items, working lawn equipment, landscaping and planters. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-29. - Buildings and structures. 
    A person commits an offense if the person maintains a building or structure in a manner that is structurally unsafe or constitutes a hazard to safety, health, or public welfare because of inadequate maintenance, unsanitary conditions, dilapidation, obsolescence, disaster, damage or abandonment or because it constitutes a fire hazard. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Secs. 13-30-13-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 

Sec. 13-40. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them as contained in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, § 683.001: 
Abandoned vehicle 
Aircraft garagekeeper 
Motor vehicle 
Special interest vehicle 
Motor vehicle demolisher 
Outboard motor 
Storage facility 
Watercraft 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-41. - Enforcement of division. 
    A person authorized by the city to administer the procedures authorized by this division may enter private property for the purposes specified in the procedures to examine a vehicle or vehicle part, obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part that constitutes a nuisance. The municipal court of the city may issue orders necessary to enforce the procedures. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-42. - Penalty for violation of division. 
    A person who violates a provision of section 13-48 is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-43. - Authority to take possession. 
    A member of the police department may take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft or outboard motor found on public or private property. The police department may use its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or contract for other personnel, equipment, and facilities to remove, preserve, store, send notice regarding, and dispose of an abandoned motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, or outboard motor taken into custody by the police department under this section. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-44. - Notification of owner and lienholders. 
(a)  Notice. The police department shall send notice of abandonment as required by V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 683.011. 
(b)  Consequences and effect of failure to reclaim. The consequences and effect of failure to reclaim an abandoned motor vehicle are set forth in a valid notice given in this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-45. - Storage fees. 
    If the police department takes into custody an abandoned motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft or outboard motor, the city is entitled to reasonable storage fees as allowed under V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 683.013. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-46. - Use by police department. 
    If the police department takes an abandoned motor vehicle into custody and the motor vehicle is not claimed, the police department may use or transfer the vehicle as allowed under V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 683.016. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-47. - Auction or use of abandoned items; waiver of rights. 
    If an abandoned motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, or outboard motor is not claimed under section 13-44, the police department may auction the vehicle per V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 683.014. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-48. - Auction proceeds. 
    A law enforcement agency is entitled to reimbursement from the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, or outboard motor as allowed by V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 683.015. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-49. - Garagekeeper's duty: Abandoned motor vehicles. 
    The duties of a garagekeeper shall be as stated in V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 683.031. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-50. - Garagekeeper's fees and charges. 
    Garagekeepers shall be entitled to collect the fees contained in V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 683.032. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-51. - Unauthorized storage fee; offense. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person charges a storage fee for a period for which the fee is not authorized by section 13-50. 
(b)  An offense under this subsection is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-52. - Disposal of vehicle abandoned in storage facility, other property. 
(a)  The police department may dispose of any vehicle abandoned in a storage facility as required by V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 683.034. 
(b)  Any personal property other than vehicles covered under section 13-66 et seq. abandoned or left unclaimed upon the streets, alleys or other public ways of the city for a period exceeding ten (10) days shall be taken up by any police officer of the city and stored and held in such place as may be designated by city manager or his or her designee. 
(c)  An accurate record of any property taken up by the police department under this section shall be kept in the office of the city manager or his or her designee, with the date of such taking. 
(d)  Any person who shall satisfactorily establish that he is the owner hereof, may reclaim any personal property taken up under this section from the city manager or his or her designee at any time after the taking thereof and before the sale thereof under the provisions of section 13-52, upon payment to the city secretary of the necessary expense of taking and storing the same, to be certified by the city manager or his or her designee. 
(e)  Whenever, in the judgment of the city manager or his or her designee, sufficient articles have been accumulated and held under section 13-51 for a period of sixty (60) days or more to justify the expense of a sale thereof, the same may be sold by the city manager or his or her designee, at public auction. Each item of such property which has been held by the police department for more than sixty (60) days shall be sold to the highest bidder for cash, and the chief of police shall convey to the purchaser, by bill of sale, title to such property. Accurate records of each sale shall be kept showing the price for which each article was sold. 
(f)  At any time within six (6) months after the sale of any property pursuant to this section, the owner of such property, upon written application, shall be entitled to receive the proceeds of the sale from the city, less the necessary expense of taking, storing and selling the property. Application for repayment by the owner of any such property shall be filed with the city secretary and passed upon by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-53. - Unattended vehicles. 
(a)  Obstructing traffic. It shall be unlawful to leave a vehicle unattended within a public right-of-way or on public property that obstructs traffic. 
(b)  Removal. Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this division, any unattended vehicle that obstructs traffic within a public right-of-way or on public property may be immediately removed by the police department. 
(c)  Authority of city to remove. The city shall have the authority to immediately remove any vehicle which is on public property and causes an immediate threat to human safety, health, welfare, or any governmental function, or creates a public disturbance. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Secs. 13-54-13-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES 

Sec. 13-70. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them as contained in V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, §§ 683.001, 683.071, and 683.077: 
Aircraft 
Inoperable motor vehicle 
Inoperable vehicle 
Junked vehicle 
Motor vehicle 
Motor vehicle collector 
Motor vehicle demolisher 
Special interest vehicle 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-71. - Junked vehicles-Public nuisance. 
(a)  Declared public nuisance. A junked vehicle that is located in a place where it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city and is a public nuisance. 
(b)  Maintenance. A person commits an offense if that person maintains a public nuisance as determined under this article. 
(c)  Any junked vehicle shall be screened from any right-of-way or adjacent property by means of a solid opaque fence or shall be enclosed within a building. In no case shall any cover placed over a junked vehicle constitute adequate screening. 
(d)  Vehicle repair businesses may have up to five (5) junked vehicles legally parked on the business property which are not screened from public view regardless of whether the vehicles are currently registered and inspected, provided that the vehicles are not wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, dilapidated, have broken window glass, or have one (1) or more flat tires. 
(e)  Vehicle repair businesses may not maintain junked vehicles on their property in excess of one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days. The vehicles on the property must be on the property for the purpose of repair. Additionally, a current, valid work order must be maintained for every vehicle. A current, valid work order is a work order that is one hundred twenty (120) days old or less. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is: 
(1)  Completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  A vehicle or vehicle part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard; or 
(3)  An unlicensed, operable or inoperable antique or special interest vehicle stored by a collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-72. - Same-Procedures for abating. 
(a)  Generally. The procedures for abatement and removal of a junked vehicle or a part of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance from private property, public property or a public right-of-way shall be in accordance with the provisions below. If a conflict exists between the provisions below and V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 683.074, the provisions of V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 683.074 shall be followed. 
(b)  Public or private property; notice and service. 
(1)  For a nuisance on public or private property, a notice of not less than ten (10) days, stating: 
a.  The nature of the nuisance; 
b.  That the nuisance must be removed and abated within ten (10) days; and 
c.  That a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day period. 
(2)  The notice must be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, or delivered by the United States Postal Service with signature confirmation service to: 
a.  The last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle or part of a junked vehicle; 
b.  Each lienholder of record of the junked motor vehicle or part of a junked vehicle; and 
c.  The owner or occupant of: 
1.  The property on which the junked motor vehicle or part of a junked motor vehicle is located; or 
2.  If the junked motor vehicle or part of a junked motor vehicle is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way. 
(3)  If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, personally delivered. 
(4)  If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States Postal Service, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than eleven (11) days after the date of the return. 
(c)  Reconstruction or making operable of junked vehicles. In addition, a vehicle that is declared a junked vehicle is prohibited from being reconstructed or made operable after it has been removed by the city. 
(d)  Hearing; order for removal. A public hearing shall be conducted before the removal of the junked vehicle. The public hearing shall be held before the municipal court. If a hearing is requested by the owner or occupant of the public or private premises or by the owner or occupancy of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the junked vehicle is located, it shall be held within ten (10) days after service of notice to abate the nuisance. At the hearing, it is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, that the vehicle is inoperable. If the court determines the vehicle is in violation of this article, the court shall issue orders to abate the nuisance. An order requiring the removal of the junked vehicle shall include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle if the information is available at the site. 
(e)  Notice to state department of highways and public transportation. Notice shall be given to the state department of highways and public transportation not later than the fifth day after the date of removal. The notice shall identify the vehicle or vehicle part. 
(f)  Notice to state department of parks and wildlife. Notice shall be given to the state department of parks and wildlife not later than the fifth day after the date of removal. The notice shall identify the watercraft. 
(g)  Enforcing persons. All actions taken in regard to junked vehicles will be taken by regularly salaried, full-time employees of the city, except that the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part from property may be by any duly authorized person. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-73. - Inoperable vehicles and inoperable motor vehicles. 
(a)  Declared nuisance. An inoperable vehicle or inoperable motor vehicle that is located in a place where it is visible from a public place, adjoining private property or a public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city and is a public nuisance. 
(b)  Maintenance of nuisance. A person commits an offense if that person maintains a public nuisance as determined under this article. 
(c)  Any inoperable vehicle or inoperable motor vehicle shall be screened from any right-of-way or adjacent property by means of a solid opaque fence or shall be enclosed within a building. In no case shall any cover placed over an inoperable vehicle or inoperable motor vehicle constitute adequate screening. 
(d)  Vehicle repair businesses may have up to five (5) inoperable vehicles or inoperable motor vehicles legally parked on the business property which are not screened from public view regardless of whether the vehicles are currently registered and inspected, provided that the vehicles are not wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, dilapidated, have broken window glass, or have one (1) or more flat tires. 
(e)  Vehicle repair businesses may not maintain inoperable vehicles or inoperable motor vehicles on their property in excess of one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days. The vehicles on the property must be on the property for the purpose of repair. Additionally, a current, valid work order must be maintained for every vehicle. A current, valid work order is a work order that is one hundred twenty (120) days old or less. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is: 
(1)  Completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  A vehicle or vehicle part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard; or 
(3)  An unlicensed, operable or inoperable antique or special interest vehicle stored by a collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means. 
(g)  Abatement and removal. An inoperable vehicle or inoperable motor vehicle that is not abated or removed within a forty-five-day time period beginning from the date of the first notice of the public nuisance will be declared a junked vehicle. The procedures for abatement and removal of the junked vehicle shall be as stated in section 13-72. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-74. - Enforcement of division. 
    A person authorized by the city to administer the procedures authorized by this division may enter private property for the purposes specified in the procedures to examine a vehicle or vehicle part, obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part that constitutes a nuisance. The municipal court of the city may issue orders necessary to enforce the procedures. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-75. - Penalty for violation of division. 
    A person who violates a provision of section 13-71 is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Secs. 13-76-13-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NOISE 

Sec. 13-96. - Loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise prohibited. 
    The creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise within the corporate limits of the city is prohibited. Any noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-97. - Mufflers and engines. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge into the open air the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal-combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. The emitting of loud or excessive noise through a muffler by deliberate backfire, or the use of mufflers other than type manufactured for said type internal combustion engine to limit loud noise shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-98. - Excessive noise near schools, churches, hospitals and other public places. 
    The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, hospital or any other public place, which unreasonably interferes with the working or sessions thereof, is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-99. - Amplified sound. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated, any mechanical or electrical device, machine, apparatus or instrument to intensify, amplify or reproduce the human voice or any other sound, on any public street within the corporate limits of the city, except as otherwise allowed in section 13-100. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated, any such mechanical or electrical device, machine, apparatus or instrument, whether involving amplification or not, that emits or causes any loud, excessive or unusual noise, in any building or on any premises in the city, whereby the sound therefrom is cast directly upon the public streets or places, or where such device is maintained and operated for advertising purposes or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the passing public, or which is so placed or operated that the sounds coming therefrom can be heard to the annoyance or inconvenience of travelers upon any street or public place, or of persons in neighboring premises, except as otherwise allowed in section 13-100. 
(c)  Measurement of noise shall be made with a sound level meter using the "A" weighting network as specified by the American National Standards Institute. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-100. - Permit to use amplified sound. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to establish a permit for the use of amplified sound and to collect an appropriate fee for said permit, as may be authorized by the city council from time to time. No permit may be established or issued for the hours between 11:30 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. Said permit shall authorize the use of sound for the hours and sound pressure levels authorized in this section. 
(1)  Outdoors. A person commits an offense by operating sound equipment, producing sound or allowing the same in an outdoor venue in excess of the following average noise levels at the property line: 
Weighted 
Measure 9:00 a.m. 
to 
7:00 p.m. 7:00 p.m. 
to 
11:30 p.m. A 90 db 80 db  
(2)  Indoors. A person commits an offense by operating sound equipment, producing sound or allowing the same in an indoor venue in such a manner that the sound may be heard in an adjacent building at such a level that a reasonable and prudent person would consider a nuisance, or in excess of the following average noise levels at the property line: 
Weighted 
Measure 9:00 a.m. 
to 
7:00 p.m. 7:00 p.m. 
to 
11:30 p.m. A 85 db 75 db  
(3)  Outdoor music festival. A person commits an offense by operating sound equipment, producing sound or allowing the same in conjunction with an authorized outdoor music festival in excess of the following average noise levels at the mix position: 
Weighted 
Measure 9:00 a.m. 
to 
7:00 p.m. 7:00 p.m. 
to 
11:30 p.m. A 100 db 95 db  
(b)  For the purposes of this section, an outdoor music festival is considered authorized when officially sponsored by the City of Denison, Texas. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, an average noise level is measured by gathering three (3) separate sound pressure level measurement readings within a five-minute time period, and taking the average of the three (3) readings; or, by utilizing a sound pressure level measuring instrument with an "equivalent continuous sound level" (L sub eq) measurement metric. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, the property line is considered that closest boundary line be it a fence, wall, barricade, or other natural phenomenon that separates the source of noise from the general public, or the pavement edge of the public right-of-way, whichever is closer. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-101. - Exemptions. 
    The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level regulations herein specified. 
(a)  Noises not directly under control of the property user. 
(b)  Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. (daytime hours). 
(c)  Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves. 
(d)  Transient noise of moving sources, such as automobiles, trucks, trains and airplanes. 
(e)  Mobile frozen dairy food vendors or other persons on their behalf who comply with the provisions of section 15-3. 
(f)  The use of bells or recordings for playing chimes, tolling, time, etc., by churches and schools. 
(g)  The use of loudspeakers or amplifiers in Munson Stadium, owned by the Denison Independent School District, for activities such as regularly scheduled interscholastic games, track meets, etc., which are officially sponsored by the school district. 
(h)  The use of loudspeakers in a City of Denison park or facility when used during an official City of Denison event or for an official event of a City of Denison partner agency. 
(i)  Emergency vehicles when operated by authorized agents of the federal and state governments, or a government subdivision of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-102. - Entertainment district. 
    From time to time, the city council may designate a section of the city as an entertainment district and establish rules governing the use of amplified sound for said districts upon the creation thereof by amendment to this section. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Secs. 13-103-13-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SEPTIC AND SIMILAR WASTES 

Sec. 13-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department means the Texas Department of State Health Services or its authorized agents or employees. 
    Regulatory authority means the Grayson County Health Department. Where inspections or enforcement activities are herein provided, such activities may be conducted by the regulatory authority or the City of Denison. 
    The definition of other terms and the enforcement thereof shall be in accordance with Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-7, Subchapter N., Art. 4477-1 and V.T.C.A., Water Code Ch. 26. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-122. - Permit required; application; issuance, renewal. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate as a transporter of grease trap, sand trap and/or septic waste shall obtain a permit by making a written application on forms provided by the regulatory authority. Such application shall include the name and address of each applicant and the mailing address, telephone number and the name of present company and the capacity of tank and the Texas Department of State Health Services registration number with a copy of state registration attached thereto. Governmental agencies providing collection and/or transportation of waste using vehicles owned and operated by the agency are exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Prior to approval of an application for a permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect each transporter unit to determine compliance with state laws and rules. The regulatory authority shall issue a permit to the applicant providing an inspection reveals that the waste transporter unit complies with the requirements of state laws and this article. Temporary permits shall be issued for no more than four (4) consecutive days. 
(c)  All permits shall be renewed annually. A person may renew a permit by making written application on forms provided by the regulatory authority. Such application shall include the information described in [subsection] (b) above and shall include a renewal fee as established by the commissioners' court of Grayson County. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-123. - Denial, revocation and suspension of permits; notice; hearing. 
(a)  The regulatory authority after providing opportunity for a hearing may deny, suspend or revoke a permit for violations of any of the requirements of state law or rules promulgated pursuant thereto or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of official duties. Prior to denial, suspension or revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the permit holder or the person in charge, in writing of the reason for which the permit is subject to denial, suspension or revocation, and that the permit shall be denied, suspended or revoked at the end of ten (10) days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the permit holder. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the denial, suspension or revocation of the permit shall become final. 
(b)  The notice provided for in this section is properly served when it is delivered in person to the permit holder or the person in charge or when deposited with the U. S. Postal Service by registered mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of the permit holder. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(c)  The hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted by a hearing officer designated by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by the hearing officer. Based on the evidence presented at such hearing, the hearing officer shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the permit holder by the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-124. - Regulations. 
    Marking and identification. Owners or operators of tanks or containers used for the collection and/or over-the-road transportation of wastes regulated under this article shall prominently mark such tanks or containers to show the company name and the department-assigned registration number and a two-digit number assigned by the Grayson County health department. The identification will be removed when it is no longer authorized by the state health department or leaves the possession of the person registered. 
    Sanitation standards. All vehicles and equipment used for the collection and transportation of sludges and similar wastes shall be constructed, operated and maintained to prevent loss of liquid or solid waste materials and to prevent health nuisance and safety hazards to operating personnel and the public. Collection vehicles and equipment shall be maintained in a sanitary condition to preclude odors and insect breeding and receive an annual inspection by the Grayson County health department or at any other time deemed appropriate. 
    Mixing of incompatible wastes. Mixing of incompatible wastes within the same container is prohibited. Transporters shall not use the same container or pumping equipment to collect or transport incompatible waste without first emptying and cleaning the container and equipment of all previously handled wastes. For purposes of this subsection, incompatible waste means wastes which have different processing, storage or disposal requirements. However, transporters may mix wastes with different characteristics provided the facility to which the waste is being transported is authorized to receive such a waste mixture. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-125. - Compliance with certain regulations. 
    Any person who engages in the transportation of wastes subject to regulation under this article from Grayson County to other states or from other states to Grayson County or persons who collect or transport such waste in Grayson County but have their place of business in another state, shall comply with all the requirements for transporters contained in the state department of health solid waste management regulations and this article. If such person also engages in the activity of managing such wastes in this state by storage, processing or disposal, such person shall follow the applicable requirements for site operators of such activities. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-126. - Discharge or spills. 
    In the event of a discharge of waste during collection or transportation, the collector or transporter must take appropriate action to protect human health and the environment, e.g., notify local law enforcement and county health department, dike the discharge area, clean up any waste discharge that occurs during transportation, or take such action as may be required or approved by federal, state or local officials having jurisdiction so that the waste discharge no longer presents a public health or environmental danger. Transporters are responsible for reporting spills in accordance with requirements of the State of Texas Oil and Hazardous Substance Spill Contingency Plan. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-127. - Records. 
(a)  Waste control record. Persons who collect and/or transport waste subject to control under this article shall initiate and maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit. Such record shall be in the form of a manifest trip ticket or other similar documentation approved by the Grayson County health department. The waste control record shall include: 
(1)  Name and state department of health registration number of transporter; 
(2)  Grayson County health department assigned number; 
(3)  Name and address of the person who generates the waste and date collected; 
(4)  Type and amount of waste collected or transported; 
(5)  Name of responsible person (driver) collecting, transporting and depositing the waste; 
(6)  Date and place where the waste was deposited; 
(7)  Identification (permit application or site registration number, location, and operator) of the facility where the waste was deposited; and 
(8)  Name and signature of facility representative acknowledging receipt of the waste and the amount of waste received. 
(b)  Maintenance of records and reporting. The transporter shall provide the person generating the waste a copy of the waste control record or other document showing receipt of waste and shall provide the facility operator a copy of all control records of wastes deposited. The transporter shall retain a copy of all records showing the collection and deposition of waste. Such copies shall be retained by the generator, disposal site and transporter, for twenty-four (24) months and shall be available for inspection upon request. Nothing herein shall be construed so as to relieve any person of the mandatory reporting requirements of the state department of health. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 13-128. - Violation; penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article and any person who is a permit holder or otherwise operates a waste transporter that does not comply with the requirements of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Any person twice or more convicted for a violation of this article shall be fined in an amount not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 9, 6-17-13) 
Chapter 14 - OIL AND GAS WELLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7. 
State Law reference- Oil and gas wells, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 85.001 et seq.; abandoned wells, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 89.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of interpreting this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
    Drilling unit or drilling block means a tract of land of size and configuration as approved by the state railroad commission for exploratory drilling or as may be adjusted by such commission for developed conditions. 
    Surface watershed means all surfaces from which water flow originates in or flows across the areas of the city, areas of its extraterritorial jurisdiction, or streams with all tributaries that flow into Randell or Waterloo Lakes. 
    Underground source of water means all areas of fresh water sands from or through which water flows or percolates to wells or springs within the corporate limits or area of extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-2. - Location in or obstructing streets and alleys. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drill any well for oil or gas within any of the streets or alleys of the city or to block or encumber or close up any street or alley in any drilling or producing operations, except by special permit issued by order of the city council, and then only temporarily. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-2) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21. 
Sec. 14-3. - Liability insurance. 
    Each person holding a permit issued under this chapter, his assigns and successors, in addition to the surety bond required by section 14-4, must at all times be insured against liability in tort arising from drilling or production, or activities or operations incident thereto, conducted or carried on under or by virtue of such permit. The amount of such insurance shall be based on the location of the well and the value of surrounding property and improvements; provided, that the amount of such insurance shall in no case be less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The normal amount of such insurance shall be based upon five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each residence or comparably valued building within or where any portion of the building is within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed well. The city council may raise or lower the amount of such insurance based on the location of the well and unusual value of surrounding property and improvements. A separate insurance policy or policies may be used to cover the drilling of the well and/or the operation or production of it after completion. The policy or policies of insurance issued in compliance herewith shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney and the city council, and duplicates shall be furnished to the city attorney. Each policy shall be conditioned or endorsed to cover such agents, lessees or representatives of the permittee as may actually conduct drilling, production or incidental operations permitted by the drilling permit. The insurance required hereby shall be released by the city council when production ceases and the permittee has in all things complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-3) 
Sec. 14-4. - Bond or other security required of applicant. 
(a)  Each application for a permit to drill for gas and/or oil under this chapter shall be accompanied by a duly executed bond given by the applicant as principal and a surety company authorized to do business in the state, as surety. Such bond shall be approved by the city attorney and the city council. The bond shall run to the city for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned, conditioned that if the permit is granted, and if drilling operations are commenced thereunder, the applicant and his assigns will comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter, and all future amendments and regulations hereunder in the drilling and operation of a well; that the applicant will restore the streets and sidewalks and other public places of the city which may be disturbed in the operations to their former condition, will clear the blocks and lots of all litter, machinery, derricks, and buildings erected or used in the drilling or operation of such well whenever the well shall be completed, abandoned or the operation thereof discontinued; and that the applicant or his assigns will pay such sums as may be due by reason of production of oil, gas or other minerals to all persons owning lots, blocks or tracts of land in the drilling block. 
(b)  The bond required by this section shall be in the principal sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). One (1) year after the completion of the well, the city council may, on application reduce the principal amount of such bond to seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00). The reduction shall in nowise affect any accrued liabilities, whether known or unknown, at the time the reduction is made. 
(c)  In lieu of the surety bond required by this section, the applicant may file with the city clerk his personal undertaking or undertakings, which shall be in the same amount and shall contain the same conditions as provided with respect to surety bonds and which undertaking or undertakings shall be secured by negotiable United States Government securities or negotiable securities of the state, or of counties or municipalities in the state. Such securities shall be approved by the city council and have a par value or market value, whichever is lesser, equal to the amount of the surety bond in lieu of which such undertaking is given. Such securities shall be deposited in escrow with an official depository of the city, jointly selected by the city manager and the applicant or his assigns, along with and attached to a copy of the written undertaking for which same are to be held as security. 
(d)  Each applicant may provide the bond or security as provided for in this section or, in lieu thereof, an insurance policy or policies to cover the same requirement, liabilities and conditions as required in the bond. Such insurance given in lieu of the bond shall provide that the city or any aggrieved party shall have a right to proceed directly against the insurance company. 
(e)  A bond, undertaking or insurance policy filed pursuant to this section shall be released by the city council when production ceases and the permittee has in all things complied with the provisions of this chapter. When a permit terminates and becomes inoperative under the terms of section 14-37, or when the permittee or his assigns shall file with the city council written notice of his election to surrender his permit and abandon the premises covered thereby, provided that notice of such intent to abandon has been given in the manner provided in section 14-28 with reference to application for permits, then if no claims under the bond or undertaking in lieu of the bond have been filed with the city clerk within ninety (90) days, the city clerk on authorization by resolution adopted by the city council, shall return the bond or undertaking and security or securities theretofore furnished by the permittee in connection with such permit. If claims are filed within such time, upon the final satisfaction or defeat of such claims, such bond or undertaking, or security or securities shall thereupon be returned to the permittee or his assigns. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-4) 
Sec. 14-5. - Appeals from official actions under chapter. 
    Any person who feels aggrieved by any action taken by any officials of the city under this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-5) 
Secs. 14-6-14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 

Sec. 14-26. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drill or commence to drill a well for oil or gas within the limits of the city, or its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction, or to work upon or assist in any way in the prosecution of the drilling of any such well, without a permit for the drilling, completion and operation of such well having been first issued by authority of the city council in accordance with the provisions of this article. No permit shall be for more than one (1) well to each drilling block. The drilling block shall be of size and configuration as approved by the state railroad commission. Should such commission adjust the size of a drilling block to permit more than one (1) well to be drilled, a permit will be required for each well authorized to be drilled by the state railroad commission. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-6) 
Sec. 14-27. - Application generally. 
(a)  Every application for a permit to drill, complete and operate a well for oil or gas shall be in writing, signed by the applicant or by some person duly authorized to sign the same on his behalf. The application shall state the drilling block and the proposed depth and the particular lot and location in the block where the proposed well is to be located and shall have attached to it certified or photostatic copies of the deed, oil or gas lease or drilling contract with the owners of land covering the lots, blocks or tracts in such drilling block over which the applicant has control for oil and gas purposes, together with abstracts of title, or certificates of title, satisfactory to the city attorney to the end that the application will show what portion and what part of the drilling block the applicant owns in fee or holds under lease or drilling contract from the owners; or satisfactory information may be provided on the plat by showing lessors, lessees, and volume and page where the lease or contract is recorded in the deed records. The applicant may withdraw the abstracts or certificate of title after they have been examined and released by the city attorney. The application shall be accompanied by a map or maps of the drilling block showing the designation of the lots, blocks, or tracts owned or controlled by the applicant, as well as the ownership of all tracts and interest within the drilling block, and showing the exact location of the proposed well, which location shall be as nearly as is practicable in the center of the drilling block. 
(b)  The application shall be filed in duplicate, with duplicate plats, with the city clerk. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-7) 
Sec. 14-28. - Notice of application and hearing thereon. 
(a)  Notice of the filing of an application for a permit under this article shall be given by the applicant as follows: At least ten (10) days prior to the date of hearing on the application, a copy of the notice in the form herein prescribed shall be sent by registered mail to each owner and lessee of lots, blocks and tracts in the drilling block owned by or under lease to the applicant, addressed to the last known address of such land and lease owners, if known to the applicant. A copy of such notice shall likewise be published, at the cost of the applicant, in three (3) issues of the official newspaper of the city, the first of such notices to be published not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing. Such notice shall state the lot and block number on which the applicant is asking for a permit to drill, and the date and place of hearing, and shall be in words and figures as follows: 
;xir; "Notice is hereby given that _______, acting under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of Chapter _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Denison, Texas, did on the _____ day of ________, 19___, file with the City Clerk of the City of Denison, an application for a permit to drill a well for oil or gas upon Lot No. _____, Block No. _____ Addition to the City of Denison, in drilling Block No. _____. A hearing upon such application will be held in the Council Room of the City of Denison in the Municipal Building, 108 West Main Street, at _____ on the _____ day of ________, 19___." 
(b)  Proof of notice shall be made by the applicant by filing with the city clerk an affidavit of the printer or publisher of the newspaper in which notice is published, containing a copy of the notice and stating the issues in which, and the period of time during which, notice was published, and an affidavit of the applicant showing the date and names of the persons to whom and the addresses to which notice was mailed by the applicant and proof that such addresses are the last known addresses of the persons involved. 
(c)  The time for hearing on each application shall be fixed by the city clerk at the time such application is filed; and at the time so fixed and published in such notices, a hearing on such application shall be held in the council room of the city by the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-8) 
Sec. 14-29. - Applicant must own or have lease or contract for drilling site. 
    No permit shall be granted or issued under this article for the drilling of a well except upon ground owned by the applicant or held by him under an oil or gas lease or drilling contract from the owner, giving the owner's permission or authority to drill the well. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-9) 
Sec. 14-30. - Fees. 
(a)  The fee for a permit under this article shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a one-block drilling unit which is within the city limits or where the well is located within three hundred (300) feet of the city limits. 
(b)  For a well to be located within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, the fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each well to defray its expenses in connection with the inspection of such operation to determine that city's watersheds are safeguarded. 
(c)  The required fees shall be paid, in cash, to the city clerk at the time the permit application is filed. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-10) 
Sec. 14-31. - Issuance generally. 
    If an application for a permit under this article is found by the city council to comply in all respects with the terms of this chapter, the city council shall, by resolution adopted either at a regular or special meeting, authorize the city clerk to issue a permit for the drilling, completion and operation of well applied for. Such permit shall be issued in the form recommended by the city attorney and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-11) 
Sec. 14-32. - Refusal or issuance with special conditions for certain locations. 
(a)  (1)  Permits; issuance or refusal to issue. The city council, within thirty (30) days after the filing of the application for a permit to drill an oil and gas well or permit to install water and/or gas re-pressurizing or injection facilities, shall determine whether or not the applicant is eligible to be permitted. If the application complies in all respects with the provisions of this section, and if the entire boundary of the drill site for the well to be drilled or the facility to be installed is located more than one thousand (1,000) feet from any occupied residence, commercial structure, public building, public athletic field, property line of any property owned by a governmental entity, any publicly dedicated right-of-way or any permanent accessory structure used in connection with any of same and said drill site is not crossed by any public street, the council may issue a permit for the drilling of the well or the installation of the facilities sought. 
(2)  If the council determines that any part of the drill site for the well to be drilled or the facility to be installed is located less than one thousand (1,000) feet from any occupied residence, commercial structure, public building, public athletic field, property line of any property owned by a governmental entity, any publicly dedicated right-of-way or any permanent accessory structure used in connection with any of same, then the council shall hold a public hearing on such application after giving notice at least once by publication in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to said hearing and in writing by regular United States mail to the surface owners of real property within one thousand (1,000) feet of the drill site and by a sign erected on the drill site premises. Such notice is not necessary to any property owner within such one thousand foot-radius that executes and files with the city secretary a written waiver acknowledged before a notary public. If, however, the proposed drill site is outside the city limits but any part of the drill sites is within one thousand (1,000) feet of any occupied residence, commercial structure, public building or structure, public athletic field, property line of any property owned by a governmental entity or any publicly dedicated right-of-way or any permanent accessory structure used in connection with same, within the city limits, then a public hearing shall be called according to the above procedure, and public notice shall be given to the surface owners of real property inside the city limits within one thousand (1,000) feet of the point on the city limit line nearest the proposed drill site. 
(3)  If, following said public hearing, the council finds that exceptional circumstances exist, it may grant such permit upon such terms and conditions as it determines to be necessary to protect the public health and safety. However, no such permit shall ever be granted for a well with the well bore to be located closer than one hundred seventy-five (175) feet to the nearest residence, commercial structure, public building or public structure without the unanimous consent of the property owners within a one hundred seventy-five-foot radius around said well and the affirmative vote of not less than three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the full city council. 
Written notices may be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the city post office to the owners and at the addresses as shown on the last approved city tax roll, or as shown in the application pursuant to this chapter if the latter is different from the tax roll. 
(4)  The decision of the council shall be final, and in making its decision, it shall, in addition to other considerations, have the power and authority to refuse any permit to drill any well at any particular location within the city, when by reason of such particular location and the character and value of the improvements already erected on or adjacent to the particular location in question for residences, commercial activities, schools, hospitals, parks, civic purposes, public health or safety reasons or any of them the drilling of such wells at such particular location would be injurious to the health or safety of the inhabitants in the immediate area of the city or to a substantial number of such inhabitants or would not promote orderly growth and development of the city. Each permit shall: 
a.  By reference, incorporate therein all the provisions of this section with the same force and effect as if this section were copied verbatim in such permit; 
b.  Specify the location of the proposed drill site, well, or injection facility with particularity to lot number, block number, name of addition or subdivision, or by metes and bounds description, or other available correct legal description; 
c.  Contain and specify that the term of the permit shall be for a period of one (1) year from the date of the permit and so long thereafter as oil and gas are produced or until such time as the permittee has permanently abandoned the operation of such well or facility for which the permit was issued; 
d.  Contain and specify such other terms and provisions as may be necessary in a particular case to accomplish the purpose of this section; 
e.  Contain and specify that no actual operations shall be commenced until the permittee has complied with the bond and insurance provisions of this section; and 
f.  Such permit, in triplicate originals, shall be signed by the city secretary, and prior to delivery to the permittee shall be signed by the permittee (with one (1) original to be retained by the city and the others by the permittee); and when so signed, it shall constitute the permittee's drilling and installation license, as well as the contractual obligation of the permittee to comply with the terms of such permit and bond and of this section. 
(b)  As an alternative to the refusal of a permit upon the conditions set forth in (a) above, the city council may, in its sole discretion, require as a condition for granting of such permit such additional requirements as may be deemed necessary under the circumstances. Subsequent breach of any part of such conditions shall authorize forfeiture of such permit by resolution of the city council duly adopted after five (5) days' notice to the holder thereof and hearing thereon. For the guidance and convenience of the city council, but without restricting it to the conditions so set forth or excluding the imposition of other conditions, the following conditions most likely to be required are enumerated, any one (1) or more of which may be required: 
(1)  That an internal-combustion engine may be used in the drilling operations of the well but such engine(s) shall be equipped with mufflers so as to reduce noise to a minimum and all such installations to be done in a manner satisfactory to the fire marshal for fire prevention purposes only. For production purposes, only electric power may be used, except that whenever electric power is unavailable, impractical, or it becomes economically more feasible for an internal-combustion engine to be used, then such an engine may be used for production purposes upon the issuance of a permit therefor by the city manager or his authorized representative. 
(2)  That all oil drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to eliminate, so far as practicable, dust, noise, vibration or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices incident to drilling for the production of oil, gas and hydrocarbon substances. Proven technological improvements in drilling and production methods may be adopted as they may become, from time to time, available, if capable of reducing factors of nuisance and annoyance. 
(3)  That firefighting equipment as required and approved by the fire marshal shall be maintained on the premises at all times during the drilling and production operations. 
(4)  That no more than two (2) production tanks shall be installed on the drilling site, neither one (1) of which shall have a rated capacity of more than five hundred (500) barrels; that the plans for such tank or tanks, including the plot plan showing the location thereof on the property, shall be submitted to and approved by the city manager or his authorized representatives before such tank or tanks and appurtenances are located on the premises, and that such tank or tanks shall be kept in good condition at all times. 
(5)  That no refinery, dehydration or absorption plant of any kind shall be constructed, established or maintained on the premises at any time. This shall not be deemed to exclude a simple gas separation process. 
(6)  That suitable and adequate sanitary toilet and washing facilities shall be installed and maintained on the premises in a clean condition at all times during drilling. 
(7)  That within sixty (60) days after the drilling of such well has been completed and the well placed on production or abandoned, the derrick, all boilers and all other drilling equipment shall be entirely removed from the premises unless such derrick and appurtenant equipment is to be used within a reasonable time limit determined by the city manager or his authorized representative for the drilling of another well on the same drilling site. 
(8)  That no oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances may be produced from any well hereby permitted unless all equipment necessarily incident to such production is completely enclosed within a building or screening, the plans for such building or screening to be approved by the director of public works and the fire marshal. This building or screening shall be of a permanent type, of attractive design and constructed in a manner that will eliminate, as far as practicable, dust, noise, noxious odors and vibrations or other conditions which are offensive to the senses, and shall be equipped with such devices as are necessary to eliminate the objectionable features mentioned above. The architectural treatment of the exterior of such building shall also be subject to the approval of the city manager or his authorized representative. 
(9)  That no sign shall be constructed, erected, maintained or placed on the premises or any part thereof, except those required by law or ordinance to be displayed in with the drilling or maintenance of the well. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-12; Ord. No. 4366, §§ 1, 2, 7-17-06) 
Sec. 14-33. - Relocation of well after issuance. 
    In the event a well is lost or abandoned as a dry hole, the permittee may relocate the well on the drilling block involved and drill and complete such relocated well under the permit for the first well by filing a plat and certificate showing the abandonment of the first well and the location of the second, such location to be approved by the city council in the manner set forth for the approval of the location of the original well. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-13) 
Sec. 14-34. - Chapter or permit does not authorize trespass or affect land owner's right of contract. 
    Neither this chapter nor any permit issued under this article shall be interpreted to grant any right to the permittee to enter upon or occupy in any respect in drilling or production operations any land except by written consent of the owner, nor shall it limit or prevent the free right of any lot, block or tract owner to contract for the amount of royalties to be paid with respect to his own land or other consideration therefor, or for damages, rights or privileges with respect thereto. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-14) 
Sec. 14-35. - Chapter does not authorize storage or transportation of oil or gas. 
    Neither this chapter nor any permit issued under this article shall be interpreted to grant any right to the permittee to store oil within the city limits except in accordance with regulations adopted from time to time, nor to use the streets, alleys, or public ways or any part thereof for the purpose of transporting oil or gas in pipe lines or otherwise, except under a separate permit issued by the city council and subject to such regulation of such transportation as may be prescribed from time to time by ordinance of the city or otherwise. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-15) 
Sec. 14-36. - Chapter does not grant vested right. 
    No permit for the drilling, completion or operation of a well issued under this article shall be deemed to grant a vested right, but each such permit shall specifically provide that it is issued subject to all future amendments of this chapter and all other ordinances or regulations that may be adopted hereafter by the city and all future laws adopted by the state legislature and regulations adopted by the state railroad commission, and that violation of any such future ordinance, law or regulation shall, when determined, after five (5) days' notice and hearing by the city council, be grounds for the cancellation of such permit and operations thereunder shall cease immediately as of the time of such cancellation. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-16) 
Sec. 14-37. - Termination. 
    A permit issued under this article shall terminate and become inoperative without any action on the part of the city council, unless within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance actual drilling of the well is commenced, or additional periods of ninety (90) days each for the commencement of such drilling are authorized by resolution of the city council. After the drilling of the well has commenced, the cessation of drilling operations prior to the completion of the well for a period of six (6) months shall operate to terminate and cancel the permit, and the well shall be considered as abandoned for all purposes of this chapter, and it shall be unlawful thereafter to continue the operation or drilling of such well without the issuance of another permit. If a well is completed as a producer and thereafter ceases to produce, the permittee shall have the right to conduct deepening or reworking operations on the well within six (6) months after cessation of production without having to procure a new permit. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-17) 
Secs. 14-38-14-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRILLING AND OPERATING RULES 

Sec. 14-56. - Compliance with article. 
    In operations under an oil or gas well permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the permittee or his assigns must observe the rules prescribed in this article and the failure to observe the same shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-18) 
Sec. 14-57. - Commission rules and regulations apply. 
    The state railroad commission rules and regulations, with respect to drilling and operating oil and gas wells, are by reference made a part hereof as fully and to the same extent as if copied and reproduced at length herein. For guidance and convenience of all concerned, pertinent safety features for the protection of people, property and watershed are set forth in subsequent sections of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-19) 
Sec. 14-58. - Fire prevention. 
(a)  No forge or open light shall be placed inside the derrick of a well showing oil or gas. 
(b)  Each person holding a permit for an oil or gas well under this chapter shall provide for safety stoves and vaporproof lights. 
(c)  All oil tanks, where there is a gas hazard, shall be gastight and provided with proper gas vents. 
(d)  No smoking will be permitted in any area within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the drilling well. Printed signs reading: Dangerous, no smoking allowed, or similar words, shall be posted in conspicuous places on each producing drilling unit. 
(e)  All of the permittee's premises shall be kept clear of high grass, weeds and combustible trash within a radius of one hundred (100) feet around an oil tank or producing well. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-20) 
Sec. 14-59. - Use of steam boilers. 
    No steam boilers will be permitted, unless the city council so authorizes at the hearing on the application for the permit, and then only on condition that boilers are located at least three hundred (300) feet from any dwelling, producing well, tank battery or separator. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-21) 
Sec. 14-60. - Interference with or pollution of underground source or surface water. 
    All operations under this chapter shall be conducted in such a manner as to assure that there will be no interference with or pollution of any of the sands or strata from which the water supply of any individual or corporation in the city is produced, and within the area of its extraterritorial jurisdiction, and that the surface watershed from which water flows in or across the areas of the city, or streams with all tributaries that flow into Randell or Waterloo Lakes are protected from pollution. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-22) 
Sec. 14-61. - Production or flow tanks to be surrounded by dike or ditch. 
    All permanent production tanks or flow tanks in the city limits shall be surrounded by a dike or ditch of at least one hundred fifty (150) percent of the capacity of the tank or tanks. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-23) 
Sec. 14-62. - Oil storage facilities prohibited. 
    No storage tanks or field working tanks or other facilities for the storage of oil shall be erected or maintained on the premises within or elsewhere within the city limits. Open earth pits for oil is prohibited. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-24) 
Sec. 14-63. - Disposal of waste. 
    All waste from an oil or gas well shall be disposed of in such a manner as to avoid creating a fire hazard or polluting streams or fresh water strata. No well, prior to its completion, shall ever be permitted to clean itself into an open pit, but the same shall be brought in flowing into a tank through a separator and the waste shall be disposed of outside of the city in such a manner as shall not constitute a nuisance. In completing a well, mud, water, oil, and the like shall be swabbed or flowed into a tank or separator, and shall not be flowed into any open pit. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-25) 
Sec. 14-64. - Depth of pipe line laid along or across streets or alleys. 
    All oil and gas pipe lines laid along or across a public street, alley or highway must be buried to a depth as established by the director of public works. Lines which cross existing paved streets shall be placed in accordance with section 21-11 or article III of chapter 21 as approved by the director of public works. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-26) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21. 
Sec. 14-65. - Fencing. 
    All well heads, pits and tank batteries shall be adequately protected with "manproof" fencing. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-27) 
Sec. 14-66. - Abandonment. 
    Upon abandonment of any oil or gas well, such abandonment shall be in such a manner as will adequately protect the fresh water sources within the city's area of interest. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-28) 
Sec. 14-67. - Inspections to insure compliance with chapter. 
    The city manager or his designated representatives shall have the right to inspect all drilling, digging or excavating operations to which this chapter may be applicable as frequently and to such extent as may be necessary to insure full compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 163/4-29) 
Chapter 15 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CERTAIN OTHER SALES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Food and food establishments, Ch. 9; posting advertising matter on property without consent of owner prohibited, § 11-1; sale of merchandise in residential districts restricted, § 11-10; public property, Ch. 18; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; traffic, Ch. 25; zoning, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference- Authority to license, tax, suppress or otherwise regulate hawkers and peddlers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.031. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mobile frozen dairy food vendor shall mean any person who operates a vehicle on the streets of the city for the purpose of soliciting sales of any frozen dessert that is wrapped in a paper or foil covering. 
    Peddler shall mean any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, and offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance. One who solicits orders and, as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this chapter. The word peddler shall include the words hawker and huckster. 
    Solicitor shall mean any individual, whether resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature, whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished immediately or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or not. The term solicitor shall include any person who, for himself or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. Such term shall also include itinerant photographers. 
(Code 1965, § 18-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 15-2. - Use of streets by peddlers. 
    No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall any peddler be permitted a stationary location, nor shall he be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this section, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. Upon proof of automobile liability insurance in an amount satisfying the Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701h and upon compliance with this chapter, a mobile frozen dairy food vendor may be allowed to sell goods or wares on the streets of the city provided such mobile frozen dairy food vendor pulls safely to the side of the street out of traffic and parks at a location not closer than one hundred (100) feet from the intersection of two (2) streets of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 18-2) 
Sec. 15-3. - Shouting, ringing bells, using loudspeakers, etc. 
    No peddler or solicitor, or any person in his behalf shall shout, cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any loudspeaking radio or sound-amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city, or upon any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares, or merchandise which he proposes to sell. It is provided, however, that a mobile frozen dairy food vendor or any person on his behalf may ring chimes, ring a bell, or use any sound device including any loudspeaking radio or sound-amplifying system to play music upon any of the streets, parks or other public places of the city between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. so long as any of such actions do not violate the provisions of section 13-96. 
(Code 1965, § 18-3) 
Sec. 15-4. - Appointment required for calls after 9:00 p.m. 
    After the hour of 9:00 p.m., it shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to make any call on any residence, unless an appointment for that purpose has been previously arranged by the occupant of the residence. 
(Code 1965, § 18-5) 
Sec. 15-5. - Truckload sales; permits, conditions, notice. 
(a)  Permit; request. The city manager is hereby authorized to issue permits for truckload sales for downtown merchants under the following conditions: 
(1)  The permit request must identify the organization, business, or individual requesting the permit; 
(2)  The permit request must be submitted to the city manager in writing, and it must set forth the date and hours of the truckload sale; 
(3)  The permit request must be submitted not less than five (5) days prior to the date of the truckload sale; 
(4)  The permit request must specify where, within the downtown area of the city, the truckload sale is to take place; 
(5)  The participating store must agree to be responsible for common area maintenance or upkeep. 
(b)  Permit; conditions for issuance. Any party requesting approval for a permit for a truckload sale in a downtown area must meet the following conditions: 
(1)  No truck or trailer shall exceed or occupy more than half the main street front footage of the store having the sale, (i.e., a fifty-foot front store would be allowed a twenty-five-foot truck or trailer); 
(2)  The truck or trailer can only be parked in front of the store having the sale and only in city-authorized parking spaces; 
(3)  No sale can run more than six (6) days consecutively, and there can only be four (4) sales a year per store. 
(c)  Notice to police department. Upon issuance of a permit, the city manager shall immediately notify the police department of the date and hours of the truckload sale. 
(Code 1965, § 23-11) 
Secs. 15-6-15-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 

Sec. 15-26. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to engage in any activity described in section 15-1 within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a license pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 18-16) 
Sec. 15-27. - Application. 
    An applicant for a license under this article must file with the chief of police a verified application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the chief of police, which shall give any or all of the following information, which, in the opinion of the chief of police, is necessary: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant. 
(2)  Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and goods to be sold. 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(5)  The entire length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(6)  The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time such application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery. 
(7)  Two (2) state-issued ID's of the applicant in which pictures shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(8)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any provision of this code, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(Code 1965, § 18-17; Ord. No. 4701, § 10(b), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 15-28. - Investigation of applicant. 
    The chief of police shall cause such investigation of the business and moral character of an applicant for a license under this article to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. 
(Code 1965, § 18-18) 
Sec. 15-29. - Applicant's bond. 
    Every applicant for a license under this article shall file with the city secretary a surety bond, running to the city in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with surety acceptable to and approved by the city manager, conditioned that the applicant shall fully comply with all the provisions of this chapter and the statutes of the state regulating and concerning such activity, and guaranteeing to any citizen of the city that all money paid as down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of the solicitor or peddler, and further guaranteeing to any citizen of the city doing business with such solicitor or peddler that the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of such solicitor or peddler. 
(Code 1965, § 18-19; Ord. No. 4701, § 10(a), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 15-30. - Fee. 
    At the time of filing the application for a license under this article, a license fee shall be paid in an amount as may be determined from time to time by the city council and kept on record with the city secretary. In the event the chief of police shall refuse to issue the license applied for, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. All receipts from such license fees shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 18-20; Ord. No. 4701, § 10(c), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 15-31. - Denial or issuance. 
    If, as a result of the investigation of the application in section 15-28, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory or the information provided is incorrect or falsified, the chief of police shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no license will be issued under this article. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the city secretary shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fee and filing of the required bond, issue a license to the applicant. 
(Code 1965, § 18-21; Ord. No. 4701, § 10(f), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 15-32. - Contents. 
    A license issued under this article shall contain the signature and seal of the chief of police and shall show the name, address and photograph of the licensee, the class of license issued, and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in peddling or soliciting. 
(Code 1965, § 18-22) 
Sec. 15-33. - Term. 
    A license issued under this article shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1965, § 18-23) 
Sec. 15-34. - Use by another prohibited. 
    No license issued under this article shall be used by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(Code 1965, § 18-24) 
Sec. 15-35. - Exhibition upon request. 
    It shall be unlawful for any solicitor and peddler to fail to exhibit his license at the request of any citizen of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 18-25) 
Sec. 15-36. - Licensee's identification card. 
    Each holder of a license under this article shall, when soliciting orders, have in his or her possession a card or other document stating such licensee's name, the produce or product he is promoting or selling, and the firm for which he is working and its address. Such card or insignia must have such information printed in legible letters and affixed to the outside clothing of such person, so as to be plainly visible. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 10(d), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4701, § 10(d), adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 15-36, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 15-36 derived from the 1965 Code, § 18-26. 
Sec. 15-37. - Revocation. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalty provided by this code, a license issued under this article may be revoked by the city secretary for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for the license. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the licensee in the course of carrying on his business as a solicitor or peddler. 
(3)  Any violation of this chapter by the licensee. 
(4)  Conviction of the licensee of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  Conducting the business of soliciting or peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  The city secretary shall give notice in writing of the revocation of a license under this section, and shall notify the holder of such license of the time and place of a hearing as to why such license should not be reinstated. Such notice shall be considered given when mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the address appearing on his application. 
(Code 1965, § 18-27; Ord. No. 4701, § 10(f), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 15-38. - Record to be kept. 
    The city secretary shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued under this article. 
(Code 1965, § 18-28; Ord. No. 4701, § 10(f), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 15-39. - Sale of farm, dairy, etc., products. 
    This article shall not apply to the sale or taking of orders for the sale of milk, dairy products, bakery goods and bakery products, vegetables, poultry, eggs or other farm or garden products, so far as the sale of such commodities is now specifically authorized by law, grown and produced by the seller thereof. It is expressly provided, however, that persons selling such products shall upon the request of the chief of police furnish to the chief of police the physician's statement provided for in section 15-27. 
(Code 1965, § 18-30) 
Sec. 15-40. - Civic groups, schools, etc. 
    Solicitations or sales by local civic groups, local schools, local charities, or other local organizations shall be exempt from the provisions of this article, but all persons who handle food in such solicitations or sales shall file with the chief of police the physician's statement referred to in section 15-27. 
(Code 1965, § 18-31) 
Secs. 15-41-15-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE OR ROADSIDE VENDORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Food and food establishments, Ch. 9. 

Sec. 15-56. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Merchandise shall be construed broadly, and shall include, but is not limited to, any articles or subjects of trade or commerce, goods, commodities, products, wares, crafts, food, beverages, fish, or any personal property to be sold, exhibited, or offered for sale. 
    Mobile or roadside vendor means any person who engages in a business in the city of selling, exhibiting, or offering for sale any merchandise not otherwise exempt, and 
(1)  Who engages in such business upon or from a truck or other vehicle within the limits of the city; or 
(2)  Who hires, rents, leases, or occupies any open or unsecured area, vacant lot, or any other similar open or unsecured space in the city, on, from, or through which any merchandise may be sold, offered, or exhibited for sale, except as provided in section 15-62. 
(Code 1965, § 18-32) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 15-57. - Areas prohibited. 
    No person, unless exempted from the provisions of this article, shall conduct mobile or roadside vending operations upon property owned or controlled by any public or governmental agency or on property dedicated for public purposes, including streets, ways, roads, highways, or parkways adjacent thereto, whether improved or unimproved, or upon property used or reserved for use as railroad right-of-way or right-of-way and easements for any public utility. A nonprofit or charitable organization, or any person participating in an exhibition or event sponsored by a nonprofit or charitable organization, shall be exempt from the application of this section. 
(Code 1965, § 18-33) 
Sec. 15-58. - Consent of property owner required. 
    Every person, before engaging in the business of mobile or roadside vending on private property within the city shall obtain written acknowledgment and permission from the owner of the property to be used for the display of merchandise and transactions of mobile or roadside vending operations. 
(Code 1965, § 18-34) 
Sec. 15-59. - Limited sales and use tax. 
    No person shall conduct mobile or roadside vending operations within the city involving the display or sale of merchandise requiring payment of state and local sales and use tax without displaying a sales and use tax permit and without reporting all taxable transactions resulting from the vending sales within the city to the state comptroller of public accounts as having been transacted in the city. 
(Code 1965, § 18-35) 
Sec. 15-60. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in, transact, or conduct the business or occupation of a mobile or roadside vendor either as principal or as agent, servant, or employee of any other person, without having first obtained a license unless such person is exempt under conditions set forth in section 15-57 or in section 15-62 from the requirement to obtain such a license. 
(Code 1965, § 18-36) 
Sec. 15-61. - Application. 
    As a prerequisite to obtaining the license herein required, every person engaging in the business of mobile or roadside vending shall make application upon blank forms to be furnished by the city secretary, wherein the applicant shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name, residence and business addresses, and length of occupancy of each person involved; 
(2)  Description of the nature of the business and the character of merchandise to be offered for sale; 
(3)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship; 
(4)  The entire length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
(5)  Applicant's last business occupation, last place of residence, and license number and place of issuance or license of motor vehicle, if any, used in applicant's business; 
(6)  Acceptable personal identification, such as a driver's license, birth certificate, or passport; 
(7)  Proof that the applicant has received a state limited sales and use tax permit; 
(8)  Description of property from which merchandise is to be displayed, including street name and address number, legal description or designation of the property as shown on the current tax records of the county tax appraisal district, with the name and tax billing address of the owner of the property; 
(9)  Description of the portion of the property to be used for the display of merchandise and transaction of mobile or roadside vending operations including area which may be used by customers for the purpose of off-street parking; 
(10)  A statement signed by the owner of the property acknowledging that said owner has reviewed the completed application forms and has granted permission to the applicant for the use of the property for the purpose set forth and for the time duration stated; 
(11)  Date or dates and approximate hours that merchandise will be displayed during the period the license shall be in force and effect; 
(12)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any provision of this code, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; 
(13)  Where the peddler or solicitor makes delivery and actually handles food products in the course of his work, a statement by a reputable physician of the city, dated not more than ten (10) days prior to submission of the application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious, infectious or communicable diseases; 
(14)  The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time such application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery; 
(15)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which pictures shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(Code 1965, §§ 18-17, 18-38; Ord. No. 4701, § 10(a), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 15-62. - License fees; duration; exemptions. 
(a)  Every person, unless otherwise exempt, and before engaging in the business of mobile or roadside vending in the city, shall pay, in advance, to the city secretary, a city license fee in an amount determined by the city council, as the same may be determined from time to time. This license fee shall not apply to nonprofit or charitable organizations nor to anyone engaged in interstate commerce, or whose operations form an integral part of interstate commerce and upon whom the license fee would impose a direct and unlawful burden with respect to such operations. 
(b)  Licenses issued under this paragraph shall expire three (3) months following the date of issuance. 
(c)  This licensing procedure, application, and fee shall not apply to: 
(1)  The distribution or sale of newspapers, handbills, or other written or printed matter sold or distributed for the purpose of disseminating news, information or religious materials; 
(2)  Any nonprofit or charitable organization; or any person participating in an exhibition or event sponsored by a nonprofit or charitable organization; 
(3)  The sale of vegetables, fruits or other cultivated produce; 
(4)  A salesman, distributor, or wholesale dealer who, at the business location of a wholesaler or retailer, sells or exhibits for sale, merchandise to such wholesaler or retailer engaged in the business of buying and selling or dealing in such merchandise within the city; 
(5)  Any person residing in the city who does not regularly engage in the business of vending and who, on five (5) or fewer days during the course of any calendar year transacts sales of used merchandise which had previously been obtained for domestic or personal use, provided that such person, upon the request of a responsible official of the city, shall sign a statement verifying that: 
a.  Such person is not in the business of vending; and 
b.  Such person has not and will not transact sales under this section on more than five (5) days during the course of the current calendar year; and 
(6)  Any person selling, displaying, or exhibiting for sale merchandise from property adjacent and contiguous to an established, permanent building or structure, from which the same or similar merchandise is or would be sold, displayed, or exhibited; 
(7)  Any person selling any frozen dessert that is wrapped in a paper or foil covering which may be dispensed from a mobile food unit on the streets or avenues as permitted by these ordinances, who otherwise has obtained a permit authorizing such operation under the provisions of article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 18-37; Ord. No. 4701, §§ 10(a), (e), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 15-63. - Approval by chief of police. 
    With respect to mobile or roadside vendors, the city secretary shall refer the application to the chief of police. The chief of police may require periodic reports from an applicant of his whereabouts and activities to the extent the chief of police deems it necessary to protect the public from any abuse of the privileges granted under this article. The applicant shall indicate, by signature on a certificate to be attached to the application form, that the applicant, or the applicant's agents, either have or will have lawful possession of the merchandise to be displayed or sold and that the display and sale of such merchandise in the manner and from the locations set forth shall not create traffic hazards or congestion nor decrease sight distances or visibility of other motorists, cyclists, or pedestrians for using any adjacent intersection, public road, street, way, or thoroughfare. The chief of police may refuse to indicate his approval if the applicant fails to submit reasonable and satisfactory proof that such conditions have been or will be complied with. 
(Code 1965, § 18-39; Ord. No. 4701, § 10(a), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 15-64. - Approval by health official. 
    With respect to mobile or roadside vendors displaying or selling merchandise classified as food otherwise not exempt from this chapter, beverages, fish, poultry, or stock, in their natural or processed state, the city secretary shall refer the application to the chief of police for the purposes and approval set forth in the preceding paragraph and shall also refer the application to the county health department, its agent or officer. The health department, its agent or officer, shall indicate by signature on a certificate to be attached to the application form, after review of methods of operation and equipment to be used by the applicant, that to the best of the health official's knowledge and belief, the merchandise to be displayed or sold will be maintained and delivered to purchasers in such a manner as to comply with chapter 9 and to comply with all applicable rules and regulations related to food, beverages, meat, poultry, fish, or farm and agricultural products promulgated and enforceable by either the state department of health or the city. The health official may refuse to indicate such approval if the applicant fails to submit reasonable and satisfactory proof that such conditions have been or will be complied with. 
(Code 1965, § 18-40; Ord. No. 4701, § 10(a), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 15-65. - Approval by zoning official. 
    With respect to mobile or roadside vendors, the city secretary shall refer the application to the zoning official of the city. The zoning official shall indicate, by signature on a certificate to be attached to the application, that the property or portion of property described on the application is then properly zoned for the intended use and is privately owned and controlled property, not dedicated for public purposes or for use as a railroad right-of-way and/or easement purposes of a public utility. The zoning official shall further indicate, by signature on the application, based upon a review of the description of the property to be used for the display of merchandise and transaction of mobile or roadside vending operations, including the area which may be used by customers for the purpose of off-street parking, that said property and area is then in compliance with regulations set forth in the then-current city zoning regulations as to general parking requirements, improvement standards, area layout, and loading requirements, and that the transaction of all mobile or roadside vending operations and parking of customers' vehicles will be conducted outside of public rights-of-way, including parkways, whether improved or unimproved. The zoning official may refuse to indicate such approval if the applicant fails to submit reasonable and satisfactory proof that such conditions have been or will be complied with. 
(Code 1965, § 18-41; Ord. No. 4701, § 10(a), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 15-66. - Rejection or refusal to approve license. 
    The city secretary shall withhold issuance of mobile or roadside vendor's license until the application is returned with proper signatures of the chief of police, zoning official, and, if required, the county health department or its representative. If the application is not returned with required signatures within seventy-two (72) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, the application shall be considered to be denied, and the applicant shall have the right to appeal as provided in section 15-68, as in the case of suspensions. The fee paid in accordance with this article shall be due and payable at the time a completed application form is submitted to the city sectretary and prior to referral of said application to the officials for review and signatures. In the event one (1) or more of the officials is unable to execute the application for approval, the city secretary shall notify the applicant of its rejection. No portion of the license fee shall be refunded, as it shall have been considered an application fee required to defray a portion of the expense of the city in ascertaining whether or not the applicant and location for the proposed activity qualify for the privileges granted under this article. 
(Code 1965, § 18-42; Ord. No. 4701, § 10(a), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 15-67. - Issuance, contents, display, nontransferability of license. 
    Upon payment of the license fee as herein provided, and following approvals of officials set forth above, the city secretary shall issue and deliver to such mobile or roadside vendor a license which shall show the date of issuance, the name, occupation, place of residence of licensee and fee paid therefor, and the licensee shall carry his license with him and exhibit the same whenever requested by any inspector, police officer, or other officer authorized by law to make inspections. No license issued hereunder shall be transferable. 
(Code 1965, § 18-43; Ord. No. 4701, § 10(a), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 15-68. - Suspension of license; appeal; revocation. 
    In the event that a duly licensed mobile or roadside vendor is found to be at variance with the operational location or use of property as set forth in the approved application, an inspector, police officer, or other official authorized to make inspections for the city shall notify the licensee in person or by written notice of the nature of the variance. If the variance is not corrected within one (1) hour of notification, the license may be suspended by the city secretary, upon the advice of the authorized inspector or police officer. In the event of suspension of the license, the mobile or roadside vendor shall immediately cease all operations and remove all merchandise, equipment, vehicles, and related items from the location for which the license had been granted. Within seventy-two (72) hours from the time of suspension of the license, the vendor may appeal the suspension to the city manager, who shall have the authority to reinstate or revoke the license. Upon receiving notice of appeal, the city manager shall set a date for hearing the appeal, such date to be within seven (7) days of receipt of notice of appeal. In the event there is no appeal within seventy-two (72) hours from the time of suspension of the license, the license shall be revoked. 
(Code 1965, § 18-44; Ord. No. 4701, § 10(a), 6-17-13) 
ARTICLE IV. - PRECIOUS METALS 

Sec. 15-69. - Applicability. 
    This article applies to all persons involved in the buying and selling of crafted precious metal; provided, however, this article does not apply to acquiring crafted precious metal by a person licensed under V.T.C.A., Finance Code ch. 371, or by a person that has kept and maintained a permanent business location within the city for a period longer than sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 4547, § 1, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 15-70. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to the authority of the City of Denison as provided and recognized by V.T.C.A., Occupation Code ch. 1956 and the city's grant from the State of Texas of general police powers, the purpose of this article is to prevent fraud, unfair business practices, imposition and abuse of citizens; prevent transactions in stolen property and other unlawful property by providing a requirement of registration of persons involved in the buying of crafted precious metal; and to assist law enforcement in the exercise of its duties to preserve and protect the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4547, § 1, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 15-71. - Definitions. 
    In this article: 
    Crafted precious metal means jewelry, silverware, an art object, or another object, other than a coin or commemorative medallion, made in whole or in part from precious metal. 
    Dealer means a person who engages in the business of purchasing and selling crafted precious metal. 
    Department means the Denison Police Department. 
    Minor means any person under the age of eighteen (18). 
    Precious metal means gold, silver, platinum, palladium, iridium, rhodium, osmium, ruthenium, or an alloy of those metals. 
(Ord. No. 4547, § 1, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 15-72. - Permit required. 
    A dealer who conducts business at a temporary location for a period of less than ninety (90) days may not engage in the business of buying precious metal or used items made of precious metal unless, at least thirty (30) days before the date on which each purchase is made, the person: 
(1)  Has filed an application for a permit with the department on such forms as may be promulgated by the chief of police or his designee, and has received a permit issued by the department for a location, date(s) certain and the hours of operation for the period authorized by the permit; 
(2)  Has filed a registration statement with the department which shall contain: 
a.  The name, address and personal identification of the dealer; 
b.  The name, address and personal identification of each employee or agent of the dealer; 
c.  If the dealer is an association, the name and address of each member of the association; 
d.  If the dealer is a corporation, the name and address of each officer and director of the corporation and the name and address of the corporation's registered agent with the Texas Secretary of State; and 
e.  Other relevant information required by the department. 
(Ord. No. 4547, § 1, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 15-73. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application filed pursuant to the requirements of section 15-72 above, the department shall conduct a background investigation on each company and/or person identified in the application; shall contact references of good character of the companies and/or persons identified in the application; and shall determine the zoning district classification of the location specified. 
(b)  Within fifteen (15) days of the date of the application, the department shall notify the applicant of the department's decision as to whether to issue the permit. Any adverse decision against the applicant, may be appealed by the applicant to the city council. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued to any company or person previously convicted of a felony; previously convicted of any crime involving the theft or misappropriation of any property; or currently under indictment or other form of formal criminal charge for a felony or crime involving the theft or misappropriation of any property. 
(d)  No permit shall be issued for a location other than in the following zoning districts; neighborhood services, local retail, and community retail. 
(e)  Upon the department's completion of the requirements of this section and upon a favorable finding of the applicant by the department, the department shall issue a permit for the certain location, for the company and individuals only specified in the application, for dates certain not to exceed seven (7) consecutive calendar days within any calendar month, for the business between 8:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m. daily. 
(f)  The permittee shall display the permit issued by the department conspicuously within the premises permitted. 
(Ord. No. 4547, § 1, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 15-74. - Revocation of permit. 
    The department may revoke a permit upon a finding by the department that a permittee has committed two (2) or more violations of the permit and this article within any permitted period as specified in subsection 15-73(e) above. Upon a finding by the department of such cause for revocation, the department shall notify the permittee in writing of the department's finding of violations and shall, upon personal service of the findings upon the permittee, order the business closed for such period of time as may be specified in the department's written notice to permittee. 
(Ord. No. 4547, § 1, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 15-75. - Recordkeeping required. 
(a)  A dealer shall create and maintain a record of each transaction conducted under the authority of the permit issued by the department. All purchases shall be recorded in a manner that facilitates the delivery of the records to the department at intervals as may be specified by the department and upon conclusion of the dealer's activities in the city. At a minimum, the information on the record document shall consist of: 
(1)  Name and age of the seller; 
(2)  Date and time of day of the transaction; 
(3)  Notation of the type of personal picture identification along with the name of the issuer of the identification and any numerical listing on the form of identification; 
(4)  Description of the item purchased by the dealer, including weight, type of metal including purity, style, stones, and the gender of the person for which the item was manufactured. Stones must be described as to type, including results of electronic testing, color as apparent to the untrained eye, shape, size and approximate weight. Class ring descriptions must also include school name and class year. All items bearing personal identification information, inscriptions, engravings, etc. shall be included with the description of the item. 
(b)  A dealer, in addition to the delivery of the records as herein required, shall maintain the record of each transaction for a period of one (1) year from the date of the transaction. 
(Ord. No. 4547, § 1, 2-15-10) 
Sec. 15-76. - Actions prohibited. 
(a)  Within the context of this article, the following actions are prohibited and declared to be an offense punishable by law; to wit: 
(1)  A dealer purchasing crafted precious metal from any person prior to receiving a permit under the provisions of section 15-72; 
(2)  A dealer failing to create, keep and maintain records of transactions occurring within the city; 
(3)  A dealer failing to deliver copies of such records to the department at intervals specified in the permit or upon conclusion of the dealer's activities in the city; 
(4)  A dealer purchasing crafted precious metal within the city from a minor; 
(5)  A dealer falsifying information in the record of any purchase of a crafted precious metal; 
(6)  A dealer failing to conspicuously display the permit issued by the department within the premises; or 
(7)  A dealer conducting business outside of the days and hours specified in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 4547, § 1, 2-15-10) 
Chapter 16 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; departments, § 2-126 et seq.; police department, § 2-141 et seq.; public works department, § 2-161 et seq.; fire marshal, § 7-41 et seq.; bureau of fire prevention, § 7-66 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Personnel policies. 
    The city council does hereby approve and adopt the personnel policy manual as the official statement of personnel policy practices and procedures for the city, which personnel policy is incorporated herein as though fully set forth and is on file in the office of the director of personnel. 
(Code 1965, § 2-13) 
Sec. 16-2. - Fitness for duty policy statement for controlled substances and alcohol use and testing. 
(a)  The city council does hereby approve and adopt the Fitness for Duty Policy Statement on Controlled Substances and Alcohol Use and Testing , attached to Ordinance No. 3608, consisting of seventeen (17) pages, including appendices, such statement to be included as a part of the city's personnel policies. From and after the adoption of the statement, it is the intent of the city council to comply with the policies and practices expressed therein and the city manager, or his designee, is hereby directed to implement same. 
(b)  The city council does hereby direct that each employee of the city be delivered a copy of such statement for inclusion with the employee's copy of the personnel policies and that such training as may be necessary for the efficient implementation of the policies and practice be provided. 
(Ord. No. 3608, §§ 1, 2, 1-22-96) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3608, adopted Jan. 22, 1996, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as § 16-2. 
Secs. 16-3-16-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CIVIL SERVICE FOR FIREFIGHTERS AND POLICE OFFICERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 11(a) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former art. II, §§ 16-26-16-31, and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 8-1-8-3, 8-5, 8-7, 8-17, and 8-29. 
Editor's note- The Civil Service Law was adopted by the voters at an election held December 2, 1947. 
Cross reference- Police department, § 2-141 et seq.; fire department, § 7-26 et seq. 
State Law reference- Firefighters' and police officers' civil service, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 143.001 et seq. 

Sec. 16-26. - Reserved. 
Sec. 16-27. - System established. 
    In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 143.001 et seq. which was adopted by the qualified voters of the city, there is hereby established a civil service system for firefighters and police officers. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 11(a), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 16-28. - Establishment and composition of commission. 
    There is hereby established a firefighter's and police officer's civil service commission which shall consist of three (3) members who shall be appointed pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 143.006. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 11(a), 6-17-13) 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 143.006. 
Secs. 16-29-16-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Texas municipal retirement system, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B, § 61.001 et seq. 

Sec. 16-51. - Election to participate. 
    On behalf of the city, the city council hereby elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments, except the fire department, and including the employees of the cemetery department and the library participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B, § 62.001 and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted and are on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1965, § 2-3; Ord. No. 4701, § 11(b), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 2798, adopted Dec. 27, 1984, provided that participation of employees of the cemetery department shall become effective Feb. 1, 1985. 
Sec. 16-52. - Authorization of restricted prior service credits. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.305 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any incorporated city or town in this state and for which the person has not otherwise received credited service in the system. The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits. 
(b)  A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take the action required under said Section 853.305 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended, while still an employee of this city. 
(c)  This section shall be and become effective on the first day of October, 1993. 
(Ord. No. 3410, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-93) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3410, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 20, 1993, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as § 16-52. 
Secs. 16-53-16-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OLD AGE AND SURVIVORS BENEFITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Social security for municipal employees, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 695g. 

Sec. 16-76. - Execution of agreements. 
(a)  The city council, acting for and on behalf of the city, shall enter into all necessary agreements with the state department of public welfare for the purpose of securing federal old age and survivor's insurance benefits for city employees, including police officers but excluding firefighters, under applicable state and federal laws. 
(b)  The mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the city council and of the city to execute all necessary agreements and instruments for and in behalf of the city council and the city. 
(Code 1965, § 2-7) 
Sec. 16-77. - Duties of director of finance. 
    The city director of finance is hereby directed to be the person responsible for making assessments, collections, payments and reports, as required by the state department of public welfare in connection with the federal old age and survivor's insurance program for city employees, including policemen. 
(Code 1965, § 2-8) 
Sec. 16-78. - Fund established. 
    A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of applicable state and federal laws relating to the federal old age and survivor's insurance program, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as the City of Denison Social Security Fund, which fund shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. 
(Code 1965, § 2-9) 
Secs. 16-79-16-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - POLICE RESERVE FORCE 

Sec. 16-91. - Establishment of police reserve force. 
    A police reserve force for the City of Denison, Texas is hereby established, as provided by V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 341.012. 
(Ord. No. 4774, § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 16-92. - Appointment of members. 
    Members of the police reserve force shall be appointed and/or relieved at the discretion of the chief of police and shall serve as police officers during the actual discharge of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 4774, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 16-93. - Maximum number of reserve officers. 
    There shall be no greater than twelve (12) members of the city's police reserve force. Each member shall be certified as provided by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 4774, § 3, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 16-94. - Service at police chief's discretion. 
    The members of the police reserve force shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police, and may be called into active service any time the chief of police considers it necessary to have additional police officers to preserve the peace and enforce the law. Such reserve police officers, while on active duty and while actively engaged in their assigned duties, shall, to the extent provided by law, be vested with the same rights, privileges, obligations and duties of any other peace officer in the state. 
(Ord. No. 4774, § 4, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 16-95. - Compensation; uniforms; benefits. 
    Members of the police reserve force shall serve without compensation. Uniforms and uniform compensation may be provided to the reserve police officers at the discretion of the chief of police. The uniform compensation shall be based solely upon the time served by the member of the police reserve force while in training for, or in the performance of, official duties. The City of Denison will not provide group hospital and medical assistance to members of the police reserve force who sustain injuries in the course of performing official duties. However, nothing herein shall prevent or exclude such officers from receiving workers compensation benefits from and through the city. Nothing in this division shall be construed to authorize or permit a member of the police reserve force to become eligible for participation in any pension fund created pursuant to state statute, to which regular officers may become a member by payroll deductions or otherwise. Reserve police officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force and shall in no case assume the full-time duties of regular police officers unless they have the qualifications provided for by law for police officers. 
(Ord. No. 4774, § 5, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 16-96. - Training standards and qualifications. 
    Reserve police officers must comply with the minimum training standards established by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement for all reserve law enforcement officers, identical to the standards so established which must be fulfilled before a person appointed as a reserve law enforcement officer may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer. The chief of police shall establish qualifications and standards of training for members of the police reserve force and shall establish rules and regulations governing reserve police officers. 
    The chief of police may establish minimum physical, mental, educational and moral standards as used by the regular police department, but in no case shall the standards be less than that established by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 4774, § 6, 3-16-15) 
Chapter 17 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Annexation, § 1.06. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; emergency management, Ch. 6; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8; housing, Ch. 10; HUD-code manufactured home and recreational vehicle facilities, Ch. 12; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; subdivision regulations, Ch. 22; traffic, Ch. 25; utilities, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference- Regulation of land use, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq.; subdivisions and property development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.011 et seq.; annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 17-1-17-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 

Sec. 17-26. - Adopted. 
    The city council of the City of Denison, Texas does hereby adopt the 2018 comprehensive plan, a copy of which is hereby attached hereto and incorporated herein for all purposes as though fully set forth herein. The 2018 comprehensive plan shall serve as a guide for the resolution of issues identified therein. 
(Code 1965, § 181/2-1(a); Ord. No. 3115, § 1,1-16-89; Ord. No. 4144, § 1, 11-4-02; Ord. No. 4976, § 4, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 17-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 12 of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former § 17-27 which pertained to comprehensive plan amendments, and derived from the 1965 Code, § 181/2-1(b). 
Chapter 18 - PUBLIC PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; hospital authority, § 2-61 et seq.; location of alcoholic beverage establishments restricted, § 3-5; consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places prohibited, § 3-8; animals prohibited from running at large, § 4-9; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8; posting advertising matter on property without consent of owner prohibited, § 11-1; sleeping on public property prohibited, § 11-9; sale of merchandise in residential districts restricted, § 11-10; nuisances, Ch. 13; peddlers and solicitors and certain other sales, Ch. 15; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; swimming pools, Ch. 23; utilities, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 28. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CEMETERIES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- It should be noted that Ord. No. 3319, adopted Feb. 3, 1992, closed the Oakwood Cemetery. Such ordinance is not codified herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the city offices. 
Cross reference- Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages in cemeteries prohibited, § 3-9. 
State Law reference- Cemeteries, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 912a-1 et seq., 969c. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 13(a) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former div. 1, §§ 18-26-18-31, and enacted a new div. 1 as set out herein. The former div. 1 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 6-1-6-6. 

Sec. 18-26. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the word cemeteries shall mean and include the five (5) cemeteries owned or operated by the city and known as Fairview Cemetery, Maple Grove Cemetery, Oakwood Cemetery, Layne Cemetery, and Magnolia Cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(a), 6-17-13) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-27. - Superintendent. 
    There is hereby created the office of cemeteries, which office may be filled by the appointment of a suitable person selected by the city manager. The city manager shall have the power to prescribe the duties and compensation to be paid to the superintendent of cemeteries. The superintendent of cemeteries shall, under the general supervisions of the city manager or his or her designee, have charge of the management and operation of the cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(a), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 18-28. - Sale of lots. 
    The city shall have the right to sale lots in the cemeteries, other than Layne and Magnolia, at prices determined by it and approved by the city council which are on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(a), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 18-29. - Continual care of lots and graves. 
(a)  The city hereby signifies its willingness and intention to act as trustee for the continual care and upkeep of the lots and graves in the cemeteries, and does hereby accept the provision, regulations and duties provided for such permanent trustee under the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 969c. The city hereby adopts all the provisions of such article 969c and accepts the powers and responsibilities set forth therein. 
(b)  The officials of the city are hereby directed and authorized to perform the duties required under the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 969c and the city secretary is hereby designated to issue the certificates mentioned in sections 2 thereof, and he/she shall be in charge of the records required by section 3 thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(a), 6-17-13) 
Secs. 18-30-18-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CEMETERY BOARD[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Section 13(b) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former div. 2, §§ 18-46-18-53, and enacted a new div. 2 as set out herein. The former div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 6-17-6-24. 
Cross reference- Authorities, boards, committees, commissions, § 2-46 et seq. 

Sec. 18-46. - Created. 
    There is hereby created, established a board to be known as the "cemetery advisory board." The cemetery board shall serve in advisory capacity to the city manager or his or her designee, and the city council. The board may make recommendations concerning operating policies and programs of the cemeteries, long-range capital improvement planning, and such other policy matters as the board determines necessary. The board shall also have those responsibilities and duties conferred upon it and expressly adopted by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(b), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 18-47. - Composition; appointment of members. 
    The cemetery board shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(b), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 18-48. - Members' qualifications and oath. 
    Members of the cemetery board shall be qualified voters residing in the city and, after their appointment, they shall subscribe to the oath of office prescribed by article X, section 10.04 of the city's Charter. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(b), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 18-49. - Terms of members. 
    Three (3) members of the cemetery board shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year and four (4) members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. After the expiration of the original appointments each member appointed thereafter shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, and shall serve for a period of two (2) years from such appointment and until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(b), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 18-50. - General powers and duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the cemetery board to offer advice and recommendations for the management and operation of the Fairview Cemetery, Oakwood Cemetery, Layne Cemetery, Magnolia Cemetery, and to offer advice and recommendations for the management and operation of such other city cemeteries, either existing or new, as the city council may direct from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(b), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 18-51. - Rules and regulations. 
    The cemetery board is empowered to provide and adopt rules and regulations for the management of its own business. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(b), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 18-52. - Cemetery budget and funds generally. 
    The city manager or his or her designee shall present a budget for the operation of the city cemeteries on an annual basis. The cemetery board shall offer comment and advice and recommend approval of said budget to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(b), 6-17-13) 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATION AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 18-53. - Cemeteries hours of operation. 
    Visitation at city cemeteries is permitted from dawn until dusk seven (7) days a week. The city cemeteries shall be closed to the public from dusk until dawn. Burials, on receipt of an interment permit, shall be permitted from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except in the case of special circumstances and on a case-by-case basis the superintendent or his or her designee may permit interment at other times. In the event a burial is allowed to occur outside of the cemetery's regular interment hours, the individual requesting the burial shall be responsible for paying any and all costs, including but not limited to the payment of overtime costs, of city employees. All construction, maintenance, or digging of a grave shall cease during a funeral service in the area where the service is occurring. 
(Ord. No. 4817, § 2, 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-54. - Platting and sale of lots or blocks in Fairview and Maple Grove Cemeteries. 
(a)  Platting . Fairview and Maple Grove Cemeteries shall be platted into lots and blocks by the city, who shall prepare, maintain and keep in its office a plat of the cemeteries as a public record. 
(b)  Sale of lots or blocks. Such lots and blocks shall be sold by the city by a process established by the city council and on file in the office of the city secretary. Payment for a lot shall be provided to the city prior to sale or transfer of the lot in accordance with the price and fee schedule attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein for all purposes (the "price and fee schedule"). 
(c)  Execution of deed. The deed of conveyance of any such lot or block shall be executed by the superintendent or his or her designee, and all such lots and blocks shall be sold in strict accordance with the terms of this article. 
(d)  Permission for buying or selling. No such lot or block shall be bought or sold without written permission from the superintendent, and all titles to such lots or blocks shall pass through the city. 
(e)  Recording fee. There shall be a recording fee, as established in the price and fee schedule, for recording any change in title or ownership in any such lot or block after the initial conveyance of the lot or block by the city. 
(f)  Permit fees. Fees for permits for concrete work and interments as provided in the price and fee schedule shall be paid to the city prior to beginning concrete work and interments. 
(g)  Payment for lots or blocks required prior to interment. No interment in the cemetery shall be made on any lot or block unless the payments required by this article have been made prior to the city. 
(Ord. No. 4817, § 2, 6-20-16) 
Editor's note- Exhibit "A," as referenced above, has been set out at the end of this division. 
Sec. 18-55. - Interments. 
(a)  Permit required. Before any opening or closing of a grave, a permit approval for an interment shall be required and obtained from the superintendent or his or her designee. An application for an interment permit must be filed with the superintendent or his or her designee. A permit for interment will be issued only if proper certificates as required by state law have been provided to the city along with the name of the deceased, the name and address of the purchase, the exact location of the block and lot, burial details, payment information, and any other requirement as determined by the superintendent or his or her designee. A fee as provided in the price and fee schedule shall be paid for each permit issued under the terms of this section. Any permit obtained after the burial shall be assessed a late fee as provided in the price and fee schedule. 
(b)  Performance and location of site. Interments must be performed to the satisfaction of the city. The city shall not be responsible for errors in location or for locating lots. 
(c)  Permit for grave digging services. No person shall perform any grave digging services in cemeteries owned and operated by the city without first having obtained a permit in accordance with the terms and provisions of this section. Any person desiring to dig graves in the city cemeteries shall file with the superintendent a corporate surety bond payable to the city in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned that the principal shall well and truly perform all contracts entered into by him for the opening and closing of graves in the city cemeteries and conditioned further that the principal shall pay any and all damages to the city or any third party incurred because of such service. 
(d)  Twenty-four-hour notice required. A twenty-four-hour notice to the superintendent or his or her designee shall be required for the preparation of a grave for burial. 
(e)  Grave depth. All graves shall be excavated to a depth which will permit a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches between the top of the permanent-type container and the ground surface. 
(f)  Grave backfilling. All graves shall be backfilled and force-settled by hydraulics or mechanical means to the satisfaction of the superintendent or his or her designee. 
(g)  Permanent containers. All interments shall be made in a permanent-type concrete box, concrete vault or metal vault which will prevent settling and collapse of grave sites. Concrete boxes and vaults shall be reinforced with wire mesh and be a minimum of one and one-half (11/2) inches thick. Metal vaults shall be a minimum of sixteen-gauge thickness. 
(h)  Charge by owner prohibited. No owner of any lot or block shall charge a fee for any interment made thereon. 
(i)  No liability for delay. The city shall not be liable for a delay in interment when the rules and regulations of the city have not been met or when a protest to interment has been made or for any other reason. The city reserves the right under such circumstances to delay the burial or refuse to permit the burial until the cause of the delay is resolved. 
(Ord. No. 4817, § 2, 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-56. - Monument, tombstone, and concrete foundation work. 
(a)  Permit required. Prior to performing any work, a person desiring to erect monuments or tombstones or perform concrete work in the city cemeteries shall first obtain a permit from the superintendent or his or her designee, and shall meet with an agent of the city to locate the gravesite where the stone is being constructed. The person performing the work must comply with all rules, specifications and requirements of the city in regard to such cemeteries. 
(b)  Fee. A fee as established in the price and fee schedule shall be paid for each permit issued under the terms of this section. Any permit obtained after the monument or tombstone has been erected or the concrete work has been done shall be assessed a late fee as provided in the price and fee schedule. 
(c)  Bond. Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the applicant shall file with the superintendent or his or her designee a corporate surety bond payable to the city in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned that the principal shall well and truly perform all contracts entered into by him for the erection of monuments or tombstones or the performance of concrete work in the city cemeteries and conditioned further that the principal shall pay any and all damages to the city or any third party incurred because of the erection of monuments and tombstones or the performance of concrete work in the city cemeteries by the principal. 
(d)  Performance of work. Concrete for use on any lot or block shall be mixed and prepared in the streets of the city cemeteries and the person performing such work shall, upon completion, immediately remove all remaining sand, gravel, tools and other equipment from the cemeteries and leave the streets in the same condition as before the work was performed and, in addition, shall thoroughly clean the lot or block upon which such work was done of all trash or litter and remove the trash or litter from the cemeteries. Work will not be considered complete until meeting the specifications of the city and passing a final inspection by the superintendent or his or her designee. 
(e)  Authority to inspect. The city shall have the right to inspect all memorials before the same are placed on the foundations thereof, and may refuse the placing of any memorial on such foundation if the superintendent or his or her designee finds that such memorial is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this section or that the workmanship has not been done in a skillful, workmanlike manner. 
(f)  Responsibility. Dealers or contractors who erect, install, construct or deliver memorials within the cemetery shall be responsible for the compliance with the provisions of this section and specifications. 
(g)  Authority to require removal and/or replacement. The city shall have the authority to require removal and replacement of any memorial which is erected, installed, damaged or constructed in a manner that is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this section or that the workmanship has not been done in a skillful, workmanlike manner. 
(h)  Temporary grave marker. At the time of interment, a temporary grave marker must be placed. The marker should include the name, date of birth and date of death of the deceased, and the name of the funeral home. Within one (1) year of interment the temporary marker must be replaced with a permanent monument in compliance with all the provisions of this section. Temporary markers located at Garden of Tranquility will be removed after sixty (60) days. 
(i)  Specifications. All monuments and tombstones shall be set on concrete on a twenty-four-inch-thick concrete foundation with a minimum width of twenty (20) inches. Any variances from this specification must be requested and receive approval by the superintendent or his or her designee. 
(1)  Monuments can be upright: One (1) marker per grave not to exceed forty-two (42) inches in width for a single lot and not to exceed ninety (90) inches in width for a double lot. 
(2)  All monuments and markers at the head of a space shall consist of granite, marble, or bronze except in those instances when existing monuments on spaces are being matched or duplicated. All markers must be centered on the end of the gravesite and in line with existing markers. All bronze markers must be on a granite base with the exception of veteran markers. Bronze markers may require an additional ninety dollars ($90.00) fee for placement, determined at the time of application by the superintendent or his or her designee. 
(3)  No foot markers allowed except for veteran markers. 
(4)  Granite markers measuring twenty (20) inches by ten (10) inches by four (4) inches lying flat at ground level with no pad structure underneath shall be the only marker allowed in the Garden of Tranquility. No monuments or statutes shall be permitted in the Garden of Tranquility. 
(5)  All monuments, tombstones, and concrete foundations must pass final inspection by the superintendent or his or her designee. Concrete foundation requirements will be specified with the permit before any construction begins. Failure to obtain a permit or meet city standards will be subject to penalty. 
(Ord. No. 4817, § 2, 6-20-16; Ord. No. 4887, § 2, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 18-57. - Placement of objects, landscaping, and maintenance. 
(a)  Construction prohibited. No construction of any nature or kind, such as curbing, fencing, coping or enclosure of any kind, whether of vegetation or construction, around any block or lot within the cemeteries will be permitted. No reconstruction of any of the existing items mentioned in this section shall be permitted, except monuments and tombstones. 
(b)  Granite, bricks, stones and walkways. No granite, bricks, stones, wood, concrete, cornerstones or any kind of artificial walkways or walks will be permitted on or adjoining lots in the cemeteries, except such walkways or walks as may have been provided or will be provided in the cemeteries by the city. 
(c)  Grade level. All graves will be maintained at the same grade level as the surface of the ground surrounding the lot, and under no circumstances will the grave be covered with a concrete slab or any other type of slab or covering. 
(d)  Placement of objects in cemetery, including floral designs and greenery. No object of any kind may be placed on graves or other cemetery property, except as specifically provided herein. 
(1)  Fresh flowers. Fresh flowers, floral pieces or funeral designs placed at gravesite at interment will be removed when they become wilted or unsightly at the discretion of city staff. Items desired to be retained must be removed within seventy-two (72) hours after placement on the lot or grave. No artificial flowers shall be allowed in the Garden of Tranquility. 
(2)  Containers. With the exception of spaces within the Garden of Tranquility, up to two (2) individual containers of fresh or artificial flowers may be placed or affixed on each space, provided that the affixed flowers are only placed in containers approved by the city consisting of granite, marble, concrete, metal or heavy plastic. 
a.  Fresh or artificial flowers placed directly in the ground will be removed by city staff. 
b.  All flowers and other memorabilia must be placed in the affixed containers, on or immediately next to the monument on its concrete base, or if there is no monument at the head of the grave not to exceed one (1) square foot. Fresh flowers will be removed when they become wilted or unsightly. 
(3)  Special arrangements. No wreathes, easels, grave blankets, or other special arrangements shall be permitted on graves except during interment and the first seven (7) days thereafter. Exceptions for placement of objects will be made during holidays. All objects will be removed when they become wilted or unsightly at the discretion of city staff. 
(4)  Benches. Benches may be placed with approval from the superintendent or his or her designee. Benches must be constructed of granite. All benches approved for placement must be placed parallel with a monument with a foundation. Benches shall not be placed in the Garden of Tranquility with the exception of those placed by the superintendent or his or her designee. 
(5)  Planting. No person shall plant any trees, flowers or shrubs on any lot without the written consent of the superintendent or his or her designee. No exceptions by the superintendent or his or her designee shall be permitted in the Garden of Tranquility. 
(e)  Authorization to remove objects, etc. The superintendent or his or her designee shall have the right to remove any structure or object on any lot or grave that may be deemed objectionable and to destroy all diseased, unsightly or undesirable trees, shrubs or plants. The city reserves the right to trim or prune any shrub or plant whenever it is deemed necessary or advisable. 
(Ord. No. 4817, § 2, 6-20-16; Ord. No. 4887, § 2, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 18-58. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  Defacing property. It is unlawful to write upon, deface or in any manner injure any monument, marker or other structure in the city cemeteries. 
(b)  Removing flowers. It is unlawful for any person other than the owner to remove flowers or plants from any lot or block in the city cemeteries; provided, however, the city may remove or destroy any flowers, trees, shrubs or other plants in the cemeteries if, in the sole judgment and discretion of the superintendent or his or her designee, such are or may become detrimental to the adjacent lots or avenues or dangerous or inconvenient or which may interfere with the scheme of the cemetery development or maintenance. 
(c)  Opening of graves. No grave, vault or tomb of any person buried in any city cemetery shall be opened, except upon special written order from the county medical director. Only human remains may be interred in any city cemetery. 
(d)  Parking. No person shall park any motor vehicle in any cemetery maintained by the city except for the purpose of attending a funeral, visiting a gravesite, or maintaining or repairing cemetery property. 
(e)  Advertising. No advertising of any type is permitted in the cemetery, including the posing of signs advertising the sale of private burial spaces, funeral homes, or grave digging services. 
(Ord. No. 4817, § 2, 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-59. - Variance. 
    A variance to the standards and specifications for interment, monuments, tombstones, and concrete work may be requested and considered for approval at the time of any permit application by the superintendent or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 4817, § 2, 6-20-16) 
EXHIBIT "A"
CEMETERY PRICE AND FEE SCHEDULE 
PROPOSED - FY 2016 AMOUNT PER UNIT FAIRVIEW CEMETERY AND MAPLE GROVE CEMETERY IN CITY OUT CITY A. Lot Prices Individual $950.00 $950.00 Units of two 1,900.00 1,900.00 VA lot (veteran only) 300.00 300.00 Veteran and spouse 1,290.00 1,290.00 B. Interment Prices Direct (use of Fairview Chapel-No charge)  Monday through Friday   9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. 800.00 800.00   After 3:00 p.m. 850.00 850.00  Saturday   9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. 950.00 950.00   After 12:00 p.m. 1,050.00 1,050.00 Graveside/tent and chair set-up  Monday through Friday   9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. 1,050.00 1,050.00   After 3:00 p.m. 1,250.00 1,250.00 * if service at funeral home/church is at 3:00 p.m., rate increases to after 3:00 p.m. charge  Saturday   9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. 1,250.00 1,250.00   After 11:00 a.m. 1,250.00 1,250.00 * if service at funeral home/church is at 11:00 a.m., rate increases to after 11:00 a.m. charge Interment of Little Angels  Babyland   Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. 250.00 250.00   Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. 300.00 300.00 * price includes: lot, opening and closing, and use of Fairview Chapel Interment of children  Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. 400.00 400.00  Saturday 9 a.m. to 12 noon 450.00 450.00 * price includes: lot, opening and closing, and use of Fairview Chapel Additional complete graveside service 50.00 50.00 Interment of cremated remains in Garden of Tranquility  Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. 800.00 800.00  Saturday 9 a.m. to 12 noon 1,100.00 1,100.00 * price includes: lot, opening and closing, and use of Fairview Chapel * (no tent/chair setup at burial area) Interment of cremated remains on existing family lots  Graveside/tent and chair set-up   Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. 450.00 450.00   Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. 550.00 550.00  Fairview Cemetery Chapel   Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. 400.00 400.00   Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. 450.00 450.00  Bury cremains on lot-No family service 225.00 225.00 Interment of cremated remains on new lots  Lot, opening and closing and use of chapel 600.00 600.00  Lot, opening and closing and complete set up 650.00 650.00   Monday-Friday 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.   Saturday services 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon 300.00 300.00 Columbarium  Individual niche   Row four (bottom) 850.00 850.00   Row three 950.00 950.00   Row two 1,050.00 1,050.00   Row one (top) 1,050.00 1,050.00  Companion niche   Row four (bottom) 1,500.00 1,500.00   Row three 1,700.00 1,700.00   Row two 1,900.00 1,900.00   Row one (top) 1,900.00 1,900.00 C. Disinterment Adults 1,500.00 1,500.00 Children (age 5 years and younger) 800.00 800.00 D. Miscellaneous Charges Concrete boxes-Funeral homes 500.00 500.00 Setting VA markers 90.00 90.00 Steel vault and box setting fee 100.00 100.00 Opening/closing permit and inspection fee 50.00 50.00 Monument/concrete foundation permit and inspection fee 50.00 50.00 Recording fee for change in title/ownership 50.00 50.00 Late fee 400.00 400.00  
(Ord. No. 4817, Exh. A, 6-20-16; Ord. No. 4874, § 2, 5-15-17; Ord. No. 4887, § 2, 8-7-17) 
_____
Secs. 18-60-18-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Possession or consumption in parks prohibited, § 3-10. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Section 13(c) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed former div. 3, §§ 18-71, 18-72, and enacted a new div. 3 as set out herein. The former div. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1965 Code, § 21-3. 

Sec. 18-71. - Amusement rides, rodeos, carnivals, etc., in parks, etc. 
(a)  It is unlawful to operate or conduct any amusement rides, rodeos, carnivals or circuses without a permit issued by the city. Requests for a permit must be submitted in writing at least sixty (60) days in advance. 
(b)  No person shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any ferris wheel, merry-go-round, or other amusement ride, go-cart track, rodeo, carnival, or circus operated for hire or for the purpose of promoting or advertising any trade business, without first furnishing to the city secretary satisfactory evidence of liability insurance in an amount to be determined by city council for bodily injury or death and insurance for the organization, agents, employees, and members in connection with the use of the premises and without keeping such insurance in full force and effect at all times. It shall not be necessary to make the city a party to any claim for any injury or damage that may occur in or upon any premises insured in accord with this section. 
(c)  The organization shall be responsible for all necessary repairs, cleanup and removal of waste, debris and trash as a result of the carnival, circus, etc. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(c), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 18-72. - Camping restricted. 
    Camping shall be prohibited in city parks unless otherwise pre-approved by the city manager or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(c), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 18-73. - Summer day camp and other non-school day programs standards of care. 
    The following standards of care have been adopted by the City Council of the City of Denison, Texas to comply with the amendment to Section 42.041(b)(14), Human Resources Code as approved by the Texas Legislature during the 74th legislative session. 
An elementary-age (ages 5-13) recreation program operated by municipality provided the governing body of the municipality annually adopts standards of care by ordinance after a public hearing for such programs, that such standards are provided to the parents of each program participant, and that the ordinances shall include, at a minimum, staffing ratios, minimum staff qualifications, minimum facility, health and safety standards, and mechanisms for monitoring and enforcing the adopted local standards; and further provided that parents be informed that the program is not licensed by the state and the program may not be advertised as a child-care facility. 
    The standards of care are intended to be minimum standards by which the City of Denison will operate the city's youth programs. The programs operated by the city are recreational in nature and are not licensed by the State of Texas as certified day care programs. The Texas Department of Family and Protective Services will issue an exemption determination certificate to the City of Denison. 
(1)  Administration. 
a.  Definitions. 
1.  City means City of Denison. 
2.  City council means City Council of the City of Denison, Texas. 
3.  Department means City of Denison Parks and Recreation Department and the Denison Public Library. 
4.  Youth program(s) mean City of Denison Youth Programs consisting of the summer day camp and other non-school day programs that last one (1) consecutive week (five (5) days) or longer. 
5.  Operations manual means notebook of policies, procedures, required forms, organizational and programming information relevant to City of Denison Youth Programs. 
6.  Program manual means notebook of information given to program leaders which includes rosters, attendance sheets, lesson plans, disciplinary action forms, etc. 
7.  Director means City of Denison Department Director or his/her designee. 
8.  Program coordinator or coordinator means City of Denison staff who has been assigned administrative responsibility for a City of Denison Youth Program. 
9.  Program leader means City of Denison full-time, part-time, seasonal staff, temporary staff, contract instructor or volunteer who has been assigned responsibility to implement the city's youth programs. 
10.  Program site means area or facilities where City of Denison Youth Programs are held. 
11.  Participant means a youth whose parent(s) or guardian(s) have completed all required registration procedures and are determined to be eligible for a City of Denison Youth Program. 
12.  Parent(s). This term will be used to represent one (1) or both parent(s) or guardian(s) who have legal custody and authority to enroll their child(ren) in the City of Denison Youth Program. 
13.  Program staff. Term used to describe the person or persons who have been hired or have volunteered to work for the City of Denison and have been assigned responsibility for managing, administering, or implementing some or all portions of the City of Denison Youth Programs. This definition also includes program coordinator and program leader. 
14.  Community center means one (1) type of facility used to host any program. 
b.  Organization. 
1.  The governing body of the youth program is the city council. 
2.  Implementation of the Denison Youth Programs Standards of Care is the responsibility of the director and program staff. 
3.  Youth programs to which these standards of care will apply are the summer day camp, and other non-school day programs that last one (1) consecutive week (five (5) days) or longer. 
4.  Each program site will have a current copy of the standards of care available for the public and program staff. 
5.  Parents of participants will be given access to a current copy of the standards of care prior to the start of the youth program, preferably during the registration process. 
6.  Criminal background checks will be conducted on prospective program staff. If results of the criminal check indicate that an applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses, he or she will not be considered for employment: 
i.  A felony or a misdemeanor classified as an offense against a person or family; 
ii.  A felony or a misdemeanor classified as public indecency; 
iii.  A felony or a misdemeanor violation of any law intended to control the possession or distribution of any controlled substance; 
iv.  Any offense involving moral turpitude; or 
v.  Any offense that would potentially put the City of Denison at risk. 
vi.  In addition, checks of the Texas Department of Public Safety database for the Texas Sex Offender Registration Program will be conducted on prospective program staff. If results of the check indicate that an applicant is a registered sex offender, he or she will not be considered for employment. 
c.  Fiscal management. 
1.  The program will follow the written policies and procedures of fiscal management set forth by the City of Denison. 
2.  The program will have sound fiscal management and operational oversight of the program. 
3.  The program will have a written budget. 
4.  Financial statements of the program will be reviewed regularly by the director and adjustments will be made as needed. 
(2)  Staffing. 
a.  Program coordinator (coordinator) qualifications. 
1.  Coordinators are considered professional staff members of the department and must have all program leader qualifications as outlined in subsection (2)c. of this document. 
2.  Coordinators must be at least twenty-one (21) years old. Coordinators should possess the following combination of experience and training: 
i.  Two (2) years of responsible community center service or recreational programming experience. 
ii.  Equivalent to a bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university with major course work in sports management, physical education, recreation, or a related field. 
3.  Coordinators must pass a background investigation, including a test for illegal substances. 
4.  Coordinators must have a current certification in first aid and cardio pulmonary resuscitation (CPR). These certifications must be from a nationally recognized certifying organization, i.e., American Heart Association or American Red Cross. 
b.  Coordinator responsibilities. 
1.  Coordinators are responsible for administrating the youth program's daily operations in compliance with the adopted standards of care. 
2.  Coordinators are responsible for recommending the hiring, supervising, and evaluating of program leaders. 
3.  Coordinators are responsible for planning, implementing, and evaluating youth programs. 
c.  Program leader (leader) qualifications. 
1.  Leaders will be full-time, part-time, seasonal, or temporary employees of the City of Denison or volunteers. 
2.  Volunteers working with participants must be age sixteen (16) or older; however, each program site will have at least one (1) staff twenty-one (21) years or older present at all times, and all Leaders must be at least four (4) years older than the participants they are working with. 
3.  Leaders must have a current certification in first aid and cardio pulmonary resuscitation (CPR). These certifications must be from a nationally recognized certifying organization, i.e., American Heart Association or American Red Cross. 
4.  Leaders must pass a background investigation, including a test for illegal substances. 
5.  Leaders must have a minimum of six-months' experience in recreation, education, or youth programs. 
6.  Leaders must possess an accredited high school diploma or GED certificate from the state in which it was acquired. 
d.  Leader responsibilities. 
1.  Leaders will be responsible for providing participants with an environment in which they can feel safe, enjoy wholesome recreation activities, and participate in appropriate social opportunities with their peers. 
2.  Leaders will be responsible to know and adhere to all city, departmental, and youth program standards, policies and procedures that apply to youth programs. 
3.  Leaders must ensure that participants are released only to a parent or an authorized person designated by the parent. If a parent wishes that their child sign himself in or out, the parent must sign a release giving said authorization. Any child signing themselves out cannot stay at the facility or on the premises. 
4.  Leaders will be responsible for supervised access to the restrooms for participants. 
5.  Program staff will: 
i.  Consistently exhibit competency, good judgment and self-control when working with participants. 
ii.  Relate to youth with courtesy, respect, tolerance, and patience. 
iii.  Intentionally develop individual relationships with youth, focusing on their developmental needs and building on their unique strengths. 
iv.  Create a supportive, caring environment and build self-esteem in every participant. 
v.  Be engaged in activities with the participants. 
vi.  Recognize participants for their achievements and participation. 
vii.  Clearly communicate behavior expectations. 
viii.  Apply rewards and 
consequences appropriately and 
consistently for 
participant behavior. 
ix.  Model and reinforce positive behavior and use positive techniques to address negative behavior by participants. 
e.  Training/orientation. 
1.  The department is responsible to provide training and orientation to youth program staff in working with participants and for specific job responsibilities. Coordinators will provide each leader with a program manual specific to each youth program. 
2.  Program staff must be familiar with the standards of care for youth programs as adopted by the city council. 
3.  Program staff must be familiar with the youth program's policies, including discipline, guidance, and release of participants as outlined in the program manual. 
4.  Program staff will be trained in appropriate procedures to handle emergencies. 
5.  Program staff will be trained in areas including city, department, and youth program policies and procedures, recreation activities organization, safety issues, program organization, and other areas as required by assigned youth program. 
6.  Program staff will be required to sign an acknowledgment that they received the required training. 
(3)  Program operations. 
a.  Enrollment. 
1.  Before a child can become a youth program participant, a parent or guardian must register their child and provide the following information: 
i.  Name, address, and home telephone number; 
ii.  Contact names and telephone numbers in case of emergency; 
iii.  The names and telephone numbers of people to whom the child can be released; 
iv.  A statement of the child's special problems and/or needs; 
v.  Emergency medical authorization with doctor's name and telephone number; 
vi.  A signed liability waiver; 
vii.  A signed release to participate in water activities; 
viii.  Designation of need for reasonable accommodations; 
ix.  Signed acknowledgement of program code of conduct; and 
x.  Proof of date of birth. 
b.  Staff-participant ratio. 
1.  In a youth program, the standard ratio of participants to program staff is twelve (12) to one (1), based on average daily attendance. In the event a leader is unable to report to the program site, the coordinator will assign a replacement. 
2.  Ratios may be adjusted to provide adequate supervision during higher risk activities, such as field trips, swimming, etc. 
c.  Special needs. 
1.  The program is aware of, records, and informs staff of special needs of participants. 
2.  Every reasonable accommodation will be made to address participants with special needs. 
3.  Participants with special needs requiring personal assistance, i.e., feeding, changing of clothes, and using the restroom, must provide an attendant (eighteen (18) years of age or older) for the duration of the program. Program staff will not provide personal assistance. The attendant will be admitted to the program free of charge. Any additional fees must be paid by the personal attendant. With appropriate notice, accessible vehicles will be made available for transportation to authorized field trips. 
(4)  Activities. 
a.  The program provides a safe, healthy, and age appropriate environment for all participants. The program provides a well-rounded variety of activities and opportunities that support the physical, social, emotional, and cognitive growth and development of all participants. 
b.  Schedule. 
1.  The program establishes and follows a schedule that is known to program staff, participants, and parents. 
2.  The daily schedule will be available for program staff, participants, and parents. 
3.  The daily schedule will be flexible enough to provide adaptability, but structured enough to provide predictability for the participants. 
4.  Transitions will be programmed into the schedule and will be orderly, efficient, and minimal in duration. 
5.  Screen time (movies, video games, TV, computers) will not exceed two (2) hours daily. 
6.  There will be a written activity plan anytime children are in care for over five (5) hours. 
7.  A rest time will be provided when children are in care for over five (5) hours. 
8.  The program schedule will provide intentional opportunities for participants to be meaningfully involved in program planning, implementation, data collection, and evaluation. Participant feedback will be incorporated into the program when possible. 
9.  Program staff will attempt to provide indoor and outdoor time periods to include: 
i.  Alternating active and passive activities; 
ii.  An appropriate amount of time for all activities; 
iii.  Opportunity for individual, small and large group activities; and 
iv.  Outdoor time each day as weather permits based upon space availability and weather conditions. 
10.  Participants are provided with a variety of engagement strategies, such as: 
i.  Individual, small group, and large group activities; 
ii.  Short and longterm projects; 
iii.  Discovery learning; 
iv.  Hands-on projects; 
v.  Instructor-led programs; 
vi.  Experiential activities that promote creativity and self-expression. 
c.  Field trips. 
1.  Program staff will be attentive and considerate of the participant's safety on field trips and during any transportation provided by the youth program. 
i.  During field trips, program staff will have authorization for emergency medical care and emergency contact information for each participant. 
ii.  Program staff will have a written list of the participants in their group and must check the roll frequently, specifically before departure to and from destination. 
iii.  Program staff will have first aid supplies. 
2.  Before a participant can participate in city-sponsored activities, a field trip release, located in the registration packet, must be completed by the parent. 
3.  First aid supplies will be available in all youth program field trips. 
4.  Participants will be oriented to expected behavior and safety rules. 
5.  Participants will be given identification with the location's name and phone number to be worn at all times while on a field trip. 
d.  Participant pick up and drop off. 
1.  A completed and signed pick-up authorization form must be on file for each participant. 
2.  These forms must be updated each year. 
3.  The original signer of the pick-up authorization form may contact the center in person to add a new authorized person, with written notification. The original signer may also contact the center via telephone and make changes verbally using the safety word on the pick-up authorization form. 
4.  Participants must only be signed out by an authorized person listed on the pick-up authorization form. One (1) staff person must monitor the sign in/out duties each day. 
5.  Authorized persons must present picture ID to pick up a participant. 
6.  Authorized persons must be eighteen (18) or older unless the person is sixteen (16) or older and a sibling of the participant. 
7.  Sign in/sign out sheets will be kept by the program site for at least three (3) months after the youth program has ended. 
8.  Participants may be signed out by a custodial parent, unless court paperwork is given to program staff. 
9.  Parents may sign a form allowing their child to walk home at the end of the program. 
10.  Participants must be picked up by the end of the assigned youth program. If a child is picked up after the end of the program, a late fee will be assessed. If a child has not been picked up within thirty (30) minutes after the program has ended, the police will be called. 
11.  If an authorized person attempts to pick up a participant while appearing intoxicated, staff will ask if there is another person who can pick up the participant. 
12.  If any unauthorized person attempts to pick up a child, staff should: 
i.  Call the program coordinator. 
ii.  Politely inform the person that they do not have permission to release the child to them. 
iii.  Ask the person to leave. 
iv.  Move the participant at risk to another room or area. 
v.  Have another program staff in the pick-up area. 
vi.  The coordinator should call the original authorized person to inform them of the unauthorized pick up attempt. 
vii.  If necessary, program staff should call 911. 
e.  Discipline. 
1.  Program staff will execute discipline and guidance in a consistent manner based on the best interests of participants. 
2.  There will be no cruel treatment or harsh punishment (physical or verbal abuse). Examples include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Using physical punishment or any action administered to the body such as, but not limited to rough handling, or forcing child(ren) to assume an uncomfortable position. 
ii.  Restraining movement by tying, enclosing in a confined space, shaking, or using exercise as punishment. 
iii.  Being verbally abusive, including, but not limited to, threats, belittling remarks, humiliation, embarrassment, or frightening a child. 
iv.  Giving any child the authority to punish another child. 
v.  Placing a child out of visual/hearing range, in the dark, or in an unventilated area. 
vi.  Punishing a child for a toileting accident. 
vii.  Taunting a child by or any other form of jeering. 
viii.  Giving preferential attention to any child over another child. 
3.  Program staff will use brief, supervised, separation (time out) from the group, if necessary. 
4.  As necessary, program staff will initiate discipline reports to the parents of participants. Parents will be asked to sign participant discipline reports to indicate they have been advised about specific problems or incidents. 
i.  A sufficient number and/or severe nature of discipline report(s), as detailed by the disciplinary action policy in the program and operations manuals, may result in a participant being suspended from the youth program immediately. If a participant is suspended from the program, an authorized person must pick up the participant within one (1) hour. 
ii.  Participants will be removed from the program site as soon as possible in instances of danger to other participants or program staff. This includes, but is not limited to, continuous disruption of the youth program, inappropriate sexual behavior, bullying, hitting or biting other participants or program staff and damage to any city property. 
5.  Participants are expected to abide by program rules that include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Showing respect to all participants and program staff. 
ii.  Bullying of any form (cyber, physical, verbal, etc.). 
iii.  Refraining from using abusive or foul language. 
iv.  Refraining from causing bodily harm to self, other participants, or program staff. 
v.  Refraining from any inappropriate touching. 
vi.  Bringing any toys, electronics, etc. to the youth program. 
vii.  Refraining from roughhousing in any manner. 
viii.  Using social media sites during camp hours. 
ix.  Refraining from taking photographs of any kind. 
x.  Respecting all equipment, supplies, and facilities. 
xi.  Cleaning up after themselves at all times. 
xii.  Respecting the property of other participants. 
xiii.  Listening to and taking direction from all program staff. 
xiv.  Staying within the physical boundaries of the program site at all times, unless with a program staff or parent. 
(5)  Facility operations. 
a.  Inspection/monitoring/enforcement. 
1.  The coordinator of each youth program will perform a monthly inspection of the facility to maintain compliance with the standards of care. 
i.  Inspection reports will be sent to the director for review and kept on record for at least two (2) years. 
ii.  The director will review the report and establish deadlines and criteria for compliance with the standards of care. 
2.  The director will make visual inspections of the youth program based on the following schedule: 
i.  Summer day camp sites will be inspected once during each session. 
ii.  The other non-school day youth programs will be inspected once during the session. 
3.  Complaints regarding enforcement of the standards of care will be directed to the coordinator. The coordinator will be responsible for taking the necessary steps to resolve the problems. The coordinator will record complaints regarding enforcement of the standards of care and their resolution. The director will address serious complaints regarding enforcement of the standards of care and the complaints and resolutions will be noted. 
4.  The director will make an annual report to the park board on the overall status of the youth programs and their operation relative to compliance with the adopted standards of care. 
b.  Program area. 
1.  The youth program's indoor space (when applicable) meets the physical, social, emotional, and cognitive needs of participants. 
2.  The youth program's outdoor space (when applicable) is large enough, appropriately equipped, and safe to allow participants to be active and independent. 
3.  The youth program's space meets the needs related to planning, activities, and storage. 
4.  Buildings, grounds, and equipment on the program site are regularly inspected, cleaned, repaired, and maintained to protect participants' health. 
(7)  Health and safety. 
a.  Health. 
1.  Illness or injury. 
i.  A participant who is considered to be a health or safety concern to other participants or program staff will not be admitted to the youth program. 
ii.  Illnesses and injuries will be handled in a manner to protect the health of all participants and program staff. Participants having a temporal fever over one hundred (100) degrees will not be allowed back into the youth program for twenty-four (24) hours. 
iii.  Program staff will follow emergency procedures for injured participants or for participants with symptoms of an acute illness. 
iv.  In the event of an emergency and/or serious accident, parents will be notified immediately. If necessary, the Denison Emergency Medical Service will transport the participant to the nearest hospital. 
v.  In the case of a minor accident or injury (bumps and bruises), the program staff will administer first aid, monitor the participant, and notify the parents at pick-up. 
vi.  Parents will be notified if a child is injured in a way that necessitates emergency care. 
vii.  Program staff will follow the recommendations of the Texas Department of State Health Services concerning the admission or readmission of any participant after a communicable disease, and a doctor's note will be required allowing participant's readmission to the program. 
viii.  If a participant becomes sick while in the program, the parent or authorized person(s) must contact staff within one (1) hour to arrange pick up. If no contact is made within one (1) hour after initial contact by staff, the police will be notified. 
2.  Program staff will administer medication subject to the following conditions: 
i.  Parents must complete, sign, and submit authorization to administer medication detailing medication name(s), time(s) to be administered, and dosage(s) for youth enrolled in program lasting more than three (3) hours. The release will include a hold harmless clause to protect the city. 
ii.  Prescription medications are in the original containers labeled with the participant's name, date, directions, and the physician's name. The prescribing physician must provide written guidelines. Program staff will administer the medication only as stated on the label. Program staff will not administer medication after the expiration date. 
iii.  Non-prescription medications are labeled with the participant's name and the date the medication was brought to the youth program. Non-prescription medication must be in the original container. Program staff will administer medication only according to label directions and with written parental permission. 
iv.  Except in instances where an accommodation may be necessary under the ADA, program staff will be limited to dispensing and administering those medications that do not require special knowledge, skills, or training. Medication will be properly disposed of at the end of the program. 
3.  Program staff will ensure medications are inaccessible to participants. If necessary, medications will be kept in the refrigerator. 
4.  A medication record form will be kept by the coordinator detailing when medication was administered. 
b.  Safety. 
1.  Program staff will supervise participants to ensure their safety. 
2.  Program staff will inspect program sites daily checking for sanitation and safety concerns that might affect the health and safety of participants. 
3.  Program site equipment and supplies will be safe for participants use. 
4.  Program staff will have first aid supplies available at each program site in a designated location, during transportation, and for the duration of any off-site activity. 
5.  The youth program will ensure that the appropriate program staff working with participants are trained in CPR and first aid. 
6.  Participants will have access to clean drinking water at all times. 
7.  Program site air conditioners, electric fans, and heaters will be mounted out of participant's reach or have safeguards that keep participants from being injured. 
8.  Program site porches and platforms more than thirty (30) inches above the ground will be equipped with railings with the exception of performance stages. 
c.  Emergencies. 
1.  Each youth program will have an emergency operations manual that will be reviewed with all program staff. 
i.  When applicable, staff will follow directives of the emergency management office. 
2.  Fire. 
i.  In case of fire, danger of fire, explosion, or other emergency, program staff's first priority is to evacuate the participants to a pre-designated safe area. 
ii.  The program site will have an annual fire inspection by the local fire marshall, and the resulting report will detail any safety concerns observed. The report will be forwarded to the director who will review it and enforce the deadline and criteria for compliance. 
iii.  All program staff will be trained in the proper use of the fire extinguisher. 
3.  Tornados. 
i.  Tornado warning procedures will be reviewed will all program staff during orientation. 
d.  Communication. 
1.  Each remote program site will have a cell phone designated to allow the program site to be contacted by program staff. Each program site will have access to a telephone for use in contacting program staff or making emergency telephone calls. At each program site the coordinator will post the following telephone numbers adjacent to a telephone accessible to all program staff: 
i.  City of Denison Emergency Medical Services. 
ii.  City of Denison Police Department. 
iii.  City of Denison Fire Department. 
iv.  Parks and recreation department administrative office and Denison Public Library. 
v.  Telephone numbers and address for the program site itself. 
vi.  Telephone number of coordinator's office. 
vii.  Program participants' emergency contact information. 
viii.  Poison control. 
e.  Nutrition. 
1.  The program will be serving food provided by the Denison ISD Summer Food Service Program or by a similar nutritional program. 
2.  Special snacks may be provided during the program. Parents must note any food allergies on participant's registration form. 
f.  Suspected abuse. 
1.  Program staff will report suspected child abuse to the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services, in accordance with the Texas Family Code, telephone number, 1-800-252-5400 or filing a report at https://www.txabusehotline.org/Login/WebSite_UI/Report-anon.aspx. 
2.  Program staff will receive basic training related to child abuse prevention and how to report suspected abuse. 
g.  Toilet facilities. 
1.  The program site will have toilets located and equipped so participants can use them independently. 
2.  An adequate number of toilets and lavatories will be provided. 
h.  Sanitation. 
1.  The indoor program sites must have adequate light, ventilation, air conditioning and heat. 
2.  The program site will have an adequate supply of water meeting the Texas Department of State Health standards for drinking water. Water will be supplied to the participants in a safe and sanitary manner. 
3.  All waste matters will be kept in a leak-proof, covered container. 
4.  Program staff will remove garbage from program sites daily. 
(Ord. No. 4876, § 2(Exh. A), 5-15-17) 
Secs. 18-74-18-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4632, § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 2012, repealed the former Div. 2, §§ 18-86-18-93. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1965, §§ 17-17-17-24. 
Cross reference- Authorities, boards, committees, commissions, § 2-46 et seq. 

Sec. 18-86. - Created; composition; appointment of members. 
    There is hereby created a parks and recreation commission to be composed of five (5) members appointed by the city council. Such commission as constituted shall be advisory to the city council, and shall possess no authority to bind the city, nor its city council. 
(Ord. No. 4632, § 2, 1-17-12) 
Sec. 18-87. - Qualifications and terms of members. 
    The members of the parks and recreation commission shall be resident citizens of the City of Denison, and shall be appointed by a majority vote of the city council for a term of two (2) years. The initial term of office shall begin on May first of the year of appointment, except for the filling of vacancies and unexpired terms. The city council may, by majority vote, appoint a resident citizen of the City of Denison for the remainder of a vacant and unexpired term. Members shall be limited to appointment for not more than three (3) complete successive terms for a total of six (6) years. 
(Ord. No. 4632, § 2, 1-17-12) 
Sec. 18-88. - Members to serve with without compensation. 
    The members of the parks and recreation commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 4632, § 2, 1-17-12) 
Sec. 18-89. - Organization; meetings. 
    The members of the parks and recreation commission shall organize and select their own officers and shall hold meetings at least once every quarter and shall designate the time and place of such meeting. 
(Ord. No. 4632, § 2, 1-17-12) 
Sec. 18-90. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the parks and recreation commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction record of its proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 4632, § 2, 1-17-12) 
Sec. 18-91. - Rules and procedure; record of proceedings. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall adopt its own rules and procedures and keep a record of its proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 4632, § 2, 1-17-12) 
Sec. 18-92. - General powers and duties. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall be an advisory board to the city council, responsible for providing advice concerning the following matters: 
(1)  To recommend to the council, a comprehensive recreation and parkland use program based on the needs and interest of the community to assure and stimulate public interest, and to solicit to the fullest extent the cooperation of schools, local youth and public and private agencies. 
(2)  To consider the acquisition of land and/or other facilities for parks and recreational facilities, and to make recommendations on such to the city council. 
(3)  To establish rules and regulations, upon recommendation by the city manager, for use and improvement of public parklands, recreation areas, squares, and grounds, including playgrounds, concessions and recreational and related facilities and programs installed and maintained therein, and to recommend fees for adoption by the city council. 
(4)  To recommend the entering into of contracts, interlocal agreements and lease agreements regarding parks and recreation activities to the city council. 
(5)  To serve in an advisory capacity in all matters as may, from time to time, be referred to the parks and recreation commission by the city council, or by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 4632, § 2, 1-17-12) 
Secs. 18-93-18-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKS 

Sec. 18-111. - Hunting in parks prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt any wild birds, animals or game with firearms, dogs, bow and arrow or otherwise in any park within the city. Exceptions may be provided in subsection 18-139(c). 
(Code 1965, § 17-1; Ord. No. 4701, § 13(d), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 18-112. - Driving vehicles or riding animals in parks and/or school grounds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or cause to be driven any motorized vehicle or motorized conveyance of any kind, or drive or cause to be ridden any animal of any kind, over, across, or along the grounds of any city park other than along and on the roadways and parking lots provided in such parks. 
(Code 1965, § 17-2) 
Cross reference- Traffic, Ch. 25. 
Sec. 18-113. - Damaging, removing, etc., park property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, pull, break, bruise, remove or in any manner injure any tree, shrub or vegetation of any kind growing in any city park or to injure, deface or in any way interfere with any chair, bench, seat or hydrant, frame, fence, gate or structure of any kind therein or thereon or connected therewith. This section shall not apply to anything done by the lawful employees of the city in the lawful performance of their duties, or under their authority or direction. 
(Code 1965, § 17-3) 
Secs. 18-114-18-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RECREATION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4883, § 2, adopted June 19, 2017, amended div. 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 4, §§ 18-136-18-144 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 17-4-17-8; Ord. No. 3363, § 1, adopted Jan. 18, 1993; Ord. No. 3674, § 1, adopted Oct. 16, 1996; Ord. No. 3831, § 1, adopted Nov. 2, 1998; and Ord. No. 4701, § 13(e), (f), adopted June 17, 2013. 
Cross reference- Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages prohibited in parks, § 3-10. 

Sec. 18-136. - City swimming pools; rules and regulations. 
(a)  Rules and regulations. The city manager or his or her designee is hereby authorized to promulgate regulations regarding the use and operation of the city swimming pools, both public and private, including the hours and days of operation. 
(b)  City swimming pools; open to public; admission charges. The admission charges for the city swimming pools during the hours of public operation and use shall be as approved and adopted by the city council and kept on file in the parks and recreation office. 
(c)  City swimming pools; private use; admission charges. The city manager or his or her designee is hereby authorized to promulgate regulations regarding the use and operation of the city swimming pools during hours set aside for private use. Admission charges for the city swimming pools during private use shall be as approved and adopted by the city council and kept on file in the parks and recreation office. 
(d)  Unlawful entry at swimming pools. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any public swimming pool in the city, or any structure of any kind therein or thereon or connected therewith, at any time other than during the hours when such pools are open to the general public either for swimming or swimming instructions. This section shall not apply to the employees of the city engaged in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 4883, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 18-137. - Waterloo Lake; rules and regulations. 
(a)  Rules and regulations. The city manager or his or her designee is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations related to the operation of Waterloo Lake and its facilities, including the following: 
(1)  Providing guidelines for the reservation of facilities; 
(2)  Establishing rental equipment policies and rates; and 
(3)  Providing for park hours of operation. 
(b)  Restrictions on use of motorboats; safety. It shall be unlawful to use a motor of any size in excess of single-headed, electric trolling motor on Waterloo Lake except when required for lake maintenance, inspections or emergency operations. 
(c)  Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any of the following conduct while within the boundaries of Waterloo Lake Park: 
(1)  To bathe, swim, wade or waterski. 
(2)  To operate or ride in any boat, canoe or vessel without having immediately available a flotation device meeting the minimum specifications of the U. S. Coast Guard for each occupant of the boat, canoe or vessel. 
(3)  To leave or permit to be left any type of unattended boat, canoe or vessel. 
(4)  To build any fire, except in grills provided or in designated areas. 
(5)  To leave an un-extinguished fire in the park unattended by a person eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(6)  To violate any rules and regulations that are clearly posted at the boundary or within Waterloo Lake Park. 
(Ord. No. 4883, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 18-138. - Randell Lake Reservation; rules and regulations. 
(a)  Rules and regulations. The city manager or his or her designee is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations related to the operation of Randell Lake Reservation and its facilities, including the following: 
(1)  Providing guidelines for the reservation and facilities; 
(2)  Establishing rental equipment policies and rates; and 
(3)  Providing for reservation hours of operation. 
(b)  Restricted access. Randell Lake Reservation is a restricted area owned by the City of Denison, Texas for the purpose of providing municipal water to its citizens. Access is therefore restricted to Denison residents and their accompanied guests. Randell Lake Reservation shall be open at sunrise and close at sunset. It shall be unlawful for a resident of Denison to be in Randell Lake Reservation before sunrise or after sunset. It shall be unlawful for any other person who is not a resident or employee of Denison, or accompanied by a resident or employee of Denison during permitted hours, to enter Lake Randell Reservation. 
(c)  Restrictions on fishing. Any resident of the city, and any such resident's accompanied guest, may fish in Randell Lake without any payment of a fee. It shall be unlawful for any other person to fish at Randell Lake. It is unlawful for a person under the age of sixteen (16) and unaccompanied by a parent or legal guardian to fish. It is unlawful to hunt or fish in any area within the Randell Lake Reservation which has been posted as a restricted area. 
(d)  Restrictions on use of motorboats on lakes; safety. It shall be unlawful to use a gas-powered motor larger than ten (10) horse power. It shall be unlawful to use a boat exceeding twenty (20) feet in length. It shall be unlawful to leave or permit to be left any type of unattended boat, canoe or raft in the lake or reservation. 
(e)  Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any of the following conduct while within the boundaries of the Randell Lake Reservation: 
(1)  To bathe, swim, wade or waterski. 
(2)  Violate any applicable local, state or federal laws including, but not limited to, required hunting and fishing game laws and licenses. 
(3)  To operate or ride in any boat, canoe or vessel without having immediately available a flotation device meeting the minimum specifications of the U. S. Coast Guard for each occupant of the boat, canoe or vessel. 
(4)  To build any fire except in grills provided or in designated areas. 
(5)  To leave an un-extinguished fire in the reservation unattended by a person eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(6)  To carry or discharge any type of firearm, except during the special waterfowl season pursuant to section 18-138(f). However, the exception in section 18-138(f) does not apply to the area within the chain-linked section of the Randell Lake Reservation. 
(7)  To hunt, fish, drive, walk in or occupy any area which has been posted as a restricted area. 
(8)  To operate any motor-powered vehicle off the designated driving areas and roads already established and marked. 
(9)  To light, discharge or cause to be discharged any kind of fireworks. 
(10)  To violate any rules and regulations that are clearly posted at the boundary or within Randell Lake Reservation. 
(11)  To violate any of the provisions in the Special Waterfowl Huntng Season Rules below in section 18-138(f). 
(f)  Special Waterfowl Hunting Season Rules. This subsection provides for waterfowl hunting by Denison residents and their guests during such hunting seasons as may be established by state and federal agencies having the authority to establish and regulate such hunting. The water superintendent of the city is hereby authorized and instructed to promulgate rules and regulations providing for the number and allocation of blinds within the reservation. In the event that the public demand for blinds exceeds the number of blinds available, the superintendent shall use a random drawing in assigning blinds and their locations. 
    It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the following provisions: 
(1)  Not having a valid duck blind permit, in your name, issued by the City of Denison, for that hunting season. 
(2)  Cutting trees or brush in the placement or construction of a blind. 
(3)  Possessing more than one (1) shotgun per person. 
(4)  Using or possessing ammunition greater weight than #2 shot. 
(5)  Gaining access to the reservation prior to one (1) hour before sunrise or remaining at the reservation beyond one (1) hour after sunset. 
(6)  Not hunting within twenty-five (25) feet of the numbered post indicating the blind site assigned to you. 
(7)  Hunters must be eighteen (18) years of age or older or unaccompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(8)  Failing to remove the blind and all personal property, including but not limited to all decoys, luring devices, and jugs from the reservation within ten (10) days of the close of the waterfowl hunting season. 
(Ord. No. 4883, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 18-139. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  The enforcement authority for this division shall be the Denison Police Department or other law enforcement agency with jurisdiction. 
(b)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this division shall upon conviction be fined pursuant to section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Any violation of this chapter can be enjoined by a suit filed in the name of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy shall be in addition to any penal provision in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4883, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Secs. 18-140-18-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC LIBRARY[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Section 13(g) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed art. IV, §§ 18-161-18-165, and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former art. IV pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 211/2-1-211/2-4. 

Sec. 18-161. - Established; name. 
    Pursuant to the city Charter, there is hereby established and continued within the city a public library. The name of the library shall be "The Denison Public Library," and it shall function in accordance with the laws of the state, and the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(g), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 18-162. - Board-Created; authority of the same. 
    There is hereby created and established a board to be known as "The Denison Public Library Advisory Board." The library board shall serve in advisory capacity to the city manager, or his or her designee, and the city council. The public library is authorized to join and participate cooperatively with the state library system and its regional system. 
    The board may make recommendations concerning the establishment of fees, operating policies and programs of the library, long-range capital improvement planning, and such other policy matters as the board determines necessary. The board shall also have those responsibilities and duties conferred upon it and expressly adopted by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(g), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 18-163. - Same-Adoption of rules and regulations. 
    The library board is empowered to provide and adopt rules and regulations for the management of its own business. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(g), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 18-164. - Same-Composition; appointment and terms of members. 
    The public library board shall consist of seven (7) directors, to be nominated and approved by the city council for two-year terms and otherwise be governed by the provisions of article II, chapter 2, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(g), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 18-165. - Library budget and funds generally. 
(a)  The city manager or his or her designee shall present a budget for the operation of the library on an annual basis. The library board shall offer comment and advice and recommend approval of said budget to the city council. 
(b)  The Denison Public Library Board shall constitute and serve as the board of trustees for the Denison Public Library Endowment Fund. Service as a trustee for such fund shall lapse upon the expiration of the term of office of a boardmember. Such board of trustees shall be empowered with the duties, obligations and limitations provided by the fund's articles of incorporation and by-laws. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 13(g), 6-17-13) 
Chapter 19 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4678, § 1, adopted Feb. 18, 2013, repealed the former Ch. 19, §§ 19-1, 19-26-19-31, 19-51-19-56. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 19 as set out herein. The former Ch. 19 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1965, §§ 221/2-1-221/2-6, 221/2-11-221/2-18; Ord. No. 3095, § 3, adopted Sept. 6, 1988; Ord. No. 3127, § 1, adopted Feb. 20, 1989; Ord. No. 3178, § 1, adopted Oct. 2, 1989; Ord. No. 3738, §§ 1-4, adopted August 4, 1997; Ord. No. 4128, §§ 1-4, adopted August 19, 2002; Ord. No. 4260, §§ 1-4, adopted Dec. 13, 2004; Ord. No. 4261, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2004. 
Cross reference- Specific code enforcement authority, § 2-126; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; food and food establishments, Ch. 9; posting advertising matter on property without consent of owner prohibited, § 11-1; HUD-code manufactured home and recreational vehicle facilities, Ch. 12; nuisances, Ch. 13; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; subdivision regulations, Ch. 22; traffic, Ch. 25; zoning, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference- Control of outdoor advertising, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a, §§ 4.03-4.07; municipal regulation of signs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - INTENT 

Sec. 19-1. - Need. 
    Signs are an important component of the urban built environment, providing important information, and directions to community residents and visitors. However: 
(1)  The uncontrolled proliferation of signs is hazardous to users of streets and highways within the City of Denison and will adversely affect the safety and efficiency of the city's transportation network; and 
(2)  Unless the location, number, setback, lighting, and size of signs are regulated, the scattering of the signs throughout the city would be detrimental to the preservation of scenic resources and so to the economic base of the city; and 
(3)  The proliferation of signs in the city has an adverse affect on adjacent property values; and 
(4)  The orderly and uniform regulation of signs is a substantial factor in guiding the attractive and aesthetic development of properties in accordance with the comprehensive plan and thereby avoiding detrimental impacts of signs on the appearance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-2. - Intent. 
    Therefore it is the intent of these regulations: 
(1)  To protect the safety and efficiency of the city's transportation network by reducing the confusion or distraction to motorists and enhancing the motorist's ability to see pedestrians, obstacles, other vehicles, and traffic signs; 
(2)  To preserve, protect, and enhance areas of historical, architectural, cultural, aesthetic, and economic value regardless of whether they are natural or manmade; 
(3)  To protect the value of adjacent and nearby properties, in particular, residentially zoned properties from the impact of lighting, size, height, movement, and location of signs; 
(4)  To enhance the image of the city conveyed to tourists and visitors by controlling the location, number, and size of signs; 
(5)  To integrate sign regulations more effectively with other regulations by establishing regulations for setbacks, height, and spacing to allow for lighting, ventilation, and preservation of views in a manner consistent with land uses in the various zoning districts; and 
(6)  To preserve and enhance the appearance of the city and the public interest in aesthetics, and to control and reduce visual clutter and blight. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Alter means to change the size, shape or outline, or type of sign or to change the electrical lighting, except for the replacement of lamps not brighter than the original or the replacement of a surface panel. 
    Attach means to stick, tack, nail or otherwise affix a sign to any object; to paint, stencil, write, or otherwise mark on an object. 
    Awning means an architectural projection that provides weather protection, identity and decoration, and is supported by the building to which it is attached. It is composed of a lightweight rigid or retractable skeleton structure over which a thin cover is attached which may be of fabric or canvas, and may be illuminated. 
    Banner means a sign composed of cloth, plastic, paper, canvas or other light fabric. 
    Building means a structure which has a roof supported by columns, wall or air for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animal or chattel. 
    Chief building official means the Chief Building Official for the City of Denison or his/her designee. 
    Canopy means a roof-like structure which shelters a use such as, but not restricted to, a gasoline pump island, and is supported by either one (1) or more columns or by the building to which it is accessory to and is open on two (2) or more sides. 
    Dilapidated or deteriorated condition means any sign: 
(1)  Where elements of the surface or background can be seen as viewed from the normal viewing distance (intended viewing distance), to have portions of the finished material or paint flaked, broken off, or missing, or otherwise not in harmony with the rest of the surface; or 
(2)  Where the structural support or frame or sign panels are visibly bent, broken, dented, or torn as to constitute an unsightly, hazardous or harmful condition; or 
(3)  Where the sign, or its elements, are twisted or leaning or at angles other than those at which it was originally erected (such as may result from being blown or the failure of a structural support); or 
(4)  Where the message or wording can no longer be clearly read by a person under normal viewing conditions; or 
(5)  Where the sign or its elements are not in compliance with the regulations of the National Electrical Code and/or the International Building Code currently adopted by the city. 
    Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall also include the painting of signs on the exterior surface of a building or structure. 
    Facing or surface means the surface of the sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign. 
    Flag means a piece of cloth, canvas, or other light fabric, usually rectangular in shape, containing a distinctive design, logo or message which is used as a symbol or to signal or attract attention. 
    Illuminated sign means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, or designs illuminated by electric lights, luminous tubes or other means that are specifically placed to draw attention to, or to provide night time viewing of, the subject matter on the sign face. 
    Incidental means information on a sign that is incidental to the operation of the business such as but not limited to hours of operation, accepted credit cards and parking information. 
    Incombustible material means any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of one thousand two hundred (1,200) degrees Fahrenheit, and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature. 
    Logo means any design or insignia of a company or product which is commonly used in advertising to identify that company or product. 
    Pennant means any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in a series, designed to move in the wind. 
    Premises means a lot or unplatted tract, or a combination of contiguous lots and/or unplatted tracts of land where the lot, tract, or combination of lots and/or tracts is under single ownership and is reflected in the plat record of the city. 
    Public right-of-way means a dedicated road or street including the easement for that road or street. 
    Roof means any exterior surface of a structure that has a slope of less than seventy (70) degrees and shall also include the top most portion of any structure. 
    Searchlight means an apparatus capable of projecting a beam or beams of light in excess of one (1) million peak candlepower. 
    Setback means the minimum required distance the sign must be located from a right-of-way or a property line. The distance shall be measured from the right-of-way or property line to the closest point of the sign from the ground upward. 
    Sight visibility triangle means where one (1) street intersects with another, the triangular area formed by extending two (2) curb lines a distance of forty-five (45) feet from their point of intersection, and connecting these points with an imaginary line, thereby making a triangle. If there are no curbs existing, the triangular area shall be formed by extending the property lines a distance of thirty (30) feet from their point of intersection and connecting these points with an imaginary line thereby making a triangle. Where a street intersects with an alley or driveway, the "sight visibility triangle" is the triangular area formed by measuring eight (8) feet to a point along the property lines and adjoining said points to form the hypotenuse of the triangle. 
    Sign means any device, flag, banner, light, figure, picture, letter word, message, symbol, plaque, or poster visible from outside the lot on which it is located and designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on that lot. 
    Sign area means the actual area of a face of the sign, unless the sign is not of a regular (square, rectangle, triangle, circle) shape. In the case of an irregularly-shaped sign, the entire area within a single continuous perimeter forming the most applicable single regular shape enclosing the extreme limits of each sign shall be the "gross surface area." In the event two (2) or more signs share a single structure, each sign or panel may be considered separately for square footage purposes, except that the combined footage of such signs cannot exceed the total square footage allowed for the sign. 
    Sign, attached means any sign attached to, applied on, or supported by, any part of a building (such as a wall, roof, window, canopy, awning, arcade, or marquee) which encloses or covers usable space. Neon tubing attached directly to a wall surface shall be considered a "wall sign" when forming a border for the subject matter, or when directing attention to the subject matter or when forming letters, logos, or pictorial designs. 
    Sign, awning means a sign attached to an awning. 
    Sign, canopy means a sign attached to a canopy. 
    Sign, changeable message means a sign whose face is designed and constructed in a manner capable of changing messages through a system of removable characters or panels attached to the face of the sign or changed by electronic means. 
    Sign, development means a temporary on-site sign providing identification or information pertaining to a residential or commercial development and may include the builder, property owner, architect, contractor, engineer, landscape architect, decorator, or mortgagee, within that development, but shall not include a subdivision marketing sign. 
    Sign, digital or electronic means a sign, display or device that changes its message by programmable electronic or mechanical process, utilizes digital images or light emitting technology or employs electronic variable messages in any manner. This does include a changeable message sign as defined herein. 
    Sign, directional means any off-site sign that directs the public to businesses, services attractions and public facilities not located on the property on which the sign is located. 
    Sign, directional off-premise (temporary directional) means a sign displaying advertising copy that pertains and provides directions to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service or product not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the lot on which the sign is located. 
    Sign, directory means any sign listing occupants within shopping centers, industrial sites, retail districts, office districts and commercial sites. Directory sign also means a permanent on-site sign identifying the buildings in the development or providing information on their location. 
    Sign, garage sale means any on-site promotional sign for the sale of personal household goods in a residential zoning district or on the property of a nonprofit organization. 
    Sign, gasonline pricing means a sign located on a site where fuel is sold and indicates the cost of gasoline or diesel fuel sold at that location. 
    Sign, home improvement means any on-site sign that displays the name of a roofing, fence, pool painting, landscape or other home improvement contractor. 
    Sign, inflatable means any hollow sign expanded or enlarged by the use of air or gas. 
    Sign, institutional means a permanent on-site sign used to identify governmental and municipal agencies, public schools, churches, or similar public institutions, and used to communicate messages of public importance to the general public. 
    Sign, menu board means an on-site sign that displays a menu and pricing for food services and may include an audible speaker and microphone integral to the sign. 
    Sign, model home means any sign identifying a new home, either furnished or unfurnished, as being a builder's or contractor's model open to the public for inspection. 
    Sign, movement control means a sign providing direction or traffic flow information for persons or vehicles located the same premises as the sign. Movement control signs shall not advertise or otherwise draw attention to the premises, an individual, business, commodity, service, activity or product. 
    Sign, municipally-owned means any sign that identifies a park, entrance to the city, place of interest within the city, any city sponsored event or any municipally-owned facility and is erected by or at the direction of a city official. A municipally-owned sign does not include traffic or street identification signs. 
    Sign, monument means any detached sign made from masonry, concrete materials, wood or plastic provided that a masonry or metal base is incorporated into the sign, with no separation between the base of the sign and grade. 
    Sign, nonconforming means a sign and its supporting structure which does not conform to all or part of the provisions of this chapter, and: 
(1)  Was in existence and lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this chapter; 
(2)  Was in existence and lawfully located and used in accordance with the provisions of the prior ordinance applicable thereto, or which was considered legally nonconforming thereunder, and has since been in continuous or regular use; or 
(3)  Was in existence, located, and used on the premises at the time it was annexed into Denison and has since been in regular and continuous use. 
    Sign, obsolete means any sign that no longer serves a bona fide use or purpose. 
    Sign, off-premise means a sign displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service or product not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the lot on which the sign is located. 
    Sign, pole means any sign erected on a vertical framework consisting of one (1) or more uprights supported by the ground, with no guy or braces to the ground or any other structure, and where there is a physical separation between the base of the sign and the ground. 
    Sign, political means a sign (1) relating to the election of a person to a public office, (2) relating to a political party, (3) relating to a matter to be voted upon at an election called by a public body, or (4) containing primarily a political message. 
    Sign, portable means a sign that is not securely connected to the ground in such a way that it cannot easily be moved from one (1) location to another and is not a vehicular sign. 
    Sign, projecting means any sign which is attached to and supported by a building or wall and which projects outward from the building or wall, generally at a right angle. 
    Sign, promotional means any type of sign used for special promotions including, but not limited to, grand openings, anniversary celebrations, sales, and other such events. Promotional signs include, but are not limited to, banners, pennants, streamers, balloons, flags, bunting, inflatable signs and other similar signs. 
    Sign, protective means signs that identify or warn of any security devices located on the premises, including guard dogs. 
    Sign, reader board means any sign comprised of changeable letters that allows a change of sign copy by adding or removing letters. The sign copy shall conform to the category use of the sign allowed by this chapter. 
    Sign, real estate means any on-site temporary sign pertaining to the sale or rental of property and advertising property only for the use for which it is legally zoned. 
    Sign, roof means a sign that is mounted to or that projects from a canopy or roof over an entry to a building, but that does not project above the highest point of the building. 
    Sign, sandwich board means a non-illuminated, self-supporting sign that is placed on a sidewalk, without a permanent base or connection, and is temporary in nature. 
    Sign, subdivision means any permanent on-site sign identifying a subdivision located in a residential zoning district. 
    Sign, temporary religious means a sign that advertises the name of and provides direction to a religious organization or group that is temporarily operating in a school or other facility. 
    Sign, V-type means an off-premise sign structure that consists of multiple sign facings placed at angles to each other, oriented in different directions and not exceeding one (1) foot apart at the nearest point to each other. 
    Sign, window means any sign, banner, poster or display located on the internal or external surface of the window of any establishment for the purpose of advertising services, products or sales available within such establishment or which announces the opening of such establishment. 
    Sign, yard means any sign that publicizes the arrival of a newborn, a birthday, a personal special event or the participation of a family member in a school activity or sport. Yard signs shall also include signs that advertise the presence of a home security system. 
    Sign support means any pole, post, strut, cable or other structural fixture or framework necessary to hold and secure a sign, providing that said fixture or framework is not imprinted with any picture, symbol or word using characters in excess of one (1) inch in height, nor is internally or decoratively illuminated. 
    Sign, vehicular means any sign on a vehicle parked temporarily, incidental to its principal use for transportation. This definition shall not include signs being transported to a site for permanent erection. 
    Sign, zoning means any sign erected by the City of Denison Planning and Zoning Department to publicize the request for zoning or rezoning of a property. 
    Sign setback means the horizontal distance between a sign and the front or side property line, as measured from that part of the sign, including its extremities and supports, nearest to any point on any imaginary vertical plane projecting vertically from the front or side property line. 
    Visibility triangle means the triangular area formed at the intersection of two (2) streets bounded by the property lines and measuring twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of the property lines along to two (2) streets and connecting the two (2) points (see figure 8 in Illustrations). 
    Wall means any exterior surface of a structure that has a slope of sixty (60) degrees or more. 
    Zoning district, non-residential means any zoning district designated by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Denison as O, NS, LR, CR, RR, C, CA, BP, LI, HI. 
    Zoning district, residential means any zoning district designated by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Denison as A, RD, SF-20, SF-10, SF-7.5, SF-5, SF-PH, SF-TH, LD, UD, MH, 2F, MF-1, MF-2. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 19-2.1. - Chief building official. 
    The chief building official is charged with the implementation and enforcement of this chapter. 
Sec. 19-2.2. - Permits. 
(a)  [Issuance:] No sign shall be erected, constructed, relocated, altered, repaired or maintained, except as provided in this chapter, until a permit for such has been issued by the City of Denison and the fee paid, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Permit fees are contained in the City of Denison comprehensive fee schedule. Any sign that is not specifically approved by this chapter shall not receive a permit and any such sign shall be considered to be in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Permit expiration: A permit for a sign shall expire if the work is not commenced within six (6) months from the date of issuance of such permit. Where work has commenced, permits shall expire one (1) year from the date of permit issuance. 
(c)  Electrical permit: Where signs contain electrical wiring and connections, an electrical permit must also be obtained in addition to the permit for the sign. No sign shall be erected in violation of the city's electrical code or regulations. Every sign with any type of electrical connection must be listed by a recognized listing agency with a permanent label properly affixed. 
(d)  Not to issue to persons previously failing to pay fees: The city shall not issue a permit under the provisions of this chapter to any person, business, entity, organization or activity who has previously failed or refused to pay any fees or costs assessed against him under the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance adopted by the City of Denison. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13; Ord. No. 4773, § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 19-3. - Applications. 
    All applications for permits shall include each of the following: 
(1)  A completed permit application. 
(2)  A drawing of the proposed sign indicating sign dimensions and all existing signs maintained on the lot and visible from the right-of-way. The drawing must indicate if the sign will be lighted, and if so, whether the lighting will be internal or external. If the sign is lighted, a separate electrical permit will be required. 
(3)  A site plan, for any monument or pole sign, indicating the distance the sign will be located from each property line. The distance must be measured from the property line to the closest point of the sign to the property line. 
(4)  A building facade drawing, for all attached signs, indicating the proposed location of the sign, dimensions and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-4. - Work started without a permit. 
    No sign requiring a permit may be erected or installed without first having a permit. If any work for which a permit is required by this chapter has been commenced without first obtaining a permit the provisions of section 5-701 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Denison shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13; Ord. No. 4773, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 19-5. - Permit revocable. 
(a)  The city may suspend or revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter whenever it shall be determined that the permit is issued: 
(1)  In error; or 
(2)  On the basis of incorrect or false information supplied; or 
(3)  In violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; or 
(4)  In violation any other ordinance of this city or laws of this state or the federal government. 
(b)  The suspension or revocation shall be effective when communicated in writing to the person to whom the permit is issued, the sign owner, or to the property owner upon whose property the sign is located. 
(c)  Any signs installed or existing under a revoked permit shall be removed by the permit holder, sign owner, or property owner within ten (10) days of written notice of the revocation. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-6. - Validity of permit. 
    The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this Code or of any other ordinance of the City of Denison. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the City of Denison shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the chief building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-7. - Nonconforming existing signs. 
(a)  Any nonconforming sign and/or its supporting structure, which is destroyed, damaged, dilapidated or deteriorated, shall not be replaced, repaired or renovated, in whole or in part, if such replacement, repair or renovation would require an expenditure of monies in excess of sixty (60) percent of the cost of a new sign, including its supporting structure, which is substantially the same or similar to the nonconforming sign destroyed, damaged, dilapidated or deteriorated. Permits granted prior to the passage of this chapter shall be renewed only if the applicant complies with all provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  No sign or supporting structure that is lawfully repaired, reproduced, repaired, or renovated as a nonconforming sign shall be increased in area or height. 
(c)  If a nonconforming sign is moved, the sign shall lose its nonconforming status and shall be required to meet all requirements of a new sign under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-8. - Inspection. 
    The chief building official may inspect annually, or at such other times as he/she deems necessary, each sign regulated by this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same complies with provisions of this chapter, is secure or insecure, whether it still serves a useful purpose, and whether it is in need of removal or repair. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-9. - Removal of obsolete signs. 
    Any sign which the chief building official determines no longer serves a bona fide use or does not conform to this chapter shall be removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the land, buildings or structure upon which the sign is located within sixty (60) days after written notification to do so from the city. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-10. - Removal or repair of dilapidated or deteriorated signs. 
    If the chief building official determines that any sign exists in a dilapidated or deteriorated condition, or is a menace to the public, he/she shall give written notice to the person or persons responsible for the sign. The permit holder, owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the premises shall remove or repair the sign within thirty (30) days after the notice. If the owner fails to remove or repair the sign by the end of the thirty (30) day notice, the city may remove or repair the sign and assess the cost of such repair to the owner of the property. The chief building official may remove or have removed, without notice, and assess the owner for the costs, any sign which is an immediate peril to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-11. - Removal of illegally erected signs. 
    Any temporary sign that is erected, constructed or otherwise displayed, which the chief building official determines to be in violation of this chapter, may be removed by city personnel. Any such sign removed by city personnel may be held for a period of seventy-two (72) hours and upon expiration of the time may be disposed. The city is not required to notify the permit holder or owner of the sign that it has been picked up or that disposal of the sign is imminent. 
    For permanent signs, the sign must be removed by the permit holder, owner of the sign, or owner of the property on which the sign is located within a reasonable time period as determined by the chief building official. Upon failure to comply with the notice or to file an appeal of the decision in accordance with this chapter, the chief building official is authorized to cause the removal of the sign and assess the permit holder, owner of the sign and/or owner of the property for the costs of removal plus an administrative fee as established by the City of Denison Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-12. - Removal expenses. 
    Any sign required to be removed by the chief building official, shall be removed by the permit holder, sign owner, or property owner within thirty (30) days after written notification to do so, unless a shorter time is given when the chief building official determines that the sign is an immediate peril to persons or property. Upon failure to comply with the notice, the chief building official may enter the property upon which the sign is located to cause the removal of the sign. The owner of the land, building or structure to which the sign is attached, or upon which it is erected, and the owner of the sign and the holder of the sign permit are jointly and severally liable for any expense incident to removal. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-13. - Variances. 
(a)  Variances to the provisions of this chapter shall be heard by the building appeals board with the exception of article XIV. Variances to article XIV will be determined by the historic preservation board. A simple majority vote of a quorum of the board in favor of the variance will be required to approve any variance request. In order to approve a request for a variance, the building appeals board or the historic preservation board shall determine that the request meets three (3) of the following four (4) criteria: 
(1)  The proposed sign shall not adversely impact the adjacent property (visibility, size, location, etc.); 
(2)  The proposed sign does not conflict with the spirit of this chapter, which is one of providing public safety, open space and air, preservation and enhancement of the appearance of the city and protection of property values; 
(3)  The variance is needed due to restricted area, shape, topography or physical features that are unique to the property on which the proposed sign would be located; 
(4)  The proposed sign is of a unique design or configuration. 
(b)  Should the building appeals board or historic preservation board deny a request for a variance, the applicant may appeal the request to the city council, provided that, such appeal is requested in writing to the chief building official within thirty (30) days of the date the building appeals board denied the variance. A vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the city council is required to overturn the decision of the building appeals board or the historic preservation board. The decision of the city council is final. 
(c)  A variance from this chapter is valid only if a permit is secured within ninety (90) days from the date of the building appeals board's or the city council's decision. 
(d)  Each applicant shall pay the fee established in the city's fee ordinance before the building appeals board shall hear any variance request. 
    Exception: No variance fee shall be required for any variance requested by any applicant that the chief building official determines to be a bona fide non-profit organization. 
(e)  All variance requests shall be made in writing to, and on the application form provided by, the chief building official. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Secs. 19-14-19-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROHIBITED SIGNS 
    Any sign which is not specifically allowed by this chapter shall be prohibited. In addition, the following types of signs are expressly prohibited within the city: 

Sec. 19-25. - Signs imitating traffic or emergency signs. 
    Signs may not contain any combination of forms, words, colors, or lights, which imitate standard public traffic regulatory, emergency signs, or signals. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-26. - Portable signs. 
    Portable signs, unless specifically allowed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-27. - Signs violating other laws or ordinances. 
    Signs erected in violation of any ordinance adopted by the City of Denison or any state or federal law. (e.g. traffic visibility requirements, zoning, building code, or electrical code). 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-28. - Signs attached to trees or utility poles. 
    Signs attached to, painted or maintained upon any tree or public utility pole or public utility structure. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-29. - Signs on sidewalks, curbs, gutters or streets. 
    Signs attached to or painted on any sidewalk, curb, gutter, or street (except street address numbers and sandwich board signs approved under section 19-152 of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-30. - Moving, flashing, revolving or color changing signs. 
    Signs that move, flash light intermittently, change color or revolve, unless specifically allowed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-31. - Pole signs. 
    Pole signs unless specifically allowed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-32. - Off-premise signs. 
    Off-premise signs, unless specifically allowed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-33. - Signs attached to or painted on a fence, wall or railing. 
    Signs attached to or painted on the outside of a fence, wall or railing, unless specifically allowed by this chapter. 
    Exception: Signs identifying the manufacturer of a fence or similar product, provided that the sign does not exceed two (2) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-34. - Signs causing a nuisance or hazard because of illumination. 
    Signs illuminated to an intensity to cause glare or brightness to a degree that could constitute a safety hazard or nuisance in the opinion of the chief building official or the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-35. - Signs advertising the sale of a vehicle. 
    Signs attached to a vehicle advertising the sale of the vehicle where the vehicle is parked in such a way that the sign informs or attracts the attention of persons using the public right-of-way. Vehicles legally parked at one location, with for sale signs visible from the right-of-way for two (2) hours or more, shall be prima facie evidence of non-compliance with this section. 
    Exceptions: 
(1)  A maximum of two (2) vehicles may be parked at the vehicle owner's residence, or on the street adjacent to the residence advertising, the sale of the vehicles provided that the vehicles are registered to the person residing at the residence. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to property that has a valid automobile sales lot where a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city for that use. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-36. - Signs attached to a vehicle. 
    Signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers that are parked on a public right-of-way, public property, or private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property shall be prohibited. However, this is not in any way intended to prohibit signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and trailers, such as lettering on motor vehicles, where the sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-37. - Easements. 
    Signs placed in or projecting over or into any easement unless specifically allowed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-38. - Right-of-way. 
    Signs placed in or projecting over or onto any public right-of-way unless specifically allowed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-39. - Visibility triangle. 
    No sign shall be erected in the visibility triangle. 
    Exception: Pole signs may be erected in the visibility triangle as long as all portions of the sign are clear from a point eighteen (18) inches to ten (10) feet from the ground with the exception of support poles which may be included in this area as long as the pole does not exceed six (6) inches in diameter. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Secs. 19-40-19-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EXEMPT SIGNS 
    A permit shall not be required for the following signs, provided however, such signs shall otherwise comply with all other applicable sections of this chapter. 

Sec. 19-45. - Nameplates. 
    Nameplates, or signs reflecting the name of a building or structure (i.e., a fence) or the name of the company that built or designed the building or structure, not exceeding one (1) square foot in area. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-46. - Building identification/memorial. 
    Memorial signs or tablets or the name of the building and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-47. - Traffic. 
    Traffic or street signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger, and emergency, temporary or non-advertising signs as may be approved by the city council or the city manager or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-48. - Signs inside a building. 
    Signs located inside a building and which are not displayed so as to be visible from outside the building. Signs located in covered mall buildings shall comply with the current building code and electrical code. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-49. - Movement control signs. 
    Movement control signs may be erected at any occupancy or any lot, other than single family or duplex premises, may be attached or detached and may be erected without limits as to number; provided that such signs shall comply with all other applicable regulations of this chapter. Movement control signs shall be premise signs only. The occupant of a premise who erects a movement control sign shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Each sign must not exceed five (5) square feet in effective area. 
(2)  If a sign is an attached sign, as defined, the words must not exceed six (6) inches in height. 
(3)  Each sign must convey a bona fide message which directs vehicular or pedestrian movement within or onto the lot on which the sign is located. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-50. - Protective signs. 
    The occupant of a premise may erect a maximum of two (2) protective signs, in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Each sign must not exceed six (6) square feet in effective area. 
(2)  Detached signs must not exceed three (3) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-51. - Government signs. 
    Flags, insignia, legal notices, or informational, directional or traffic signs which are legally required or necessary to the essential functions of government agencies and decorative displays for holidays or public demonstrations which do not contain advertising and are not used as such. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-52. - Holiday lights and decorations. 
    Temporary lights and holiday decorations displayed ninety (90) days or less shall be exempt from the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-53. - Political signs. 
    Any political sign placed within the public right-of-way, on public property, on any public/utility structure (e.g., telephone poles, street light standards, street sign poles, public buildings, etc.) or placed in violation of any of the terms below may be removed and disposed of by City of Denison personnel. Political signs that meet the requirements below are exempt from permitting requirements: 
(1)  The sign is located on property with consent of the property owner; and 
(2)  Are not greater than fifty (50) square feet; and 
(3)  Are not taller than eight (8) feet measured from the ground to the highest point of the sign; and 
(4)  Are not illuminated; and 
(5)  Do not have any moving elements or parts; and 
(6)  The sign is not placed more than ninety (90) days prior to the election for which the sign is applicable; and 
(7)  The sign is removed no more than ten (10) days after the election has taken place. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-54. - Special event or public announcement signs. 
    Signs providing public information concerning special events, bazaars, rallies, or other similar activities sponsored by non-profit organizations including charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational, or civic institutions with the following regulations: 
(1)  Signs must be located on private property and the organization must have permission from the property owner to place the sign on their property. (Signs of this type can be off-premise signs and are exempt from article XIII. 
(2)  The maximum sign area is thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(3)  The maximum height is six (6) feet. 
(4)  A maximum of twenty-four (24) off-premise signs may be located in the city at a given time advertising the non-profit organization function. 
(5)  The advertised function must occur within the corporate limits of the City of Denison, its ETJ, or an adjacent municipality and be sponsored by a non-profit organization located within the City of Denison. 
(6)  Signs shall not be located on a residential premise. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13; Ord. No. 4773, § 3, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 19-55. - Garage sale signs. 
    Signs for garage sales placed on the property where the sale occurs and that do not exceed nine (9) square feet are exempt from the terms of the chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-56. - Home improvement signs. 
(a)  Home improvement signs may be erected that display the name of a roofing, fence, pool, landscape or other home improvement contractor currently providing such services on the premises. 
(b)  A home improvement sign is allowed only on the lot on which the improvement is occurring. 
(c)  On lots where a sidewalk exists within the street right-of-way, signs shall be located between the sidewalk and the structure, but no closer than three (3) feet from the sidewalk. On lots where no sidewalk exists within the street right-of-way, the sign shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the edge of the street. 
(d)  The home improvement sign must be removed sixty (60) days after it is erected or upon the completion of the work, whichever occurs first. 
(e)  Home improvement signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. 
(f)  A maximum of one (1) home improvement sign shall be allowed on the lot at any one (1) time. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-57. - Temporary religious signs. 
(a)  Temporary religious signs may be erected during times of worship provided the sign is placed no earlier than two (2) hours prior to worship and is removed no later than two (2) hours after worship. 
(b)  Signs shall be located only on private property with the consent of the property owner. 
(c)  On lots where a sidewalk exists within the street right-of-way, signs shall be located between the sidewalk and the structure, but no closer than three (3) feet from the sidewalk. On lots where no sidewalk exists within the street right-of-way, the sign shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the edge of the street. 
(d)  Signs shall not exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-58. - Yard signs. 
(a)  Signs shall be located only on lots containing an occupied single-family, two-family or multi-family dwelling. 
(b)  On lots where a sidewalk exists within the street right-of-way, signs shall be located between the sidewalk and the structure, but no closer than three (3) feet from the sidewalk. On lots where no sidewalk exists within the street right-of-way, the sign shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the edge of the street. 
(c)  Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-59. - Zoning signs. 
(a)  On lots where a sidewalk exists within the street right-of-way, signs shall be located between the sidewalk and the structure, but no closer than three (3) feet from the sidewalk. On lots where no sidewalk exists within the street right-of-way, the sign shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the edge of the street. 
(b)  Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-60. - Signs held by pedestrians. 
    Any sign held or carried by a person for the purposes of advertising or otherwise drawing attention to an individual, business, commodity, service, activity or product, or a person dressed in a costume for such purposes, must be located at least four (4) feet from the street pavement of any right-of-way, and located on the property where the event, activity or thing that the sign advertises or draws attention to occurs or is located. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Secs. 19-61-19-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 19-65. - Flags. 
    All flags shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the display of the United States, State of Texas, Grayson County or the City of Denison flag. No permit or permit fee is required for such flags. 
(2)  Businesses may erect one (1) corporate flag and flag pole, per location, for a bona fide company or corporate office located within the City of Denison. A sign permit and permit fee is required. 
(3)  Setback requirements: Flag poles must be located at least ten (10) feet from any property line. 
(4)  Maximum height: 
a.  Residential: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
b.  Commercial: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
(5)  No flag or flag pole may be located within any easement. 
(6)  Flags (not flagpoles) may be located in the right-of-way in the Downtown Historic District if approved by the historic preservation board. Flags may be located within any right-of-way if approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-66. - Obscenity. 
    No person shall display on any sign any obscene or indecent matter as defined by the Texas Penal Code, or any matter soliciting or promoting unlawful conduct. Any sign which does contain any obscene indecent or immoral matter must be removed or the obscene, indecent or immoral matter must be removed within seventy-two (72) hours of notice. The owner or person in control of the property on which the sign is located shall be responsible for compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-67. - Obsolete signs. 
    All signs relating to a product no longer available for purchase by the public and all signs relating to a business which has closed or moved away shall be removed or the advertising copy shall be removed. Painted wall signs shall be painted over with a color that resembles or matches the wall and does not allow the sign message to be visible after overpainting. The owner of the property on which the sign is located shall be responsible for removal of the sign within sixty (60) days of obsolescence. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-68. - Maintenance of signs. 
    All signs shall be maintained in good condition. Signs which are damaged in any way, rusty or have peeling paint do not meet minimum maintenance criteria and shall be brought into compliance, or the sign must be removed, no later than thirty (30) days after written notice of such violation is sent to the property owner, permit holder or person in control of the property, via certified mail. The owner of the property, permit holder or person in control of the property on which the sign is located shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-69. - Wind pressure and dead load requirements. 
    All signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind pressure requirements of the city's currently adopted building code and shall be considered structures that must comply with building code requirements. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-70. - Obstructing doors, windows, or fire escapes. 
    It shall be unlawful to erect, relocate, or maintain a sign in any manner that prevents free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape, or to attach any sign to a standpipe or fire escape. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-71. - Placement of advertising matter. 
(a)  No person shall place on or suspend from any building, light fixture, pole, structure, sidewalk, parkway, driveway or parking area, any goods, wares, merchandise or other advertising object or structure for the purpose of advertising such items other than a sign, as defined, regulated and prescribed by this chapter, except as otherwise allowed by this chapter or another ordinance. 
(b)  No person, firm, corporation or association of persons shall paste, stick, tack, nail or otherwise place any advertisement, handbill, placard, printed, pictured or written matter or thing for political advertising or other advertising purposes upon any fence, railing, sidewalk or public telephone, electric or other utility pole, or any other public property, including trees thereon or to knowingly cause or to permit the same to be done for his benefit. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter or throw any handbills, circulars, cards, tear sheets or any other advertising device of any description, along or upon any street or sidewalk in the City of Denison. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-72. - Signs prohibited on or over public property. 
    No portion of any sign shall be erected on or over public property, or in the right-of-way of any thoroughfare within the city, unless the same is erected by the city, or with the permission of the city for public purposes, except for projecting signs in the Historic Overlay District meeting regulations in article XIV and flags complying with section 19-65. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-73. - Illumination of signs. 
(a)  No sign shall be illuminated to such an intensity or in such a manner as to cause a glare or brightness to a degree that it constitutes a hazard or nuisance. 
(b)  Moving, flashing, changing color, beacons, revolving or similarly constructed signs shall not be allowed, except as specifically allowed by this chapter. 
(c)  Variable message signs shall not be animated, flash, travel, blink, fade, or scroll and shall transition instantaneously to another static image. 
(d)  Variable message signs shall display static images for a period of at least eight (8) seconds. 
(e)  A sign in a residential district, where allowed by this chapter, may be illuminated. Any illumination shall be located so as not to produce intense glare or direct illumination across the bounding property line. Internal illumination shall not exceed forty (40) watts per every twenty-five (25) square feet or any portion thereof of the sign face. 
(f)  Every sign with any type of electrical connection must be listed by a recognized listing agency with a permanent label properly affixed. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-74. - Visibility triangle. 
    No sign shall be erected in the visibility triangle. 
    Exception: Pole signs may be erected in the visibility triangle as long as all portions of the sign are clear from a point eighteen (18) inches to ten (10) feet from the ground with the exception of support poles which may be included in this area as long as the pole does not exceed six (6) inches in diameter. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Secs. 19-75-19-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ATTACHED SIGN REGULATIONS 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, the regulations set forth in this section shall be applicable to all attached signs that are allowed under this chapter. 

Sec. 19-80. - Wall signs. 
(a)  Where allowed. Wall signs shall be limited to buildings located in a non-residential zoning district or to churches, apartments, schools and other non-residential uses located within a residentially zoned district. 
(b)  Installation requirements. All signs and their words shall be mounted parallel to the building surface to which they are attached, and shall project no more than twelve inches (12") from that surface. Wall signs shall not extend higher than the wall or building surface to which the sign is attached. Banner signs shall not be utilized as permanent wall signs, but only as promotional signs as allowed in section 19-117. 
(c)  Maximum sign area. Wall signs shall not exceed the following area schedules: 
(1)  Attached signs located at a height of thirty-six (36) feet or less shall be limited to two (2) square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of building frontage for a single tenant building, or lease space frontage in a multiple tenant building, not to exceed four hundred fifty (450) square feet. 
(2)  Attached signs located above a height of thirty-six (36) feet shall be permitted an increase in maximum effective area. Such increases shall not exceed five (5) additional square feet in effective area, as restricted in paragraph (1) above, for each additional one (1) foot of height above thirty-six (36) feet measured from the base of the sign. Signs may be increased hereunder to a maximum size of six hundred (600) square feet. 
(3)  Attached signs may be located on any facade except for signs located on the side or rear wall of a building where the sign would face an adjacent residential zoning district. The sum of the effective area of all attached signs shall not exceed the allowable effective area specified, for each façade, in paragraphs (1) or (2) above, whichever paragraph is applicable. Signs on a single façade shall not exceed the sign area allowed in paragraph (1) above. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-81. - Roof signs. 
    One roof sign shall be allowed for each building. The size of the roof sign shall be limited by the maximum size allowed in paragraph (c)(1) above. The size of all wall signs shall be added to the size of the roof sign to determine the total amount of sign area and shall not exceed the requirements of (c)(3) above. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-82. - Illumination of attached signs. 
    Attached signs may be illuminated utilizing internal or external lighting. Internally lighted signs must be UL approved or approved by any other nationally recognized agency approved by the chief building official. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-83. - Window signs. 
    Window signs do not require a permit or a permit fee. Window signs must meet the following regulations: 
(1)  Window signs must not obscure more than forty (40) percent of the window area per facade. 
(2)  The sign area shall be measured by drawing a rectangular or square box around the sign elements, then multiplying the height by the width. For signs whose shape is irregular, the box must enclose all elements of the sign. 
(3)  No illuminated window signs shall be allowed within two (2) feet of the window surface, except for open/closed signs. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-84. - Awning signs. 
    Awning signs must meet the following regulations: 
(1)  An awning may extend the full length of the wall of the building to which it is attached and shall be no more than six (6) feet in height and shall provide a clearance of at least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk. 
(2)  Artwork or copy on awning signs shall be limited to a business name and/or logo. 
(3)  The artwork or copy for an awning sign shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the area of the awning and shall extend for no more than sixty (60) percent of the length of the awning. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-85. - Canopy sign. 
    Canopy signs must meet the following regulations: 
(1)  A canopy sign may be attached to, or be an integral part of the face of a canopy. 
(2)  A canopy sign may consist of only the name and/or logo of the business at the location of the canopy. A sign displaying the price(s) of gas sold at the location may also be included on the canopy. 
(3)  The artwork or copy on a canopy sign shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the face of the canopy, or a maximum of twenty-five (25) square feet, whichever is greater. 
(4)  An illuminated stripe may be incorporated into a canopy. The stripe may extend along the entire length of the face of the canopy. The width or thickness of the stripe shall be limited to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the vertical dimension of the face of the canopy. The internal illumination of a canopy is limited to the portions of the canopy face on which a sign or stripe is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13; Ord. No. 4773, § 4, 3-16-15) 
Secs. 19-86-19-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MONUMENT SIGN REGULATIONS 
    All monument signs shall be compatible with the colors and materials of the building that is located on the same lot as the sign. Sculpted aluminum sign panels and plastic panel signs are allowed to be utilized on monument signs. Additional monument sign regulations are as follows: 

Sec. 19-90. - Properties with multiple tenants. 
    Shopping centers and office buildings with multiple tenants are permitted to erect monument signs that comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Maximum size: One hundred fifty (150) square feet. 
(2)  Maximum height: Ten (10) feet measured from grade. 
(3)  Setbacks: 
a.  Fifteen (15) feet from property lines adjacent to the street right-of-way. 
b.  Fifteen (15) feet from property lines other than property lines adjacent to the street right-of-way. 
c.  Two hundred fifty (250) feet from any other monument or pole sign on the same property, measured along the right-of-way. 
(4)  Digital (electronic) signs: 
a.  Signs may include a maximum area of forty (40) square feet that incorporates changeable messages or lettering, as defined, in the sign face. 
b.  Digital signs shall not be animated, flash, travel, blink, fade, or scroll and shall transition instantaneously to another static image. 
c.  Digital signs shall display static images for a period of at least eight (8) seconds. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-91. - Properties with single tenants. 
    Businesses located on individually platted land including individual pad sites within a shopping center, apartments, schools, model homes and other non-residential uses located on residentially zoned property are permitted to erect monument signs that comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Maximum size: Ninety (90) square feet. 
(2)  Maximum height: Ten (10) feet. 
(3)  Setbacks: 
a.  Fifteen (15) feet from the property line adjacent to street right-of-way. 
b.  Fifteen (15) feet from property lines other than property lines adjacent to the street right-of-way. 
c.  Two hundred fifty (250) feet from any other monument or pole sign on the same property, measured along the right-of-way. 
(4)  Digital (electronic) signs: 
a.  Digital signs may include a maximum area of forty (40) square feet that incorporates changeable messages or lettering, as defined, in the sign face. 
b.  Digital signs shall not be animated, flash, travel, blink, fade, or scroll and shall transition instantaneously to another static image. 
c.  Variable message signs shall display static images for a period of at least eight (8) seconds. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-93. - Material regulations. 
    All monument sign bases shall be constructed of the same material as the front building façade on the same site or shall be compatible in design with stone or brick. The sign support must be constructed or covered with the same masonry material as the principal building, or stone, or brick. Sculpted aluminum or plastic sign panels will be allowed. All sign text and graphic elements shall be limited to a minimum of six (6) inches from the outer limits of the sign structure. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-94. - Illumination. 
    Monument signs shall be illuminated by a ground lighting source where the light itself and supporting structure are screened from public right-of-way, except, signs with sculpted aluminum panels, plastic panels, cut-out letters, or other type of raised lettering may be back lit using internal lighting. Every sign with any type of electrical connection must be listed by a recognized listing agency with a permanent label properly affixed. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Secs. 19-95-19-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - POLE SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 19-100. - Off-premise pole signs. 
    All off-premise pole signs shall meet the requirements of article XIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-101. - On-premise pole signs. 
    On-premise pole signs may only be erected in non-residential zoning districts. All on-premise pole signs shall meet the following regulations: 
(1)  Maximum size: 
Single tenant: Two hundred (200) square feet. 
Multiple tenant: Three hundred (300) square feet. 
(2)  Maximum height: Forty (40) feet. 
Exception: Signs located in the U.S. Highway 75 or Highway Overlay District shall not exceed a height of seventy (70) feet. 
(3)  Setbacks: 
a.  Ten (10) feet from any property line. 
(4)  Spacing: A minimum of two hundred (200) feet from any other monument or pole sign on the same property, measured along the right-of-way. 
(5)  Digital (electronic) signs: 
a.  Digital signs shall not be animated, flash, travel, blink, fade, or scroll and shall transition instantaneously to another static image. 
b.  Digital signs shall display static images for a period of at least eight (8) seconds. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Secs. 19-102-19-104. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - OTHER TYPES OF SIGNS 
    This section provides standards for specific types of permanent signs permitted by this chapter. 

Sec. 19-105. - Menu board signs. 
    Menu board signs must meet the following regulations: 
(1)  Menu board signs may be attached or monument signs. 
(2)  The maximum height is six (6) feet. 
(3)  The maximum sign area is forty (40) square feet. Only one (1) sign face is allowed per sign. 
(4)  A maximum of two (2) such signs are allowed for each lot. 
(5)  All menu board signs shall be located at the side or rear of the principal building. If two (2) signs are erected they must be at least twelve (12) feet apart. 
(6)  Internal illumination may be utilized for the sign panel. 
(7)  Any sign must be located at least fifteen (15) feet from any property line. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-106. - Subdivision entry signs. 
    Subdivision entry signs must meet the following regulations: 
(1)  Subdivision entry signs may be attached to a wall at the subdivision entrance or on a monument sign. 
(2)  Attached signs may not project above the top of the wall on which they are attached. 
(3)  The maximum sign area is thirty-two (32) square feet for attached signs. 
(4)  Only one (1) monument sign or two (2) attached signs may be placed at each subdivision entrance. A monument sign may have the subdivision name on both sides. 
(5)  Monument signs may be located in the median at the street entrance if approved by the city in an approved plat, within a developer's agreement, or by separate approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-107. - Directory signs. 
    Directory signs must meet the following regulations: 
(1)  Directory signs may be either attached, monument or pole signs. 
(2)  Directory signs must be located a safe distance from the entry drive and the public right-of-way as determined by the city's director of public works. 
(3)  Only one (1) directory sign is allowed per street entrance. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-108. - Institutional signs. 
    Institutional signs must meet the following regulations: 
(1)  Institutional signs may be attached, monument or pole signs. 
(2)  Institutional signs may include a reader board, subject to the following limitations: 
a.  Reader board must be integral to the permitted sign for the site; 
b.  Messages on the reader board, whether electronic or manual, may not scroll, flash, or change more frequently than once a day; 
c.  Manual reader boards using movable lettering must have a lockable covering; 
d.  The reader board display cannot exceed two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the gross sign area per sign face, excluding the sign border. 
e.  Internal illumination may be utilized for the reader board sign panel. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-109. - Gasoline pricing signs. 
    Gasoline pricing signs may be attached signs, pole signs or monument signs and must meet the regulations of the type of sign used (attached, pole or monument) as well as the following regulations: 
(1)  Gasoline pricing signs shall not be animated, flash, travel, blink, fade, or scroll and shall transition instantaneously to another static image. 
(2)  Gasoline pricing signs shall display static images for a period of at least eight (8) seconds. 
(3)  Only one (1) pricing display is allowed per site. 
(4)  Internal illumination may be used for the pricing display only. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Secs. 19-110-19-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - REGULATIONS FOR TEMPORARY SIGNS 

Sec. 19-115. - Development signs. 
    Development signs are allowed subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Maximum size: Thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(2)  Maximum height: Fifteen (15) feet. 
(3)  Setback: Twenty (20) feet from all property lines. 
(4)  Number of signs: One (1) for every fifty (50) acres of property, or portion thereof, under active development. 
(5)  Development signs require a temporary sign permit and may be erected in nonresidential and residential zoning districts. 
(6)  Development signs must be related only to the property on which they are located. They may be monument or pole signs provided that a minimum of two (2) vertical sign supports are utilized. 
(7)  Each development site may have one (1) such sign for each fifty (50) acres, or any portion thereof, under active development. 
(8)  Development signs must be removed when the project is eighty (80) percent complete. In the case of a commercial project, eighty (80) percent complete means when a certificate of occupancy is issued for a shell building. For a residential project, eighty (80) percent complete means when eighty (80) percent of the lots in the subdivision have received building permits. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-116. - Real estate sign. 
    Real estate signs are subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Real estate signs may be erected in nonresidential and residential zoning districts and shall not require a permit. 
(2)  Real estate signs may be attached, monument or ground signs. 
(3)  The maximum sign area shall not exceed nine (9) square feet and a maximum height of four (4) feet for property located in a Residential Zoning District. Signs located in a Non-Residential Zoning District shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area and ten (10) feet in height. 
(4)  On lots where a sidewalk exists within the street right-of-way, signs shall be located between the sidewalk and the structure-But no closer than three (3) feet from the sidewalk. On lots where no sidewalk exists within the street right-of-way, the sign shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the edge of the street. 
(5)  No more than one (1) sign shall be located for every two (2) acres in a tract of land or portion thereof. 
(6)  A real estate sign shall be removed upon the sale or lease of the property. 
(7)  Real estate signs located in Residential Zoning Districts do not require permits. Real estate signs located in Non-Residential Zoning Districts and larger than nine (9) square feet must be permitted and the appropriate permit fee paid. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-117. - Promotional signage. 
    Businesses that erect signs under the provisions of this section shall not display a sign that states "Going out of Business", "Quitting Business" or similar message more than one (1) time. Promotional signs are subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  All promotional signage requires a permit. A maximum of four (4) permits are allowed for each calendar year. A separate permit is required for each thirty-day period promotional signage will be used. Promotional signs will be considered as a group and not as each individual sign, streamer, banner, etc. 
(2)  Promotional signage may include flags, pennants, streamers, balloons, inflatable signs, and any legal signs allowed by this chapter. Additionally, a maximum of two (2) banners is allowed, in addition to flags, pennants, streamers, balloons, inflatable or other promotional signage per permit. 
(3)  Promotional signage is allowed for four (4) thirty-day periods each calendar year per legal business subject to the following: 
a.  A thirty-day period will commence on the first day promotional signage is displayed. 
b.  The four (4) thirty-day periods shall not occur in the same or consecutive months. 
c.  A legal business shall include any commercial, industrial, or institutional use for which the building inspection department has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
d.  In the case of a special promotion for a grand opening celebration or a going out of business event, one (1) permit may be extended to a forty-five-day period, provided the promotion for a grand opening sale shall commence within the first three (3) months of the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy and the grand opening is limited to the address noted on the certificate of occupancy. 
(4)  Any device described as promotional signage shall not exceed an overall height of forty (40) feet measured from ground. 
(5)  The following setbacks apply. However, the setbacks may be increased for any promotional signage found by the city to block traffic visibility or constitute a traffic hazard. 
a.  Fifteen (15) feet from street right-of-way. 
b.  Ten (10) feet from property lines other than those property lines fronting the street right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13; Ord. No. 4773, § 5, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 19-118. - Searchlights. 
    Searchlights may be permitted in accordance with any applicable regulations. A permit for use of an advertising searchlight may be granted under the following additional regulations: 
(1)  A searchlight shall be located a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet from a public right-of-way and positioned so as to project all beams at a minimum angle of thirty (30) degrees from grade level. 
(2)  The maximum light intensity generated by searchlights on any premises may not exceed a total of 1.6 million foot candlepower. No more than four (4) beams of light may be projected from any premises. 
(3)  All searchlights must be designed and maintained so as to prevent beam rays of light from being directed at any portion of the rights-of-way or adjoining property, and no light shall be of such intensity or brilliance to cause glare to or impair the vision of the driver of any vehicle, or to create greater than 0.5 foot candles at four (4) feet height at the property line. 
(4)  No advertising searchlight may be operated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(5)  No advertising searchlight may be operated on a premises for more than seven (7) consecutive days. No permit for an advertising searchlight may be issued for any business entity for which a permit has been issued for a searchlight on the same premises within the six (6) months preceding the date of the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Secs. 19-119-19-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - KIOSK SIGNS 
    On properties located at the intersection of two (2) major thoroughfares or a major thoroughfare and a collector street, kiosk signs that provide directional arrows are permissible subject to the following conditions and upon the issuance of a sign permit: 

Sec. 19-125. - Design and location. 
    The sign design and location must be approved the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-126. - Length of permit. 
    Permits for such signs shall be temporary in nature and shall expire two (2) years from the date of permit issuance. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-127. - Maximum height. 
    The maximum height of the sign is ten (10) feet. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-128. - Maximum width. 
    The maximum width of the sign is six (6) feet. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-129. - Font, lettering and color. 
    The font, lettering and color of the sign shall be uniform throughout the entire sign. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-130. - Distance from right-of-way. 
(a)  Historic Overlay Area. The sign may be located on the sidewalk and within the right-of-way as long as the sign does not cause a traffic safety problem and the proprietor files with the city clerk a certificate of insurance for general liability in the minimum coverage amount of $500,000.00/$1,000,000.00, combined single limit, evidencing the City of Denison as an additional insured. The permit applicant, property owner or developer shall be responsible for the cost of production, maintenance of the sign and removal of the sign. 
(b)  Areas other than the Historic Overlay Area. Five (5) feet from the back of the curb or road pavement and at least one (1) foot from any sidewalk. The permit applicant, property owner or developer shall be responsible for the cost of production, maintenance of the sign and removal of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-131. - Responsibility of applicant. 
    The permit applicant, property owner or developer shall be responsible for the cost of production, maintenance of the sign and removal of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Secs. 19-132-19-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - OFF-PREMISE SIGNS 
    Except for kiosk signs specified in Article XII of this Code, all off-premise signs shall conform to the following standards: 

Sec. 19-135. - Location. 
    Off premise advertising shall be permitted only in those areas adjacent to thoroughfares described below, and, provided that, the property is zoned general retail, commercial, light industrial or heavy industrial pursuant to the terms of the Zoning Ordinance adopted by the City of Denison. Placement of off-premise advertising in any location other than within the areas below is prohibited. 
(1)  Property Designated as "Area A": 
a.  U.S. Highway 75 from the corporate limits on the south to the corporate limits on the north. 
b.  U.S. Spur 503. 
(2)  Property Designated as "Area B": 
a.  F.M. 691 from S.H. 91 (Texoma Parkway) westward. 
b.  F.M. 120 from U.S. 75 westward to its intersection with F.M. 1417. 
c.  S.H. 84 from S.H. 91 westward. 
d.  U.S. Hwy 69 from its intersection with Des Voignes Road eastward and from its intersection with Martin Luther King Boulevard northward. 
e.  F.M. 1417 from its intersection with F.M. 691 on the south to its intersection with F.M. 120 on the north. 
f.  S.H. 91 from its intersection with Memorial Drive northward and from its intersection with Spur 503 southward. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-136. - Distance from other off-premise signs. 
    No off-premise sign shall be located within a radius of three thousand (3,000) feet of an existing and permitted off-premise sign. Signs located on separate thoroughfares are required to meet the separation requirement regardless of the thoroughfare on which the sign is located. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-137. - Distance from certain uses. 
    No sign shall be located closer than on hundred (100) feet to a property line of a residential structure, church, park, hospital, cemetery or school. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-138. - Digital signs. 
(a)  Off-premise sign faces may be converted to a digital sign or electronic sign. 
(b)  Off-premise signs may be digital signs as long as the sign meets all of the requirements for off-premise signs contained in this article. 
(c)  Digital signs shall not be animated, flash, travel, blink, fade, or scroll and shall transition instantaneously to another static image. 
(d)  Digital signs shall display static images for a period of at least eight (8) seconds. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13; Ord. No. 4773, § 6, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 19-139. - Directional off-premise sign regulations. 
    Directional off-premise signs shall not be subject to the location and spacing requirements of this section, but shall be subject to the following location and spacing requirements: 
(1)  Maximum size: Thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(2)  Maximum height: Five (5) feet. 
(3)  Setback: Fifteen (15) feet from the back of the curb or the edge of the street pavement or property line. 
(4)  Spacing: No closer than one hundred (100) feet to another directional off-premise sign 
(5)  Directional off-premise signs shall not be located more than one-thousand (1,000) feet from one (1) of the thoroughfares identified in section 19-135. 
(6)  Directional off-premise signs shall be placed within one hundred (100) feet of the point at which the turn or directional movement is to be made by one (1) following the directional message. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-140. - Off-premise sign regulations. 
    Off-premise signs shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Maximum size: 
Area A: Six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet. 
Area B: Four hundred (400) square feet. 
(2)  Maximum height: Forty (40) feet. 
(3)  Setback: Twenty (20) feet from any public right-of-way or property line. 
(4)  Maximum height dimension of display: Fourteen (14) feet. 
(5)  Display area ratio: The width to height ration must not be less than two to one (2:1) nor more than four to one (4:1). 
(6)  V-type signs: The angle between the display area of V-type signs shall not be greater than forty-five (45) degrees measured back to back, and, if the size of each area is three hundred (300) square feet or less, the maximum distance at the nearest point between the two (2) backs, as measured at the apex, shall not exceed one and one-half (11/2) feet. If the size of either area exceeds three hundred (300) square feet, then the maximum distance between the two (2) backs, as measured at the apex, shall not exceed three and one-half (31/2) feet. Back-to-back signs must be on common supports, and the nearest point between the two (2) backs shall not exceed five (5) feet plus the diameter of the intervening upright or support. 
(7)  The display area shall not have any extensions beyond the basic dimensions of the display area, any inserted, flashing, or neon lighting, three-dimensional features, or moving components. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-141. - Annual operating fee. 
    Each permittee shall pay an annual operating fee per display area per off-premise sign. The amount of the fee shall be established by the city's comprehensive fee schedule. The annual operating period shall run from January 1 through December 31of each year. The amount of the fee shall not be pro-rated unless specifically allowed in the city's comprehensive fee schedule. The first annual operating fee shall be due on January 1 immediately following the date of the permit. Failure to pay the annual operating fee shall be cause for the chief building official to order the sign to be removed or to remove the sign and charge the cost of removal to the sign owner. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Secs. 19-142-19-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - HISTORIC OVERLAY AREA 
    No signs, other than those listed below, shall be installed or erected in the Historic Overlay Area indicated by the City of Denson Zoning Map. No permit shall be issued and no sign erected unless the sign is approved by the Historic Preservation Board of the City of Denison. Any variance to the terms of this article shall be determined by the historic preservation board and not the building appeals board. 
    Note: Colors utilized in signage must comply with the historic color palette adopted by the historic preservation board. 

Sec. 19-145. - Projecting signs. 
    Projecting signs shall only be allowed within the Historic Overlay Area and must meet the following regulations: 
(1)  Signs shall be constructed of noncombustible material. 
(2)  Signs shall not project more than four (4) feet, measured from the building face, and shall not be closer than eight (8) feet from the back of the curb line. 
(3)  Signs shall be at least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk. 
(4)  Signs may be externally illuminated. Internal illumination shall not be permitted. 
(5)  Signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet per sign face. 
(6)  For any projecting sign that extends over or into a right-of-way, prior to the issuance of a sign permit, the proprietor shall file with the city clerk a certificate of insurance for general liability in the minimum coverage amount of $500,000.00/$1,000,000.00, combined single limit, evidencing the City of Denison as an additional insured. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-146. - Awning signs. 
    Awning signs must meet the following regulations: 
(1)  An awning may extend the full length of the wall of the building to which it is attached and shall be no more than six (6) feet in height and shall provide a clearance of at least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk. 
(2)  Artwork or copy on awning signs shall be limited to a business name, business logo and/or property address. 
(3)  The artwork or copy for an awning sign shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the area of the awning and shall extend for no more than sixty (60) percent of the length of the awning. 
(4)  Awnings shall not be illuminated. 
(5)  Awnings shall be composed of canvas or other fabric material approved by the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-147. - Canopy sign. 
    Canopy signs must meet the following regulations: 
(1)  A canopy sign may be attached to, or be an integral part of the face of a canopy. 
(2)  Artwork or copy on canopy signs shall be limited to a business name, business logo and/or property address. 
(3)  The artwork or copy on a canopy sign shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the face of the canopy, or a maximum of twenty-five (25) square feet, whichever is greater. 
(4)  An illuminated stripe may be incorporated into a canopy. The stripe may extend along the entire length of the face of the canopy. The width or thickness of the stripe shall be limited to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the vertical dimension of the face of the canopy. The internal illumination of a canopy is limited to the portions of the canopy face on which a sign or stripe is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-148. - Wall signs. 
(a)  Where allowed. Wall signs shall be limited to buildings located in a non-residential zoning district or to churches, apartments, schools and other non-residential uses, with the exception of model homes, located within a residentially zoned district. 
(b)  Installation requirements. All signs and their words shall be mounted parallel to the building surface to which they are attached, and shall project no more than twelve (12) inches from that surface, except for projecting signs as allowed in article XIV. Wall signs shall not extend above the wall or building surface to which the sign is attached. Banner signs shall not be utilized as permanent wall signs, but only as promotional signs as allowed in section 19-117. 
(c)  Maximum sign area. Wall signs shall not exceed the following area schedules: 
(1)  Attached signs located at a height of thirty-six (36) feet or less shall be limited to two (2) square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of building frontage for a single tenant building, or lease space frontage in a multiple tenant building, not to exceed four hundred fifty (450) square feet. 
(2)  Attached signs located above a height of thirty-six (36) feet shall be permitted an increase in maximum effective area. Such increases shall not exceed five (5) additional square feet in effective area, as restricted in paragraph (1) above, for each additional one (1) foot of height above thirty-six (36) feet measured from the base of the sign. Signs may be increased hereunder to a maximum size of six hundred (600) square feet. 
(3)  Attached signs may be located on any facade except for signs located on the side or rear wall of a building where the sign would face an adjacent residential zoning district. The sum of the effective area of all attached signs shall not exceed the allowable effective area specified in paragraphs (1) or (2) above, whichever paragraph is applicable. Signs on a single façade shall not exceed the sign area allowed in paragraph (1) above. 
(d)  Wall signs in the Historic Overlay Area must be externally illuminated. Internal illumination shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-149. - Roof signs. 
    One roof sign shall be allowed for each building. The size of the roof sign shall be limited by the maximum size allowed in paragraph 19-148(c)(1) above. The size of all wall signs shall be added to the size of the roof sign to determine the total amount of sign area and shall not exceed the requirements of subsection 19-148(c)(3) above. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-150. - Illumination of attached signs. 
    Attached signs may only be illuminated utilizing external lighting. Exterior letters with exposed neon lighting are not allowed. All sign lighting must be specifically approved by the historic preservation board. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-151. - Window signs. 
    Window signs do not require a permit or a permit fee. Window signs must meet the following regulations: 
(1)  Window signs must not obscure more than twenty-five (25) percent of the window area per facade. 
(2)  The sign area shall be measured by drawing a rectangular or square box around the sign elements, then multiplying the height by the width. For signs whose shape is irregular, the box must enclose all elements of the sign. 
(3)  No illuminated window signs shall be allowed within two (2) feet of the window surface, except for open/closed signs. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-152. - Sandwich board signs. 
    Businesses may display sandwich board signs that comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Signs may only be placed on the sidewalk during the hours that the business is open to the public. 
(2)  Signs must be placed within three (3) feet of the front wall of the business and must allow for a minimum open space of four (4) feet between the sign and the edge of the sidewalk adjacent to the street to allow for unobstructed pedestrian passage along the sidewalk. 
(3)  Prior to initiating the use of the adjacent sidewalk, the proprietor shall file with the city clerk a certificate of insurance for general liability in the minimum coverage amount of $500,000.00/$1,000,000.00, combined single limit, evidencing the City of Denison as an additional insured. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-153. - Digital (electronic) signs. 
    Digital or electronic signs are specifically prohibited within the Historic Overlay Area. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-154. - Real estate signs. 
    Real estate signs may be erected that comply with section 19-116 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-155. - Kiosk signs. 
    Kiosk signs may be erected as long as the provisions of article XII of this Code are met and the signs are approved by the historic preservation board. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-156. - Exempt signs. 
    Signs exempted by article V of this Code are also specifically allowed in the Historic Overlay Area. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-157. - Promotional signage. 
    Promotional signage complying with section 19-117 of this Code are specifically allowed in the Historic Overlay Area. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-158. - Searchlights. 
    Searchlights complying with section 19-118 of this Code are specifically allowed in the Historic Overlay Area. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Sec. 19-159. - Menu board signs. 
    Two (2) menu board signs may be attached to any surface on the building as long as they do not conflict with any other right-of-way regulations required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4678, § 1, 2-18-13) 
Chapter 20 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Public works department, § 2-161 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; food and food establishments, Ch. 9; housing, Ch. 10; posting advertising matter on property without consent of owner prohibited, § 11-1; nuisances, Ch. 13; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; utilities, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference- Solid waste management, resource recovery and conservation act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-7c. 

Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Brush means the cuttings or trimmings from trees, shrubs or lawns and similar material. 
    Garbage means municipal solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, handling and sale of produce and other food products; and nonputrescible household solid waste consisting of combustible waste including paper, rags, cartons, and similar materials and noncombustible waste including glass, crockery, tin and aluminum cans. 
    Hazardous waste means any commercial or residential garbage, trash, rubbish or other solid waste identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq., as amended. 
    Industrial solid waste means solid waste resulting from or incidental to any process of industry or manufacturing, or mining or agricultural operations. 
    Infectious waste means commercial or residential garbage, trash, rubbish or other waste containing pathogens or biologically active materials, which because of its type, concentration and quantity is capable of transmitting disease to persons exposed to the waste, including human and animal tissue, bandages, syringes and other materials used in health care which become contaminated by pathogenic materials. 
    Municipal solid waste means solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, commercial, institutional and recreational activities, and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, and other solid waste other than industrial waste and special waste. 
    Recyclable waste means any commercial or residential garbage, trash, rubbish or other solid waste which is not special waste that has been collected or sorted for legitimate reuse or reclamation. 
    Special waste means any commercial or residential garbage, trash, rubbish, hazardous waste, infectious waste, or other solid waste that because of its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics or biological properties is not collectable by the city's sanitation department. 
(Code 1965, § 12-2; Ord. No. 3339, § 2, 7-6-92; Ord. No. 3495, § 1, 11-7-94) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 20-2. - Scope and effect of chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all territory within the corporate limits of the city. It is the intent of the city council through this chapter to fully regulate the collection of municipal solid waste within the city. Ownership of municipal solid waste set out for collection shall be vested in the City of Denison. 
(Code 1965, § 12-1; Ord. No. 3339, § 3, 7-6-92) 
Sec. 20-3. - Residential garbage containers. 
(a)  Residential customers of the city shall be required to dispose of all garbage in plastic garbage bags. Bags used for these purposes are to meet minimum standards as may be established by the city. In no instance shall the bags be packed so as to contain more than fifty (50) pounds of garbage. 
(b)  Garbage bags shall be fastened at all times so that flies or other insects shall not have access to the contents thereof. Garbage bags which are not properly fastened or which are torn shall not be removed by employees, agents or permittees of the city for purposes of disposal. 
(c)  No garbage shall be picked up by the city in any type of container other than a plastic garbage bag. 
(d)  Rolls of garbage bags shall be sold by the city at such locations as may be established by the city manager, shall be sold at an amount at least equal to one hundred seventy-five (175) percent of the price per roll paid by the city to its wholesale supplier. Nothing herein shall be construed to be made applicable to any number of rolls of garbage bags which may be included in the basic residential garbage collection charge. 
(Code 1965, § 12-3; Ord. No. 3134, § 5, 3-20-89; Ord. No. 3495, § 2, 11-7-94) 
Sec. 20-4. - Collection of garbage, brush, trash from dwelling places. 
(a)  Residential garbage bags shall be picked up at the curb or near the street right-of-way adjacent to the front lot line or from such other location as may be designated in writing by the director of public works. Garbage bags shall not be left at the curb except on the days for regularly scheduled garbage pickup service. It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or lessee placing bags for collection to keep the area around same maintained free and clear of loose trash, garbage, paper or waste materials. A maximum of twenty (20) bags per week per residence will be picked up by the city. All garbage from private residences placed in plastic bags shall be removed from the premises by the city or its permittees once weekly. 
(b)  All brush and appliances to be collected shall be stacked or placed at the edge of paved and improved alleyways, where they exist, or at the curb of the street adjacent to the property or at such other locations as may be approved for sanitation service by the city manager or his or her designee. In no instance shall tree limbs or trees exceeding the length of twelve (12) feet or exceeding a weight of fifty (50) pounds be collected as part of the city's brush collection service. 
(c)  Garbage or recycling bins shall not be left at the curb except on the days for regularly scheduled pick-up garbage and/or recycling service as the schedule may dictate. Bins of all kind and nature left on the curb for more than twenty-four hours shall be a violation of this section. 
(d)  Cardboard boxes which are broken down shall be picked up by the city as part of its regular garbage collection service. 
(e)  Rock, scrap building materials or waste resulting from construction, remodeling or general cleanup of vacant or improved property; sizeable amounts of trees, brush and debris resulting from property being cleared in preparation for construction, will not be removed by the city as part of its regular service. Property owners shall be responsible for having such debris removed at their expense. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a residential refuse customer of the city to dispose of any garbage, brush, refuse or solid waste of any nature within the city by any means. It shall be unlawful for any person who is a residential refuse customer of the city to allow, suffer or permit any person to place any garbage, brush, refuse or solid waste for collection at the customer's collection point when the person making the disposition is not a member of the household or when the garbage, brush, refuse or solid waste was not generated at or by the customer's residence. 
(Code 1965, §§ 12-4, 12-5(a); Ord. No. 3134, §§ 2, 3, 3-20-89; Ord. No. 3139, §§ 2, 3, 5, 4-3-89; Ord. No. 3329, §§ 1, 2, 3-16-92; Ord. No. 3495, §§ 3, 4, 11-7-94; Ord. No. 4701, § 14(a), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 20-5. - Service and charges for collection. 
(a)  The charges fixed under the terms of this section, or any charge under a contract that may be entered into by the city for the removal and disposal of garbage, shall be a charge against the owner, occupant or lessee of the premises, and the amount so fixed shall be collected monthly through the city water department as water charges are collected. Water services shall be discontinued for failure to pay the charges herein established in the same manner as it is discontinued for failure to pay water or sewer charges. The failure to pay the charges herein established shall subject the customer to the same penalty as prescribed for failure to pay water or sewer charges. 
(b)  Any person making application for water service shall be deemed to have applied for garbage service and shall be considered a customer of the city until such time as water service to such person has been discontinued. Garbage service shall be provided to the location of the active water account only. 
(c)  The city may not be required to provide garbage collection or disposal service to any area not within the corporate limits of the city. In the event garbage collection and disposal service is provided to areas or locations outside the city limits, the user charge or fee levied shall be no less than two (2) times that which would be charged to a similar class or type of customer situated within the city limits. 
(d)  The schedule of rates and charges is on file in the public works office. 
(Code 1965, § 12-5) 
Sec. 20-6. - Containers furnished by city for commercial and industrial concerns. 
(a)  The director of public works shall locate and place garbage and refuse containers for use by commercial and industrial concerns in accordance with the needs of the concern. All concerns for which containers are provided by the city shall place their garbage and dry refuse in such containers. It shall be unlawful for any person using such containers to leave the lid open after placing refuse materials therein. 
(b)  No person shall place or permit to be placed any manure, offal, night soil, ashes, dead animals, including fish entrails and heads thereof, rocks or construction waste materials, including lumber or any large pieces of metal, in containers provided by the city under this section. The city shall not empty any containers holding items prohibited by this section. 
(c)  All cardboard boxes and cartons must be broken down and bundled before being placed in any container furnished by the city, and no such bundle should exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight. 
(d)  No person, other than the party paying the charges for such service, shall place any garbage, brush or dry refuse in any container provided by the city under this section. 
(Code 1965, § 12-6) 
Sec. 20-7. - Collection by city from commercial and industrial concerns. 
(a)  All commercial and industrial concerns afforded garbage and refuse service by the container system provided for in this chapter shall pay a charge approved and adopted by the city council and kept on file in the office of the city manager or his or her designee. 
(b)  Commercial and industrial concerns provided pickup service and not provided with containers furnished by the city under this chapter shall be charged on the basis of an amount per month per cubic yard of refuse picked up each week. Any commercial or industrial concern, upon approval of the city manager or his or her designee, may have additional collections in any single week provided by the city for containerized service and shall be charged, on the appropriate monthly bill, at the rate approved and adopted by the city council and kept on file in the office of the city manager or his or her designee. 
(c)  All commercial and industrial concerns not located within the central business district not provided with containers furnished by the city in the chapter and whose daily refuse collection requirements are less than twenty (20) bags per week, shall pay a charge per month which is approved and adopted by the city council and kept on file in the office of the city manager or his or her designee. 
(d)  A fee and late penalties shall be established for customers desiring roll-on/roll-off container service. The fee and late penalties schedule established for customers desiring roll-on/roll-off service shall be as approved and adopted by the city council and kept on file in the office of the city manager or his or her designee. 
(e)  Any commercial or industrial customer whose garbage and refuse collection needs exceed the normal container service provided by the city, pursuant to this chapter, may request special collection services. The city manager or his or her designee is authorized to negotiate contracts for the meeting of such special refuse collection needs, subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(f)  The city may not be required to provide garbage and refuse service to any area not within the city. In the event garbage and refuse collection is provided to areas or locations outside the city limits, the user charge or fee levied shall be no less than two (2) times that which would be charged to a similar class or type of customer situated within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 14(b), 6-17-13; Ord. No. 4974, § 3, 12-10-18) 
Editor's note- Section 14(b) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 20-7 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 20-7 derived from the 1965 Code, § 12-7; and Ord. No. 3139, § 4, adopted April 3, 1989. 
Sec. 20-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 14(b) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 20-8, which pertained to waste material as fill, and derived from the 1965 Code, § 12-10. 
Sec. 20-9. - City to provide solid waste services. 
    The city's sanitation department shall be the exclusive provider of residential and commercial garbage, rubbish and refuse collection and disposal services for all premises within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to provide residential or commercial garbage, rubbish or refuse collection or disposal services to any person for compensation within the city, or to make use of the public streets for that purpose, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3339, § 5, 7-6-92) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3339, § 4, adopted July 6, 1992, repealed former § 20-9, relative to permits, and § 5 of said ordinance enacted new §§ 20-9-20-13 to read as herein set out. The provisions of former § 20-9 derived from Code 1965, § 12-11. 
Sec. 20-10. - Prohibited materials and regulations. 
(a)  The city shall keep a list of special waste that is not acceptable for collection and disposal by the sanitation department. The city manager or his or her designee may also make reasonable rules regarding the collection and disposal by the city's sanitation department of any garbage, rubbish, trash, or other solid waste that requires special preparation or handling to meet the requirements of any local, state or federal law or regulations. The list of special waste and the rules shall be written and kept on file by the city manager or his or her designee and be available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
(b)  No person shall deposit in any container serviced by the city any special waste. The city may refuse to collect, transport, or dispose of special waste or any other garbage, rubbish, trash, or other solid waste that does not comply with this chapter or the regulations made by the head of the sanitation department. 
(c)  Each property owner shall be responsible for arranging with an authorized private hauler for the collection, removal, and disposal of any special waste, or other solid waste which the city will not collect. 
(Ord. No. 3339, § 5, 7-6-92; Ord. No. 4701, § 14(c), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 20-11. - Owner to arrange for commercial collection. 
    Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of any business, commercial, or institutional property, or other property not entitled to receive residential garbage collection services shall arrange, by contract with the city, for commercial garbage collection and disposal services from the city, except as otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3339, § 5, 7-6-92) 
Sec. 20-12. - Annual permit required for special waste haulers. 
(a)  No person shall collect or remove for compensation from any property within the city any special waste without first obtaining a special waste hauler's permit from the sanitation department. 
(b)  The person applying for a special waste hauler's permit shall make application to the city's sanitation department on forms provided for that purpose, and pay the required fee. The application shall require the following information: 
(1)  The name and business address of the applicant. 
(2)  The name of the owner of the property and the address where the special waste will be collected. 
(3)  A description of the special waste to be collected. 
(4)  The location where the special waste will be disposed, including proof, when required by the head of the sanitation department, that the applicant is legally authorized to dump at the specified location. 
(5)  A description and the license number of the motor vehicles to be used in collecting and transporting the special waste within the city. 
(6)  Any other information which is reasonably necessary to administer this section. 
(c)  The city manager or his or her designee shall issue the special waste hauler's permit to the applicant if: 
(1)  Proper application has been made and the fee paid. 
(2)  The applicant will only be collecting special waste as defined in this chapter. 
(d)  The special waste hauler's permit shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(e)  The special waste hauler's permit fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 3339, § 5, 7-6-92; Ord. No. 4701, § 14(d), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 20-13. - Recyclable waste. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person from collecting, gathering, or transporting recyclable refuse collected from property within the city. 
(b)  Any person who transports recyclable refuse collected by others outside the person's household from any property inside the city to a point outside the city more than three (3) times per year shall register with the city's sanitation department, on forms provided for that purpose. There shall be no fee for registration. 
(Ord. No. 3339, § 5, 7-6-92) 
Sec. 20-14. - Discontinuation of services for nonpayment. 
    The city may suspend solid waste services to any person who is delinquent in the payment of all solid waste disposal service fees until the delinquent claim, including late penalties, is fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 4974, § 4, 12-10-18) 
Chapter 21 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 4775, adopted March 16, 2015, changed the title of ch. 21 from "Streets and Sidewalks" to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference- Specific code enforcement authority, § 2-126; public works department, § 2-161 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places prohibited, § 3-8; animals prohibited from running at large, § 4-9; building lines established on certain streets, § 5-2 et seq.; numbers for buildings, § 5-4; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8; food and food establishments, Ch. 9; housing, Ch. 10; posting advertising matter on property without consent of owner prohibited, § 11-1; posting advertising matter on utility poles prohibited, § 11-2; sleeping on public property prohibited, § 11-9; sale of merchandise in residential districts restricted, § 11-10; nuisances, Ch. 13; location of oil and gas wells in or obstructing streets and alleys prohibited, § 14-2; depth of oil or gas and oil pipe line restricted, § 14-64; peddlers and solicitors and certain other sales, Ch. 15; planning, Ch. 17; public property, Ch. 18; signs, Ch. 19; solid waste, Ch. 20; subdivision regulations, Ch. 22; traffic, Ch. 25; stopping, standing and parking regulations on streets, § 25-131 et seq.; speed limits on specific streets, § 25-106 et seq.; utilities, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference- General authority of city relative to street abandonment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 253.001; building lines and condemnation of easements, etc., for streets, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Obstructions generally. 
(a)  Except as the city council may otherwise provide, it shall be unlawful for any person to place goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables, boxes, barrels, containers, dispensers, signs or any other obstruction of any kind in or upon any street, avenue, alley or sidewalk within the city. Likewise, except as the city council may otherwise provide, it shall be unlawful for any person in charge of or occupying any property to permit goods, wares, merchandise, boxes, barrels, containers, signs or other obstructions to remain on the street, alley, avenue or sidewalk adjoining the property or building in his charge or control, whether the same was placed thereon by such person or not. 
(b)  Within the Central Business District the city manager may grant permission to individual merchants or an association of merchants to display goods, wares and merchandise for sale along the publicly-owned sidewalks during such times and under such conditions as may be specified by the city manager in the granting of such permission. 
(Code 1965, § 23-1; Ord. 3443, §§ 1, 2, 2-7-94) 
Sec. 21-2. - Obstructions and planting in parkways-Generally; application for use permit. 
    No obstruction or planting of any kind shall be maintained, constructed, placed, planted or grown in the area of the public parkway lying between the curb or grade line of any public street and the abutting sidewalk or private property line other than grass, plants or shrubs; grass will be cut and maintained in an acceptable manner, plants or shrubs will be kept trimmed or pruned so as not to exceed eighteen (18) inches in height above the top of curb level and in such a manner as to keep such plants and shrubbery from encroaching over or obstructing the adjacent public sidewalk street area, traffic-control signs or devices. Provided, however, the owner of any abutting property may use the public parkway contrary to the above provision by application for a street parkway use permit executed by the building official who is hereby authorized to issue such a permit which shall provide that the permittee by acceptance of such permit agrees and obligates himself or assigns to maintain any tree, shrub or plant placed in such area in such manner as to keep same from becoming a motor vehicle or pedestrian traffic hazard and will not interfere with an unobstructed view of street signs, traffic-control signs or devices. If such parkway shall at any time be needed for any public purpose or for any utility line or poles, street signs, traffic signs and/or other devices placed in such area under lawful authority of the city council, the permittee shall whenever it shall be deemed necessary in the public interest, as may be determined by the city council, remove any tree, plant or shrub situated within such area at no expense to city. 
(Code 1965, § 23-2.1) 
Sec. 21-3. - Same-Notice to remove; failure to comply with notice. 
    Whenever the building inspector receives information and proof of the existence of any obstruction prohibited by the provisions of section 21-2 or whenever he has been directed by the city council to cause any obstruction to be removed from the public parkway area as described herein, he shall issue a written notice to any person responsible for the violation or obstruction ordering the abatement or removal of the same. He shall, at the same time, send a copy of the notice to the director of public works. Such notices shall specify the nature of the violation or obstruction and shall designate a reasonable time within which such abatement or removal shall be accomplished. In the event such notice is not complied with within the specified time, the director of public works who received the copy of the original notice shall be so advised by the building inspector, and he is hereby authorized to immediately institute proceedings for the abatement or removal thereof, as provided in section 13-29 through section 13-31. 
(Code 1965, § 23-2.2) 
Sec. 21-4. - Duty to keep sidewalk, parkway and alleyway clean. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or lessee to keep the abutting or adjacent sidewalk, parkway, and alleyway clean and free of all weeds, trash, rubbish, filth, and debris which may incumber such sidewalk, parkway and alleyway and to place such material in trash receptacles as required by this Code and failure to comply with the requirement of this section shall be and is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance subject to abatement as provided for in section 13-29 through section 13-31. 
(Code 1965, § 23-2.3) 
Sec. 21-5. - Obstructing passage of water through or across street or sidewalk. 
    Any person who shall in any manner obstruct the free passage of water through or across any street, road, highway, sidewalk or alley in this city, so as to interfere with the free and easy passage of the same, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 23-4) 
Sec. 21-6. - Minimum height of stairways or fire escapes over street or alley. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, place or permit to remain on any building in his control or possession any stairway or fire escape over any paved street, avenue or alley at a lesser height than fifteen (15) feet from such paving. 
(Code 1965, § 23-5) 
Sec. 21-7. - Trees near streets, sidewalks or drives. 
    Trees shall not be placed nearer than three (3) feet nine (9) inches to sidewalks and curbs, unless an approved means to control root growth, such as special curbing, is provided, and shall be spaced sufficiently to prevent interference of adjacent trees when mature. Roots of any tree or other plant which tend to damage or interfere with sidewalks, curbs or drivers shall be corrected by the owner of the tree or plant and any sidewalk, curb or drive thus damaged shall be repaired by such owner in a manner approved by the city manager or his or her designee. Trees shall be maintained to give a vertical clearance of seven (7) feet over walks and thirteen (13) feet over streets. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 15(b), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 15(b) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 21-7 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 21-7 derived from the 1965 Code, § 23-6. 
Sec. 21-8. - Hedges, retaining walls, steps, fences, etc., near streets or alleys. 
    Hedges, retaining walls, steps, fences or other accessories for property abutting a street or alley shall be located on such property and no portion thereof shall lie in the street or alley, except footings to walls which may be placed under the surface in a manner approved by the director of public works. The design of retaining walls referred to herein shall be approved by the director of public works. 
(Code 1965, § 23-7) 
Sec. 21-9. - Painting, marking, etc., streets, sidewalks and curbs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, stain or mark any sign, figure, character or letter upon any sidewalk, curb or paved street in the city, except that the numbers of a street address may be painted on the sidewalk or curb abutting a street in such manner as to aid in identifying and locating such real property. 
(b)  Persons who go from house to house for the purpose of painting such address numbers shall be required to obtain a license from the city as provided in section 15-26 et seq. 
(Code 1965, § 23-8) 
Sec. 21-10. - Maintenance of sidewalks, driveways, etc., by property owners or occupants. 
(a)  It shall be the duty and the obligation of all owners, occupants and users of real property within the corporate limits of the city, upon which property a sidewalk, driveway or other way is located and used by or which may be used by the public, to keep and maintain such sidewalk, driveway or way in a safe condition for use. Such sidewalks, driveways or ways shall be maintained so as to be free of depressions, excavations, inequalities, obstacles, obstructions or encroachments by the owner or occupant of such real property. 
(b)  The responsibility for and cost of the repair of curbing existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection was derived shall be equally borne by the property owner adjacent to such curbing and the city. Such cost shall include material, labor and engineering, if any. 
(Code 1965, § 23-9; Ord. No. 3868, § 1, 4-5-99; Ord. No. 4701, § 15(c), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 21-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 15(d) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 21-11 which pertained to requirements by contractor installing service lines in city right-of-way, and derived from the 1965 Code, § 23-10. 
Secs. 21-12-21-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS, DRIVES, CURBS AND GUTTERS 

Sec. 21-26. - Control. 
    The construction of sidewalks, drives, curbs and gutters in the streets of the city shall be subject to control by the director of public works or other designated representative of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 23-20) 
Sec. 21-27. - Contractor's bond. 
    Every person engaging in the business of constructing sidewalks, drives, curbs and gutters in the streets of the city shall execute a surety bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), payable to the city and conditioned that such person will construct all sidewalks, drives, curbs and gutters in strict compliance with the specifications of this article and hereafter required by ordinance of the city, and to the satisfaction of the director of public works and that such person will well and truly indemnify and keep harmless and secure the city from the payment of any and all damages arising out of the laying of any sidewalk, drive, curb or gutter by such person. Such bond shall also be conditioned that all sidewalks, drives, curbs and gutters constructed by the maker of the bond shall remain in good condition for two (2) years after being constructed, and should any sidewalk, drive, curb or gutter constructed by the maker not remain in good condition for two (2) years, the maker will make all necessary repairs, keeping it in good condition for that period. 
(Code 1965, § 23-21) 
Sec. 21-28. - Work to be performed by authorized contractor. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or cause to be constructed any concrete sidewalk, drive, curb or gutter in the streets of the city, unless such work is performed by a contractor who has executed the bond required by this article. 
(Code 1965, § 23-22) 
Sec. 21-29. - Work permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to lay, build or construct any sidewalk, drive, curb or gutter, whether consisting of brick, concrete or other materials, upon any of the streets or avenues within the city without first securing a permit so to do. Before any such permit shall be granted, it shall be the duty of the person contemplating such work to make application to the director of public works for such permit, giving the location of the property in front of which the work is to be done, and a description of the work and the material to be used. Such permit shall be issued upon payment of a fee in the amount of one dollar ($1.00), if the applicant has complied with all provisions of this article and if the proposed work will conform to this article. 
(Code 1965, § 23-23) 
Secs. 21-30-21-60. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 15(d) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed §§ 21-30-21-41, which pertained to grading, materials generally, concrete generally, forms; placement of concrete; preservation of grade and line stakes; etc., curing of concrete, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, drives, parkway grading, cleanup, replacement of defective work; deviation from article, street improvements under an assessment paving project, and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 23-24-23-35. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 4775, adopted March 16, 2015, repealed former art. III, §§ 21-61-21-66, which pertained to street cuts, and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 23-45-23-50. 

Secs. 21-61-21-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREET AND ALLEY ABANDONMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoning roadways, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 253.001. 

Sec. 21-81. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of interpreting this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
    Alley means a secondary means of access which is platted, dedicated, or deeded in fee simple to the public and not merely existing by easement rights, whether open on the ground or not. 
    Easement means property reserved by plat, dedication, or instrument for public use and access where the abutting property owner or owners own the underlying fee simple title to the land. 
    Right-of-way generally means the entire platted, dedicated, or deeded public street or alley which exists between two (2) property lines, whether improved or not, but also may refer to any other public way or portion thereof. 
    Streets means thoroughfares, public drives, roads, or ways which are platted, dedicated, or deeded to public use, whether open on the ground or not. 
(Code 1965, § 23-51) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-82. - Administrative charges. 
    Upon filing of any request for abandonment of a street, alley, right-of-way, or easement, an administrative fee shall be paid to the planning department in the amount of one hundred eighty-five dollars ($185.00) to cover the expense of administering the procedure outlined in this article, the cost of mailing notices and release forms to all abutting property owners, and the cost of publishing the public notice. Such fee is nonrefundable, regardless of the ultimate action of the city, and shall be in addition to other charges hereinafter described. 
(Code 1965, § 23-52) 
Sec. 21-83. - Procedure, generally. 
    Any person desiring the city to abandon, close, and vacate any street, alley, right-of-way, or easement shall file a petition with the planning department, in writing, directed to the planning and zoning commission. Such petition shall contain a description of the street, alley, right-of-way, easement, or portion thereof, to be abandoned, closed, and vacated. Attached to such request shall be a list of all owners of property abutting such street, alley, right-of-way, or easement, together with the last known address of each such owner. In the event that the petition requests abandonment of a portion of a street, alley, right-of-way, or easement which, whether open on the ground or not, can be accessed by the public from either direction, it shall be necessary for the petition to provide the planning department with the names and last known addresses of all abutting property owners for both the portion to be abandoned and for that portion which is not to be abandoned. In all cases, applicant must provide sufficient information for the city to prepare an ordinance abandoning, closing, and vacating said property. In the event that all abutting property owners do not join in such petition, a statement shall be attached to said request showing the reason for non-participation of those who have not signed. Ownership information appearing on the last approved city tax roll shall be conclusive as to the names of the abutting property owners. Upon the filing of such request, the planning department shall mail notices of such request to all utility companies in the city. Such notice to utility companies must be given not less than ten (10) days before the date set for the planning and zoning commission's consideration of such request. 
(Code 1965, § 23-53) 
Sec. 21-84. - Hearings. 
(a)  Upon filing of the information set out in section 21-83 above, the planning and zoning commission shall review all information and make its recommendation to the city council. It shall be the burden of the applicant to support the petition by showing that the abandonment of such street, alley, right-of-way, or easement is in the public interest due to as many of the following prerequisites as may be established: 
(1)  That such street, alley, right-of-way, or easement has never been used by the public but has, in fact, been abandoned and vacated for any public use. 
(2)  That the street, alley, right-of-way, or easement, as it now exists, is not accessible to the general public. 
(3)  That, if there were any public need for the continuance of such street, alley, right-of-way, or easement in times past, such need no longer exists. 
(4)  That the street, alley, right-of-way, or easement has, in fact, never been used by the public and, in cases of streets and alleys, that they are not paved or graveled and, as a practical matter, are not accessible to the public and/or that the expense of opening or improving for use such street, alley, right-of-way, or easement would be prohibitive due to location or topography. 
(b)  Following consideration by the planning and zoning commission, said application shall be set for a public hearing before the city council. At least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing, the planning department shall notify, by mail, all abutting property owners or, in the partial closure of a street, alley, right-of-way, or easement, all affected property owners. Prior to the public hearing, the city shall obtain, at applicant's sole expense, an appraisal of the fair market value of said property, prepared by a city-approved real estate appraiser, in accordance with Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5421c-12. Applicant must then pay to the city the appraised value of the property to be abandoned, and such payment shall be retained by the city in the case of city council approval or refunded to applicant in the case of city council denial. The city council shall then hold a public hearing for the purpose of either approving or denying such application. In the event of approval by the city council, the property shall be sold to the abutting property owners in proportion to their abutting ownership, such division to be made in an equitable manner. The applicant, at his or her expense, shall provide individual quitclaim deeds for each affected property owner, said deeds to be executed by the mayor of the city. The applicant shall then receive original executed quitclaim deed, certified copy of ordinance, and other such documents to be filed for record at applicant's expense. 
(Code 1965, § 23-54) 
Sec. 21-85. - City-initiated abandonment. 
    City-initiated abandonments shall not require the payment of application fee; however, appropriate hearings shall be required and notice provisions met as otherwise required. 
(Code 1965, § 23-54.1) 
Secs. 21-86-21-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STREET NAMES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Numbers for buildings, § 5-4. 

Sec. 21-106. - Procedure generally. 
    Any person desiring the city to change the name of any street thereof shall file a petition with the city secretary, in writing, directed to the city council. Such petition shall contain a description of the street. A list of all abutting property owners shall be attached to such petition, together with the last known addresses of all such owners. In the event that all abutting owners do not join in such petition, a statement shall be attached to said request showing the reason for nonparticipation of those who have not signed. Ownership information appearing on the last approved city tax roll shall be conclusive as to the names of the abutting property owners. Upon the filing of such request, the city secretary shall mail notices of such request to all abutting property owners. Such notice must be given not less than ten (10) days before the date set for hearing. Notice shall be considered as being properly given when notices are deposited, addressed and postage paid, in the United States mails. 
(Code 1965, § 23-55; Ord. No. 4701, § 15(a), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 21-107. - City council action. 
    No request for a street name change shall be acted upon until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have had an opportunity to be heard. At least ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1965, § 23-56) 
Sec. 21-108. - Administrative charges. 
    Upon the filing of any request for a street name change, an administration fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to the city secretary to cover the expense of administering the procedure outlined in this article, the cost of mailing notices to all abutting property owners, and the cost of publishing the public notice. Such fee shall be nonrefundable. 
(Code 1965, § 23-57; Ord. No. 4701, § 15(a), 6-17-13) 
Secs. 21-109-21-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICTS 

Sec. 21-121. - Entertainment district established. 
    The Downtown Entertainment District, referred to in this article as "the district" is hereby created within the area of downtown Denison, the boundaries of which are more particularly described as follows: 
    Beginning at the southwest corner of Forest Park which is the common point of the east right-of-way line of the 300 Block of South Fannin Avenue and the north right-of-way line of the 400 Block of West Morgan Street; 
    Then northerly along the east right-of-way line of Fannin Avenue, across Crawford Street to the southwest corner of Block 63, OTP; 
    Then westerly along the north right-of-way line Crawford Street one city block to the southwest corner of Block 17, Steven's Addition; 
    Then northerly along the east right-of-way line of the 100 and 200 block of south Barrett Avenue, crossing Chestnut Street, to the northwest corner of Block 16, Steven's Addition; 
    Then westerly along the south right-of-way line of the 600 and 700 block of West Main Street to the northwest corner of Block 2, Miller's First Addition; 
    Then northerly, crossing Main Street, along the east right-of-way line of Armstrong Avenue to the northwest corner of Block 19, Miller's First Addition; 
    Then easterly along the south right-of-way line of West Woodard Street to the intersection with Austin Avenue, crossing Austin Avenue to the northwest corner of Block 46, OTP; 
    Then northerly across Woodard Street to the northwest corner of Block 39, OTP; 
    Then easterly along the south right-of-way line of Gandy Street to the northeast corner of Block 40, OTP; 
    Then southerly along the west line of the railroad right-of-way to its intersection with the 100 block of East Crawford Street; 
    Then westerly along the north right-of-way line of Crawford Street, crossing Houston, Austin and Rusk Avenues to the southeast corner of Block 62, OTP; 
    Then southerly, crossing Crawford Street, to the south right-of-way line of Crawford Street at a point that is the northeast corner of the Denison ISD Munson Stadium property; 
    Then westerly along the south right-of-way line of Crawford Street to a point that is the northeast corner of Forest Park and the northwest corner of DISD Munson Stadium property; 
    Then southerly along the common line separating Forest Park from Munson Stadium to a point in the north right-of-way line of West Morgan Street; 
    Then westerly along the north right-of-way line of the 300 and 400 block of West Morgan Street to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4643, § 1, 3-5-12) 
Sec. 21-122. - Use of public sidewalk. 
    Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code and subject to the requirements and limitations herein provided, the public sidewalks within the district adjacent to commercial enterprises within the district may be used by the proprietors of such enterprises during the hours of business operation for such uses as, but not limited to, the display of merchandise, merchandise racks, sandwich board signs, benches, tables, food service, etc. Prior to initiating the use of the adjacent sidewalk, the proprietor shall file with the city secretary a certificate of insurance for general liability in the minimum coverage amount of five hundred thousand dollars/one million dollars ($500,000.00/$1,000,000.00), combined single limit, evidencing the City of Denison as an additional insured. Additionally, during the period when the adjacent sidewalk is occupied by the adjacent proprietor, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Between the curb of street and the area of sidewalk used, maintain at least six (6) feet of clear passage for pedestrians, 
(2)  Tables and chairs shall not be placed within ten (10) feet of an entrance or doorway, 
(3)  No fences, walls, partitions, barriers, or other fixtures or objects may be placed in the sidewalk area with the exception that a removable freestanding balustrade may be used to mark the boundaries of a sidewalk café or food serving area, if applicable, 
(4)  Keep clean of spills, debris, litter, etc. the adjacent sidewalk and street areas, 
(5)  The property owner is responsible for condition of the sidewalk and the making of repairs to the sidewalk area and to brick pavers. Repairs shall be made within thirty (30) days after notice from city. 
    Nothing herein shall be construed to limit or prohibit an adjacent property owner from applying for and receiving a sidewalk license agreement for commercial use of the sidewalk beyond that which is contemplated by this section. 
(Ord. No. 4643, § 1, 3-5-12; Ord. No. 4701, § 15(a), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 21-123. - Sound amplification within district. 
    Pursuant to the authority of section 13-102 of this Code, and without the issuance of a permit for amplification, an entertainment venue within the district may use amplification during periods of operation of the venue during days and times of day that coincide with the alcoholic beverage permit in use by the venue, and in no event shall the measurement of the sound exceed ninety (90) dB at the point of sound mixing. If no alcoholic beverage permit is applicable, sound amplification shall cease at 2:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday and at Midnight during the remaining days. 
(Ord. No. 4643, § 1, 3-5-12) 
Sec. 21-124. - Special event street and public park use. 
    Authority is hereby delegated to the city manager, or his designee, to undertake the following: 
(1)  Close the streets, or portions thereof, within the district for events sponsored by the city or held in conjunction with the city, for such times and duration as may be specified in writing to the chief of police; 
(2)  Grant a temporary, exclusive use of public park space in order to facilitate such events, and promulgate performance requirements for grantees; 
(3)  Promulgate standards for closing such streets, for the occupying and use of streets and public parks during the periods of such events, including, but not limited to, the use of streets and parks for the sale and consumption of beer and wine; 
(4)  Suspend temporarily valid mobile vending and itinerant merchant permits so as to prohibit the holders of such permits from participating in special events without first having registered and paid any applicable fee associated with exhibiting or vending during the special event; and 
(5)  Enter into such rental and use agreements on behalf of the city as may be reasonably necessary to support and encourage such special events. 
(Ord. No. 4643, § 1, 3-5-12) 
Sec. 21-125. - Alcohol possession and consumption. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 3-5, 3-8, and 3-10 of this Code and V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 101.75, the possession and consumption of beer and wine on public property within the district during the days and hours of a special event within the district is permitted. This section does not affect the prohibition against possessing an open container in a passenger area of a motor vehicle under V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 49.031. 
(Ord. No. 4643, § 1, 3-5-12) 
Sec. 21-126. - Conflict with other provisions. 
    It is the legislative intent of the city council that conflicting provisions of this article with other sections of this Code be read together and reconciled so as to preserve the meaning, intent and effect of each provision if possible. But should such conflicts be irreconcilable, then it is the city council's intent that the provisions of this article shall control to the extent necessary to resolve the conflict. Nothing herein is intended to repeal any provision of the Code unless such repeal is clearly stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 4643, § 1, 3-5-12) 
Secs. 21-127-21-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-130. - Administration. 
    The city manager shall appoint a right-of-way (ROW) manager, who is the principal city official responsible for the administration of the ROW, ROW permits, the regulation of same and ordinances and codes related thereto. The ROW manager may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder. The ROW manager shall have the duties, responsibilities and authority as specified for the ROW manager stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-131. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions apply in this article. The terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the same meanings herein. When not inconsistent with the context words used in the present tense include the future; words in plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely permissive. 
    Abandoned facilities means facilities no longer in service or physically disconnected from the operating facilities, or from any other facilities, or from any other facilities that are in use or that still carry service. 
    Administration fee means the fee charged by the city to recover its costs incurred for ROW management; including, but not limited to, costs associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying ROW permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration improvements; determining the adequacy of the ROW restoration; revoking ROW permits and other costs the city may incur in implementing the provisions of this article. 
    Applicant means an owner or authorized agent of an owner, who submits an application for a permit under the provisions of this article. 
    Area of influence means that area around a utility excavation where the pavement and subgrade is impacted by the excavation and is subject to more rapid deterioration due to the trench excavation. 
    Backfill means the following: 
(1)  The placement of new dirt, fill, or other material to refill an excavation; or 
(2)  The return of excavated dirt, fill or other material to an excavation. 
    Certified telecommunications provider or "CTP" means a person who has been issued a certificate of convenience and necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority by the Texas Public Utility Commission or "PUC" to offer local exchange telephone service as defined by V.T.C.A, Local Government Code ch. 283 or "the Act". 
    City as used herein shall mean the City of Denison, Texas and the city's officers and employees. 
    City project means the construction, location, maintenance, relocation, alteration, improvement, repair, removal or other work performed by the city, or its designee, in the public right-of-way or on any city utilities or city facilities. 
    City utilities means any water, sewer or drainage line owned and operated by the City of Denison. 
    Collector street means any roadway or street classified on the City of Denison's Comprehensive Plan, as it exists or may be amended, as a collector. 
    Compaction refers to consolidating backfill material in a trench to prevent future settlement. 
    Comprehensive plan means the City of Denison's Comprehensive Plan, as it exists or may be amended. 
    Contractor means any public or private person, subcontractor or organization, other than the City of Denison, Texas. 
    Construction means boring, the breaking of pavement, or the installation, modification, upgrade, maintenance, removal, or similar activities, within the right-of-way. The definition includes, but is not limited to, providing primary service, restoration, or maintenance of existing facilities within the ROW. 
    Day means business day unless otherwise specified. 
    Department means the City of Denison Department of Public Works or a successor department that is responsible for management of the ROW and roadway infrastructure. 
    Emergency operations are defined as those operations and repairs necessary to prevent damage or injury to the health or safety of the public or any person and the work necessary to address or prevent an immediate service interruption. Upgrading of facilities, new service installation and neighborhood improvement projects are not emergency operations. 
    Excavation means any activity that removes or otherwise disturbs soil, pavement, driveways, curbs, or sidewalks in the ROW and does not include landscaping activity unless the activity removes or disturbs the paved portion of the ROW. 
    Facilities means the equipment, and property, including but not limited to, lines, poles, mains, pipes, conduits, ducts, cables, valves, man holes, hand holes and wires located under, on, or above the surface of the ground within the ROW, and related facilities and equipment used or useful for the provision of utility services. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Governing body means the Mayor and the City Council of the City of Denison, Texas. 
    Governmental entity means any county, township, city, town, village, school district, library district, road district, drainage or levee district, sewer district, water district, fire district or other municipal corporation, quasi-municipal corporation or political subdivision of the State of Texas or of any other state of the United States and any agency or instrumentality of the State of Texas or of any other state of the United States. 
    Holiday shall refer to days in which city offices are closed in observance of a holiday. 
    Local street means any roadway or street not classified on the City of Denison's Comprehensive Plan, as it exists or may be amended, as a highway, major thoroughfare, minor thoroughfare or collector. 
    Main line shall refer to lines other than service connections used to convey the ROW user's product. 
    Major project means any project, which includes three hundred (300) or more linear feet of excavation or any excavation under pavement. 
    Pavement shall refer to streets containing Portland cement, asphalt, brick or other rigid or semi-rigid material that covers the surface of a street and their underlying sub grade and base. 
    Permit means a permit issued under this article authorizing excavation in the ROW. 
    Permittee means any person or ROW user to whom a permit is issued to excavate a ROW. 
    Person means any person, company, partnership, contractor, subcontractor, agency or other public or private entity, excepting the city. 
    Perpendicular excavations means any trench with a centerline that when projected toward the centerline of the street, the two (2) lines intersect at an angle of ninety (90) degrees. 
    Public inconvenience penalty shall refer to a penalty assessed to the ROW user who denies the public the use of public property for a time period greater than allowed by this article. 
    PUCT means the Public Utility Commission of Texas. 
    Registration means the annual application process of the ROW user to use any portion of the ROW. 
    Registration certificate shall refer to the document provided by the city, annually, upon approval of the application for registration. 
    Repair means the temporary or permanent construction work necessary to make the ROW useable. 
    Repair area means that area around excavation where the pavement and sub grade is impacted by an excavation. 
    Restoration means the process by which an excavated ROW and surrounding area, including, but not limited to, pavement and foundation structures, ground cover, landscaping, and monuments are returned to the same condition, or better than that which existed before the commencement of the work. 
    Resurfacing means any repaving, overlay, seal or reconstruction which creates a new pavement surface over the entire width of the street, excluding crack seals and localized base and pavement repairs. 
    Right-of-way or public right-of-way (ROW) means the surface of, and the space above and below, any street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, drainage way, channel, fee interest, public way or place, sidewalk, alley, boulevard, parkway, drive, fire lane or other easement now or hereafter held by the city or over which the city exercises any rights of management or control and shall include, but not be limited to, all easements now held, or hereafter held, by the city, but shall specifically excludes private property. 
    Right-of-way (ROW) manager as used herein shall mean the ROW Manager of the City of Denison, or his/her designee. 
    Right-of-way (ROW) user means a person, its successors and assigns, that uses the ROW for purposes of work, excavation, provision of services, or installing, constructing, maintaining, or repairing facilities thereon, including, but not limited to, landowners and service providers. 
    Routine service operation means a work activity that makes no material change to the facilities and does not disrupt traffic. 
    Service means a commodity provided to a person by means of a delivery system that is comprised of facilities located or to be located in the ROW, including, but not limited to, gas, telephone, cable television, internet services, open video systems, alarm systems, steam, electric, water, telegraph, data transmission, petroleum pipelines, or sanitary sewage. 
    Service connection shall refer to the line that serves no more than two (2) individual customers or two (2) meter banks. 
    Street means the paved portion of the ROW that has been constructed, reconstructed, or resurfaced with concrete or asphalt or some other surface. 
    Surface mounted markers refers to any sign, post or other marker, which rises above the surface of the ground to show the location of an underground utility. 
    TMUTCD shall mean the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as it exists or may be amended. 
    Thoroughfare means any roadway or street classified on the City of Denison's Comprehensive Plan, as it exists or may be amended, as a highway, major thoroughfare or minor thoroughfare. 
    Traffic control representative shall refer to the designated representative of the row user who is responsible for work zone safety and compliance with TMUTCD. The ROW user shall ensure such person has adequate training, knowledge and authority to perform the responsibilities listed above. 
    Trench shall refer to excavation deeper than twenty-four (24) inches. This shall include linear trenches, holes, pits and etc. 
    Underground Facility Damage Protection Safety Act shall refer to the V.T.C.A., Utility Code § 251.001 et seq., as it exists or may be amended. 
    Utility means any privately or publicly owned entity which uses ROW to furnish the public any general public service, including, without limitation, sanitary sewer, gas, electricity, water, telephone, petroleum products, telegraph, heat, steam or chilled water, together with the equipment, structures, and appurtenances belonging to such entity and located within and near the ROW. Poles are regulated herein only as specifically set forth in this article. 
    White lining means marking the excavation site with white washable marking paint or flags prior to requesting a utility locate in order to further identify the site. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-132. - Utility coordination. 
    Each utility shall name a utility coordinator who shall participate in utility coordination meetings upon request by the City of Denison. All ROW users with open permits shall send one (1) representative to the utility coordination meeting pertaining to the specific/related project as determined by the City of Denison. Meetings shall be held at the time and location established by the city. City shall notify, by any means, the ROW users of the required attendance meetings. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-133. - Field utility coordination. 
    The ROW user shall notify the department at each of the following times during a project: (a) forty-eight (48) hours before the start of construction; (b) upon completion of the initial backfill; and (c) upon completion of the project. The ROW user shall make a request for a utility locate in compliance with the Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act. 
    The use of markers, stakes, poles, barricades or other devices shall be used in such a way to avoid damage to adjoining property. The use of "non-washable" markers is prohibited. Compliance with the Texas Utilities Code, as amended, is required at all times. 
    All barricades, plates, cones, traffic directional equipment and all other traffic control devices owned, leased or used by the ROW user and used on or near any excavation shall be maintained in a clean and functional condition as determined by the City of Denison. Modifications to any traffic control plan shall be implemented immediately upon notification from the City of Denison. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-134. - Maps and records of registrants. 
    Upon request, each existing ROW user shall provide the city an accurate map of their service area. The map shall be in electronic format overlaid over the City of Denison ETJ map. In dual coverage areas, the city may request additional information to enable identification of ROW users. 
    Each ROW user must maintain accurate and up-to-date maps and records of its facilities. The city's available plans and maps may be provided upon request. The ROW users provided information should include true bearings and distances to the nearest established street lines and official monuments, which shall be accurately described on the map. The ROW user will provide the city with information within ninety (90) days of a request for maps from the city. 
    If the maps and records submitted in response to any request by or requirement of the city include information expressly designated by the ROW user as a trade secret or other confidential information protected from disclosure by state law, the city and its agents, employees, or other representatives may not disclose that information to the public without the consent of the ROW user, unless otherwise compelled by an opinion of the attorney general pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act, as amended, or by a court having jurisdiction of the matter pursuant to applicable law. This subsection may not be construed to authorize a ROW user to designate all matters in its maps and records as confidential or as trade secrets. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-135. - Notice. 
    Notice for purposes of this article shall be made to the city via electronic message (e-mail), overnight courier (generally used carrier with tracing available), hand delivery with signed receipt, facsimile transmission, or deposited with sufficient postage with the United States Postal Service return receipt required. All notices shall be provided to the ROW manager. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-136. - Registration. 
(a)  Nothing in this section relieves a ROW user and/or utility from obtaining a permit under this article to perform work in the ROW. 
(b)  In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, a utility maintaining or operating existing facilities in the ROW must register with the ROW manager in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  The registration must be on a form furnished by the ROW manager and made in the name of the ROW user that owns the facilities. 
(2)  Registration expires December 31 of the following year after the first registration occurs. If the utility fails to renew registration by that date, the city will send by certified mail a notice of noncompliance to the address listed on the registration. If the utility fails to renew registration within thirty (30) calendar days after the date of sending the notification, the facilities of the utility will be deemed to have been legally abandoned. 
(3)  If information provided as part of the registration changes, the utility must inform the ROW manager, in writing, not more than thirty (30) days after the date the change occurs. 
(4)  The utility shall also include the following registration: 
a.  The name of the utility using the ROW, including any business name, assumed name, or trade name the utility operates under or has operated under in the city within the past five (5) years. 
b.  If the utility is a CTP, the certificate number issued by the Texas Public Utility Commission. 
c.  The ordinance number of any franchise or license issued by the city that authorizes the utility to use the ROW. 
d.  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two (2) persons who will be general, day-to-day contacts for the utility. At least one (1) of the addresses must be within fifty (50) miles of the City of Denison. 
e.  The name and mailing address of the officer or agent designated as the person authorized to receive service of process on behalf of the utility. 
f.  The name, address and telephone number of any contractor or subcontractor, who will be working in the ROW on behalf of the utility. This list may be amended as needed by the utility; however no work shall be performed in the ROW by a contractor or subcontractor that is not on the list, regardless of whether a permit is required. 
g.  The names and telephone numbers of at least two (2) persons serving as emergency contacts who can be reached by telephone twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. 
h.  Proof of existing insurance that complies with section 21-189. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-137. - Traffic handling training. 
    The ROW user is responsible for work zone safety including, but not limited to, traffic control through the designated traffic control representative. The representative is responsible for compliance with the TMUTCD and the traffic control plan (if required) at all work zone sites. The traffic control representative shall ensure employees on the job site have adequate training. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-138. - Reporting obligations. 
    All ROW users shall, upon request, provide proof of any necessary permit, license, certification, grant, registration, franchise agreement or any other authorization required by any governmental entity, including, but not limited to, the city, state, or federal government, or railroad or pipeline company, including a description of the ROW user's intended use of the ROW, information sufficient to determine whether the ROW user is subject to franchising or licensing by the city, and information to determine whether the ROW user has applied for and received any certificate of authority required by the PUCT. The information provided shall be sufficient enough to determine whether the ROW user has applied for and received any permit or other approvals required by the FCC. ROW user shall provide all such other information as may be reasonably required by the city to complete the registration statement. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-139. - Relocation of facilities for public improvements. 
(a)  In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all uses of the ROW. The city reserves the right to, among other things, lay water, sewer, drainage, and other pipelines or cables and conduits, and to do underground and overhead work, and attachments, restructuring, or changes in street facilities in across, along, over, or under a public street, alley or ROW occupied by an agency or ROW user, and to change the curb, sidewalks, or the grade of streets. 
(b)  The ROW user must relocate its facilities, at its own expense, prior to the start of construction of a city project. Failure to comply with this provision shall subject the ROW user to the enforcement provisions contained herein. 
(c)  A permit will be required when making facility adjustments in preparation for city projects. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-140. - Permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, its agents, servants or employees to dig, plow, blast, make cuts, openings, bore, tunnel, excavate or close lanes on a thoroughfare or collector without first having made application and obtained a permit, unless excepted from the permit requirement in section 21-141. It is unlawful for any person, its agents, servants or employees to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any ROW for the installation, repair or removal of any facilities, or for any other purpose without first obtaining from the ROW manager a permit in compliance with this article. 
(1)  Before issuing a permit, the ROW manager shall have been provided a written application, on a form furnished by the ROW manager, setting forth the name and residence or business address of the applicant; the location and approximate area of the excavation, including its approximate length and width, and, if the excavation is in a street, whether it is parallel or transverse to the direction of the travel lanes; and, the purpose of the excavation. The application form shall include plans prepared in accordance with city specifications. Plans shall be drawn at a reasonable scale that legibly and accurately show all existing improvements and proposed work. All proposed work must be shown in heavy or bold type lines and fonts. If proposed work is in phases or part of another overall drawing, show all existing and future work in lighter or faded out lines and fonts. If ROW user cannot show distinctive line weights, the plans shall clearly label the above information using text. When required by the Texas Engineering Practice Act, as amended, the plans must be sealed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas. 
(2)  At the time the permit issued, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable permit application fee in an amount as provided for in this article. 
(3)  The proposed location, depth and other characteristics of any facilities for which the permit is issued shall be subject to approval of the ROW manager, and all backfilling, compaction and pavement restoration performed for any excavation shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(4)  In the event that relocation is required by the city in accordance with section 21-139, in no event shall any fee or requirement of this article be construed to affect or alter in any way any obligation of public and/or private utilities with facilities installed in any ROW to relocate the facilities, at no cost to the city, subject to state law, if applicable. 
(5)  Combinations of permits shall be permitted at the sole discretion of the ROW manager. Fees shall be assessed based on the excavations permitted. 
(6)  Subdivision monuments, historical markers, and any other signs or structures with foundations in the ROW, excluding billboards, are subject to this article. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-141. - Exceptions to require permit. 
(a)  The ROW manager reserves the right in his/her discretion to require a ROW permit on service connections. Unless otherwise required by the ROW manager, service connections do not require a permit if all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The service connection excavation shall not exceed four (4) feet inside the ROW to property line; 
(2)  All excavation shall be in accordance with service connection drawings; 
(3)  The address for the service connection is on the city provided form, which is submitted to the ROW manager via e-mail. Work shall not begin until the electronic form is transmitted to the ROW manager. 
(4)  The excavation required is less than twenty-four (24) inches in depth; 
(5)  The excavation is no wider than six (6) inches or is hand dug; and 
(6)  The service connection does not require boring. 
(b)  Irrigation system installation does not require an additional permit if all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The work is performed with an existing valid permit issued by the city for the installation of irrigation; 
(2)  The excavation shall not exceed twelve (12) inches in depth and no wider than six (6) inches; 
(3)  The address for the service connection is on the city provided form, which is submitted to the ROW manager via e-mail and is approved. All requests, which are not approved within forty-eight (48) hours, are denied; 
(4)  Line locates from the city are requested. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-142. - Permit application. 
(a)  Application for a permit shall be addressed to the ROW manager and made on a form furnished for that purpose, stating the extent, dimensions, character and purpose of the cut or excavation to be made, the location, by street and number if possible, where the work is to be done, and the time in which it is to be completed. The application form shall be accompanied by maps of the existing facilities in the area, to the extent available, and the location of the proposed facilities, methodology of construction, and proposed start and completion dates. When the work includes excavation, which will exceed five (5) feet in depth, a trench safety design sealed by a licensed professional engineer shall also accompany the application, unless otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  A permit shall only be valid for the area of the ROW specified within the permit. No permittee may cause any work to be done outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee who determines that an area is greater than that which is specified in the permit must apply for and receive a new ROW permit. 
(c)  Applicants may apply jointly for permits to excavate the ROW at the same time and place. Applicants who apply jointly for a ROW permit may share in the payment of the permit fee. Applicants must agree among themselves as to the portion each shall pay. The city will recognize only one (1) point of contact. 
(d)  Permits will be issued or denied within five (5) business days of city receiving a complete application. Permits shall be valid for the dates specified in the permit. The applicant may request but is not guaranteed the permit be valid for such longer period as may be necessary in the circumstances, in advance, as part of the application. The city may approve or deny the application for such extended permit period. No permittee may commence work before the permit start date and, except as provided herein. No permittee may continue working after the end date. If a permittee does not complete the work by the permit end date, the permittee must apply for and may receive a new ROW permit or a permit extension for additional time. This supplementary application must be submitted to the city prior to the permit end date. Applicants are encouraged to request a pre-submission meeting for large projects. 
(e)  An expedited permit may be requested, and shall be issued or denied within two (2) days of application upon a showing of good cause, as solely determined by the ROW manager. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-143. - Issuance of permit. 
    Every person making application for a permit in accordance with the provisions of this article, and having complied with such provisions, shall be entitled thereto, and, upon filing such application with the ROW manager, it shall be his/her duty to issue the permit, when the provisions of this article have been complied with. 
(1)  Upon receiving a written application for a permit and a plan prepared in accordance with the city specifications, the ROW manager's designee shall set forth all requirements, approve or disapprove the application, sign and return it to applicant. Excepting only emergency excavations, at least one (1) working day prior to the start of work, the applicant shall notify the ROW manager the date the work will commence when traffic control devices are necessary on a thoroughfare. 
(2)  No permit shall be transferable. A permit shall be void unless the excavation to be made pursuant thereto is commenced within the time stated therein and the work diligently completed. 
(3)  Each permit shall state a time period for completion of all the work to be done hereunder. The ROW manager may in his/her sole discretion, grant extensions of time. 
(4)  No person in violation of any requirement of this article shall be issued an excavation permit, nor shall any contractor or agent apply for or be issued a permit on the person's behalf, until the outstanding violation(s) is/are corrected or a plan for correction is approved by the ROW manager. The foregoing requirement is in addition to any penalty or remedy for violation that may be imposed or sought by the city at law or equity. 
(5)  No work shall be done under any permit issued under this article except as stated in the permit. If the permit is allowed to expire, the ROW user shall procure a new permit, paying the applicable fee, prior to proceeding with any such work. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-144. - Excavation to be under supervision of the ROW manager. 
(a)  Any ROW user engaged in making or backfilling any excavation in any ROW shall, at all times while such work is in progress, keep at the job location the permit, or a copy thereof, and shall provide copies of the same, when requested by any authorized city employee. At all times while the work is in progress, the ROW user shall also maintain, at the job location, a sign, barricade or other device bearing the ROW user's name. 
(b)  The ROW user shall protect from damage, utility conduits, sewer conduits, water conduits, lawns, shrubbery, trees, fences, structures, irrigation, sidewalks, streets, signs, street lights, or other property at, near or encountered in its work. 
(c)  All excavations and other construction in the streets shall be conducted so as to interfere as little as practicable with the use of ROW and with the use of private property, in accordance with chapter 21, article III or this Code. The ROW user shall not trespass upon private property. The ROW user shall determine the boundary between ROW and private property. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to, among others, lay, and allow to be laid, electricity, sewer, gas, water and other pipe lines or cables and facilities, as well as drainage pipes, and channels and streets, and to perform, and allow to be performed, any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the city council, in, across, along, over or under any ROW or public place occupied by a ROW user and to change any curb or sidewalk or the grade of any street and to maintain all of the city's facilities. In allowing such work to be performed by others, the city shall not be liable to a ROW user for any damage caused by those persons or entities. Nothing herein shall relieve any third party from responsibility for damages caused to a ROW user by such third party. 
(e)  All transmission and distribution structures, lines, equipment and facilities erected by a ROW user within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of the ROW, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of said streets. No pole may be placed in an area prohibited by another section of this article. 
(f)  If the city requires a ROW user to adapt or conform its facilities, or in any way or manner to alter, relocate or change its property to enable any other corporation or person, except the city, to use, or to use with greater convenience, any ROW or public place, the ROW user shall not be required to make any such changes until such other corporation or person shall have undertaken, with solvent bond, to reimburse a ROW user for any loss and expense which will be caused by, or arise out of such removal, change, adaptation, alteration, conformance or relocation of a ROW user's facilities; provided, however, that the city shall never be liable for such reimbursement. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-145. - Hours of operation for non-emergency work. 
(a)  Excavation and boring is allowed. Excavation and boring shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Monday thru Friday, except on holidays. No excavation or boring shall be performed on holidays. 
(b)  All other work requiring an inspection shall be done between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Monday thru Friday, except on holidays. No work shall be performed on holidays. A ROW user may work on Saturday subject to the approval of the ROW manager and a notification no later than noon on Thursday before the Saturday in which the work is to be performed. The Saturday inspection fee must be paid prior to noon on Thursday before the Saturday in which the work is to be performed. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-146. - Denial of permit. 
    A permit may be denied or suspended for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to provide proof of a surety bond or liability insurance acceptable to the city or notice of termination of the same. 
(2)  Failure to secure a contractor's license or other required license. 
(3)  Failure to perform in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(4)  The proposed warning or other traffic control procedures or equipment do not comply with the requirements of the TMUTCD or the requirements of the ROW manager. 
(5)  The proposed activity would violate any city ordinance or state or federal law, rule, regulation or statute. 
(6)  The permit application contains false or misleading information. 
(7)  The activity would cause a public health or safety hazard. 
(8)  The ROW user is not authorized within the city. 
(9)  The ROW user is in violation of this article relative to work in progress. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-147. - Appeal. 
    A ROW user that: (i) have been denied registration; (ii) has been denied a permit; (iii) has had a permit revoked; or (iv) believes that fees imposed are invalid, may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request as follows: 
(1)  If an applicant desires to appeal a decision; the applicant may file a written notice of appeal with the ROW manager within five (5) business days of the date the decision was rendered. The notice must state the alternatives available and routes explored, hardship encountered, cost comparison of other alternatives and a statement of any other significant factors. The ROW manager shall provide a written decision within five (5) business days. Failure to render a decision within five (5) business days shall constitute a denial. 
(2)  If a further denial is given, the appellant may thereafter file a written notice of appeal to the office of the city manager within five (5) business days of receipt of the director of public works written decision. The city manager shall provide a written decision within five (5) business days of receipt of an appeal in accordance with this section. Failure to render a decision within five (5) business days shall constitute a denial. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-148. - Lawful use of ROW. 
(a)  The use of the ROW in any manner which violates federal, state, or local laws, or city codes, ordinances and regulations, including, without limitation, those relating to health, safety, noise, environmental protection, waste disposal and water and air quality, is prohibited. All permittees shall provide satisfactory evidence of compliance with the foregoing upon request of the city. 
(b)  Permittee shall dispose of all material removed from the ROW and any waste created by permittee in compliance with all state, federal and local laws and requirements. Temporary storage of material may be placed in a pile no higher than thirty (30) inches. 
(c)  If a permittee excavates any contaminated, regulated or hazardous materials in the ROW, permittee shall be responsible for environmental assessment, excavation, testing, transportation and disposal of that material in accordance with applicable law. The permittee shall promptly notify the city, orally, of the condition within two (2) hours of discovery of any contaminated, regulated or hazardous materials in the ROW, and within eight (8) hours provide the aforementioned information to the city in writing. Permittee must consult with and receive written authorization from the city before undertaking any of the steps/actions set forth in this paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-149. - Compliance with safety regulations. 
    The permittee and ROW user shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local safety regulations and requirements, including, by example and not limitation, the occupational safety and health standards for the construction industry. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-150. - Conformance with the thoroughfare plan. 
    A ROW user should consult the city's thoroughfare plan (TP) prior to the acquisition of any interest in real property in the city for the installation or relocation of service lines or other equipment or facilities along or adjacent to any street, ROW, thoroughfare, highway, or any proposed street, ROW, highway or thoroughfare to attempt to minimize any future conflict regarding the location of such facilities. All ROW users are charged at all times with constructive notice of the TP subsequent to the effective date of this article. The city shall, at a minimum, have no liability for the value of or loss by a ROW user of any improvements constructed in the area shown on the TP, except as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-151. - Tree trimming and graffiti abatement. 
    Permission is granted to a ROW user, subject to the requirements of the city's tree preservation ordinance, as exists or may be amended from time to time, to trim trees upon and overhanging the ROW, so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with a ROW user's facilities. When so directed by the city, the tree trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city. The city shall report damage or vandalism to the ROW user's facilities as soon as practicable after the city discovers or learns of such event. The ROW user shall make the necessary repairs or restoration, including, but not limited to, cleaning of graffiti, as soon as practicable but not to exceed seven (7) days after the ROW user discovers or learns of any misuse, destruction, damage or vandalism to its facilities. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-152. - Routing and spatial assignment. 
    The city reserves the right, in the permit or otherwise, to restrict or determine the route (pathway) and/or spatial location, whether horizontal, vertical or depth, of any Facility and/or structure or improvement in the ROW. The city reserves the right to reserve space for future utilities. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-153. - Commencement and completion. 
    After obtaining the permit and prior to commencing the work, the permittee shall notify the ROW manager, and shall commence and complete all work within the time specified in the permit, unless an extension of time is granted by the ROW manager. No work shall commence until erosion control measures (e.g. silt fence) and advance warning signs, markers, cones and barricades are in place. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-154. - Notification of effected property owners. 
    Except in the case of an emergency, whenever excavation is required in the ROW adjacent to an occupied property, the ROW user shall notify the property owner of the activity through use of a door hanger (cost of production and distribution to be sole responsibility of the ROW user), which shall include the following information: 
(1)  Permit number; 
(2)  Identity of the contractor and the ROW user, including a contact name and phone number by which more information regarding the project could be obtained and a twenty-four (24) hour-a-day emergency phone number; and 
(3)  The anticipated duration of the construction work. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-155. - Safe conduct of work. 
    Every permittee and ROW user shall prosecute its work diligently and in a good, safe, and workmanlike manner, and shall safeguard and protect the public, using the street or ROW where the work is being performed, from accidents or damage by placing barriers, lights and other sufficient safeguards around all cuts, openings and excavation. All material, implements and tools stored upon the premises and used in connection with the excavation shall be stored in a safe and non-hazardous manner. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-156. - Revocation or suspension of permit. 
    The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke or suspend any permit, without refund of the permit fee, in the event of a breach by the permittee of the terms and/or conditions of the permit, this article and/or any other city ordinance. A breach of the terms of the permit shall include, but not be limited to any of the following: 
(1)  The violation of any provision of the permit. 
(2)  An evasion or attempt to evade any provision of the permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens. 
(3)  Any material misrepresentation of any fact in the permit application. 
(4)  The failure to meet insurance, surety bond or indemnification requirements. 
(5)  The failure to complete the work as specified in the permit. 
(6)  The failure to correct a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to this article. 
(7)  Any traffic control violations. 
(8)  Failure to protect existing facilities or to repair existing facilities damaged in the ROW. 
(9)  Violation of any part of this article. 
(10)  Recognition by the ROW manager that a permit was issued in error. 
(11)  Failing to comply with an order of the ROW manager on the permit and any other valid permit held by the ROW user. 
(12)  Any safety violation or other action that threatens the health, welfare and/or safety of the public as solely determined by the ROW manager. 
(13)  If the ROW manager determines that the permittee has committed a breach of any law or condition of the ROW permit, the ROW manager shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation within ten (10) days. Continued violation may be cause for revocation of the permit or legal action, or both. The ROW manager may, in his/her discretion, revoke the permit, provide specifications to cure the breach, or both. Within five (5) days of receiving notification of the breach, permittee shall contact the ROW manager with a plan, acceptable to the ROW manager, for correction of the breach. Permittee's failure to do so or permittee's failure to timely implement the approved plan shall be cause for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-157. - Work not in accordance with permit declared unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or allow to be made, any excavation, or to install, cause or allow to be installed any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, utility pole or other utility or appliance in or under the surface of any street, alley, sidewalk, ROW or other public place, at any location, other than that described in the application for the permit and as shown on the plans filed with the ROW manager, and in accordance with the requirements of the permit. If the circumstances appearing after the excavation is commenced make it impossible to comply with the permit, the ROW manager may, in his/her sole discretion, grant a waiver to take the circumstances into account. 
(b)  Failure to comply with requirements set forth in this article or on any permit shall be cause for revocation of the subject permit and of any other permits held by the same permittee until the violations have been corrected or the ROW manager has approved alternative requirements. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-158. - Work done without a permit. 
    No cut, excavation, grading or disturbing of the ROW, in any way, shall be made, other than excavations necessary for emergency work, without first securing a permit. No person or ROW user shall, at any time, open or encumber more of the ROW than shall be reasonably necessary to complete a project in the most expeditious manner. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-159. - Cease work. 
    At any time, the ROW manager may order the immediate cessation of any work that poses a threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public. The ROW manager may revoke the permit of any permittee in any instance where there is a threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-160. - Requirements. 
    The ROW manager may issue a written notice to the permittee indicating work that does not conform to the terms of the permit, applicable standards, conditions, codes or other applicable regulation. At such time a notice is issued, no new work shall be conducted until the deficient work has been corrected. Within ten (10) days after issuance of written notice, the permittee shall present proof to the ROW manager that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the ROW manager may revoke the permit. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-161. - Location and relocation of facilities. 
    Subject to applicable federal, state, and local laws, the ROW user shall, upon the request of the city, locate and/or relocate its facilities situated within any ROW, at no expense to the city, where reasonable and necessary to accommodate the city's public improvements associated with street construction, improvement, and widening. When relocation is necessitated by federal government requirements, and includes reimbursements, the city will reimburse applicant for its proportionate share from funds provided the city in such reimbursements. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-162. - Relocation facilities for the city. 
    In the event the city finds it necessary to move a ROW user's facilities to protect the ROW and/or street, the city shall notify the local representative of the ROW user. ROW user shall promptly move or facilitate the relocation of the subject facilities at ROW user's sole expense. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-163. - Abandoned facilities. 
    A ROW user owning abandoned facilities in the ROW shall: 
(1)  Remove its facilities and repair, at its sole expense, any damage caused by the removal. The ROW manager may allow some or all facilities to remain if the ROW manager determines same is in the best interest of the public to do so; or 
(2)  Provide information satisfactory to the city that the ROW user's obligations for its facilities in the ROW have been lawfully assumed by another authorized ROW user. The facilities of the ROW user who fails to comply with this section, and those facilities which remain unused for two (2) years, shall be deemed to be abandoned unless, within the aforesaid two-year period, the city receives written confirmation and reasonable evidence, as solely determined by city, that the ROW user intends to use the facilities. The city may exercise any remedies and/or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, taking possession of the abandoned facilities or requiring the removal of the facilities by the ROW user at the ROW users sole expense. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-164. - Underground service requirements. 
    Placement of new utility support structures (poles) shall be prohibited for electrical distribution lines with sixty thousand (60,000) volts and less and all communication utilities, unless otherwise allowed by an existing franchise agreement between the ROW user and the city or a PUCT tariff. This provision does not prohibit replacing existing poles for maintenance purposes. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-165. - Location of poles and conduits. 
    All poles in the ROW shall be of sound material and straight, and shall not interfere with the flow of water in any gutter or drain, and shall be placed so as not to unduly interfere with vehicular and pedestrian travel. The location and route of all conduits, fiber, cables, utilities and facilities placed and constructed by a ROW user in the construction and maintenance of its system in the city shall be subject to the reasonable and proper control, direction and approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-166. - Size and location of above ground facilities. 
    The maximum dimensions for utility structures above the ground in the ROW adjacent to streets are seven (7) feet long (parallel to the road), two (2) feet wide (perpendicular to the road) and six (6) feet in height. For structures three (3) feet or less in height, the width may be forty-four (44) inches. This does not include poles. The height of utility structures shall be measured from the lowest grade at any point eighteen (18) inches or less from the side of the structure that faces the street to the highest point of the structure. Utility structures exceeding those dimensions shall not be located in the ROW adjacent to streets, unless otherwise approved in writing by the ROW manager. All aboveground facilities shall be located outside of the corner visibility triangle at all intersections, future intersections and all driveways. No aboveground facilities may be placed in a parkway that is across from a median opening. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-167. - Height of overhead line. 
    The user shall ensure all overhead lines are constructed and maintained so that the minimum clearances are in compliance with the National Electric Code as it exists or may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-168. - Attachments to poles. 
(a)  Nothing shall obligate or restrict a ROW user from exercising its rights to enter into pole attachment, pole usage, joint ownership or other wire space or facilities agreements with light and/or power companies or with other wire-using companies authorized to operate within the city. 
(b)  A ROW user shall utilize existing pole space, conduit, and other facilities whenever reasonably and/or economically possible. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-169. - Temporary rearrangement of aerial wires. 
    The ROW user shall rearrange its transmission media temporarily as necessary to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The requesting parties shall, pay the reasonable and necessary expense of such temporary rearrangements. The ROW user shall in a reasonable time frame and reasonable cost, remove its transmission media in connection with the demolition of unsafe structures, including emergency or ordered demolitions at no cost to the city. The ROW user may invoice the requesting parties for the cost of this work, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-170. - Street closures. 
(a)  All lane closures on any thoroughfare or collectors shall comply with TMUTCD, and shall include a lane closure exhibit to be submitted with the permit to the ROW manager. The ROW manager may require a traffic control plan. Arrow boards and message boards may be required for lane closures on thoroughfares and collectors. 
(b)  Except in an emergency, no thoroughfare or collector street shall be closed on weekdays during the hours of 6:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. Every day of the week, all roadways shall be open to traffic by sunset on the same day as the construction. 
(c)  All lane closures require twenty-four-hour notification of the police and fire departments prior to closing. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-171. - Site maintenance during construction and prior to full restoration. 
(a)  Erosion control and stormwater management. The ROW user shall be responsible for stormwater management, erosion control and excavation safety measures that comply with city, state and federal guidelines. Requirements shall include, but not limited to, construction fencing around any excavation that will be left overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until reasonable vegetation is established, barricade fencing around open holes, and high erosion areas will require wire backed silt fencing. Upon request of ROW manager, the ROW user may be required to furnish documentation submitted or received from the federal or state government. 
(b)  Dust control. The ROW user shall ensure that the work is conducted and site maintained to minimize blowing dust. At any time dust leaves the job site so that it is a nuisance, the work will stop until measures can be taken to eliminate the dust. 
(c)  Traffic control safety. In the event of non-compliance with the TMUTCD, the ROW user shall be notified of the violation. In the event of continued non-compliance, the ROW manager may revoke the permit, in addition to any other remedies available to the city. At any time the ROW manager determines the work threatens public safety, he/she may take immediate action as necessary including but not limited to, stopping all work, or have a third party make the repairs at the expense of the applicant. 
(d)  Responsibility for signs, barricades and warning devices. The ROW user working in any ROW is responsible for the safe movement of traffic, both pedestrian and vehicular, through the construction area. The ROW user shall meet all requirements for barricading and traffic control as specified in the TMUTCD. 
(1)  Only those individuals who are qualified by means of adequate training in safe traffic control practices and have a basic understanding of the principles established by applicable standards and regulations, including without limitation, those in TMUTCD, may place and maintain the traffic control devices in a construction area. 
(2)  The ROW user must either (i) subcontract the barricading to a firm specializing in traffic control; or (ii) submit the qualifications and name(s) of employees to the ROW manager for approval prior to the work commencing. The ROW user must also submit a traffic control plan for review when required by this article. All signs and barricades must conform to the requirements of the TMUTCD. 
(3)  All barricades, plates, and other traffic control equipment must conform to TMUTCD specifications and must be inspected and maintained by the traffic control representative. 
(4)  Non-compliance with the TMUTCD shall be cited in writing. In the event of non-compliance after citation, the ROW manager may place the necessary devices as required, and the ROW user shall reimburse the city for all such expenses as well as five hundred dollars ($500.00) for non-compliance. Failure to comply with this provision may result in denial of application for future permits. 
(5)  All traffic control devices must be removed immediately upon completion of work. 
(e)  Duty to barricade. At all times during construction activity, the contractor and/or ROW user, as applicable, shall place and maintain all necessary and proper barriers and other safeguards, including without limitation, watchmen certified in accordance with the safety training described in this article, if necessary, upon and around the work and for the prevention of accidents, and after daylight hours, shall place, maintain and keep suitable sufficient lights, in accordance with the TMUTCD. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-172. - Inspection. 
    The permittee shall make the work-site accessible to the city, and others as authorized by law, for inspection at all reasonable times during performance of the work. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-173. - Materials testing. 
    The department will require testing of materials used in construction in or near the ROW to determine conformance with city construction specifications, including, but not limited to, compaction tests on backfill materials, sub grade, aggregate base course, Portland concrete (rigid pavement), asphaltic concrete (flexible pavement) and other construction materials as deemed necessary by the department. The ROW user shall, at his expense, hire a testing laboratory with current accreditation by the American Association for Laboratory Accreditation, American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) or another nationally recognized accreditation agency that verifies compliance with ASTM E 329 and that demonstrates the laboratory's capabilities to perform applicable ASTM or AASHTO test procedures, as may be required. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-174. - Duties of persons making excavations or creating obstructions. 
    Any person who shall cause to be made any excavation or obstruction in any street or ROW shall not allow the same to remain there beyond a time reasonable sufficient for the completion of the work and/or removal of the obstruction, and shall repair the subject portion of such street and/or ROW so as to restore the same to its condition previous to the making of such excavation or obstruction. It shall be the duty of such excavators to protect the area while such condition exists and promptly to repair the same so as to leave the street or ROW in as good condition as before the excavation. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-175. - Emergency excavations. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent any person maintaining any pipe, conduit or duct in or under any street, or ROW by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit, from making such excavation as may be necessary for compliance with law or for the preservation of life or property when the necessity arises, provided that the person making the excavation shall notify the ROW manager within twenty-four (24) hours. Except as specifically provided otherwise in this article for excavations authorized by this section, permittee shall be subject to all fees and requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-176. - Excavation in streets. 
    Except in case of an emergency there shall be no excavation in any street without the prior written approval of the ROW manager. Any request for a permit to excavate a street shall include a description of the proposed work and proposed restoration of the area, as well as a statement of clear and convincing evidence is provided to the ROW manager as to why alternate procedures cannot or should not be used in lieu of excavating a street. All pavement cuts and repairs shall be performed by a contractor with experience in street repair work. Any damage to pavement outside the removal area shall also be repaired subject to approval of the ROW manager. All pavement replacement shall be performed immediately after the utility installation operations so that the area can be reopened for traffic as soon as practical. When narrow sections of pavement remain after proposed removal of pavement for the work needing to be conducted, ROW manager reserves the ability to determine need and require additional pavement be removed so as to maintain the integrity of the pavement system as a whole in and around the subject area. If such additional pavement is determined to be required to be removed, ROW user shall remove and be responsible for the replacement thereof. In no case shall the cost for any part of the additional pavement removal or replacement be born by the city. 
(1)  Excavation in Portland cement concrete (PCC) pavement surface. If the existing pavement is PCC, the concrete shall be cut first with a saw to a depth of the full the thickness of the concrete, and the full width of the trench, which shall also cut the reinforcing steel. A second cut shall be twelve (12) inches parallel to the first cut to full thickness of the concrete and excavated to undisturbed soil. Outer twelve (12) inches shall be removed after utility work has been completed and immediately before pavement replacement so as to preserve the integrity of the underlying soils. Should perimeter underlying soils become disturbed either by ROW user or other events, even such events outside of the ROW users control, an additional twelve (12) inches shall be removed as noted above. This additional pavement removal shall be required progressively until the soil integrity has been observed to be satisfactory to the ROW manager. 
(2)  Excavation in hot mix asphalt concrete (HMAC) pavement surface. If the existing pavement is HMAC, the HMAC shall be cut first with a saw to a depth of the full pavement section thickness, and the full width of the trench, which shall also cut the reinforcing steel. A second cut shall be twelve (12) inches parallel to the first cut to full thickness of the concrete and excavated to undisturbed soil. Outer twelve (12) inches shall be removed after utility work has been completed and immediately before pavement replacement so as to preserve the integrity of the underlying soils. Should perimeter underlying soils become disturbed either by ROW user or other events, even such events outside of the ROW users control, an additional twelve (12) inches shall be removed as noted above. This additional pavement removal shall be required progressively until the soil integrity has been observed to be satisfactory to the ROW manager. 
(3)  Jacking and boring. ROW user shall submit project specific specifications for construction and restoration. 
(4)  Responsibility of excavated area maintenance. A permittee or ROW user shall maintain its repairs in the ROW for two (2) years from the completion date of any repair. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-177. - Backfill of excavated area. 
(a)  Open trenches may be temporarily backfilled for the convenience of the permittee or the public safety. Traffic bearing plates can be used temporarily for pavement areas. At least one (1) hour prior to beginning permanent backfill operations, the permittee shall notify the ROW manager of the time the backfill will begin. 
(b)  All excess water and mud shall be removed from the trench prior to backfilling. Any backfill placed during a rainy period or at other times, where excess water cannot be prevented from entering the trench, will be considered temporary and shall be removed as soon as weather permits. All disturbed base material or any base that has been undermined shall be removed and discarded. Compaction of all backfill shall be performed in lifts no greater than eight (8) inches thick and shall be compacted to ninety-five (95) percent of maximum density with a moisture content of 0% to +4% of optimum moisture content as determined by ASTM D698 under or near paved surfaces, future paved surfaces or otherwise as determined by ROW manager. Outside of pavement surfaces, compaction of all backfill shall be performed in lifts as noted herein and shall be ninety (90) percent of maximum density with a moisture content of -2% to +4% of optimum moisture content as determined by ASTM D698. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-178. - ROW restoration requirements. 
(a)  The work to be done pursuant to the permit and any repair and/or subsequent restoration of the ROW must be completed within the dates specified in the permit. In the event of circumstances beyond the control of the permittee or when work is prohibited by unseasonable or unreasonable conditions, the ROW manager may, in his/her sole discretion, extend the dates on receipt of a substantiated supplementary application for a permit extension. 
(b)  All earth, materials, sidewalk, pavement, utilities, conduits, crossing, irrigation, landscaping, monuments, manhole covers, valve covers, meter box lids or improvements of any kind, which are owned or possessed by the city, and damaged, disturbed, or removed by a ROW user shall be fully repaired promptly by the ROW user, at its sole expense, to the reasonable satisfaction of the ROW manager. 
(c)  After any excavation, the ROW user shall, at its expense, restore the ROW, trench envelope, pavement structure and the surrounding area, to the same or better condition than it was prior to the excavation. The restoration shall be made in accordance with specifications set forth herein, and the repair shall endure without failure for two (2) years from the completion date of any repair. 
(d)  In the event the ROW user fails to restore the ROW in the manner and to the condition required herein, or fails to satisfactorily and/or timely complete all restoration, the city may, at its option, serve written notice upon the ROW user that, unless within five (5) days after serving of such notice a satisfactory arrangement can be made for the proper restoration of the ROW by the ROW user, the city may take over the work and prosecute same to completion, by contract or otherwise, at the sole expense of the ROW user, and ROW user, and its surety, shall be liable to the city for any and all cost incurred by the city by reason of such prosecution an completion including, without limitation, the applicable public inconvenience penalty. Nothing contained herein shall limit any other remedies available to the city. 
(e)  If any excavation cannot be backfilled immediately, the ROW user shall securely and adequately cover the excavation and maintain proper barricades, safety fencing and/or lights as required, from the time of the opening of the excavation until the excavation is surfaced and opened for travel. 
(f)  In all ROW restoration, the ROW user guarantees its work and shall maintain it two (2) years from the date of completion of any restoration. During the period following completion, the ROW user shall, in the event of any failure of the restoration, and upon notification from the ROW manager, reimburse the city for pavement restoration costs as provided for in this article. Additionally, the ROW user, in the event of such failure, shall within forty-eight (48) hours of notice from the city, repair the subject trench envelope. 
(g)  The two-year guarantee period shall be applicable to, among others, failure of the pavement surface as well as failure of the trench envelope. Notwithstanding remediation of the pavement structure by the city, the ROW user retains repair responsibility at all times during the guarantee period for the trench envelope. In locations where two (2) or more ROW users have made repairs in the exact same location, the last ROW user to excavate shall be responsible for the two-year guarantee in that location, unless the ROW manager determines, in his/her sole discretion, that a failure was most likely a result of work performed by another ROW user. That ROW user shall be responsible for the two-year maintenance period. 
(h)  All street excavations shall be perpendicular excavations, unless otherwise approved by the ROW manager. Excavations in streets, which are not perpendicular excavations, require (a) block-to-block and curb-to-curb pavement reconstruction or (b) other method of repair approved by the ROW manager. All repairs shall be equal or better than that which existed prior to the commencement of any work. 
(i)  No trench shall be opened for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or ducts for a distance greater than can be backfilled on the same work day before sunset. Any variance from this requirement must be granted in writing from the ROW manager prior to work beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-179. - Restoration of pavement. 
    Unless otherwise specified in the permit, restoration of the pavement of any street, alley, ROW or other public place shall be performed by the permittee. 
(1)  No trench shall be opened in any street for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or ducts more than two hundred (200) feet in advance of the pipe, conduit or ducts being placed in the trench, other than with the prior written consent of the ROW manager. 
(2)  All excavations shall comply with the city construction standards, as amended, and requirements of this article. Unless otherwise required by city standards, as amended, or if unusual conditions are encountered, the ROW manager may require new standards for compaction, backfill and pavement restoration. 
(3)  Any excavated pavement, debris and/or other rubble shall be removed, together with any surplus material, within one (1) working day from the time such material is placed upon the street. After backfilling is completed, and prior to repaving the cut, the ROW user shall remove all loose paving material and trim the edges of the excavation at the street surface to the satisfaction of the ROW manager. 
(4)  Whenever any caving occurs in the sidewalks of any excavation, the pavements above such caving shall be cut away, trench backfilled, compacted and sidewalk pavement restored. In no case shall any side or lateral tamping fill any void under a pavement. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-180. - Permanent pavement repairs. 
    The ROW user will maintain the excavated area until permanent pavement restoration of the excavated area is complete. The ROW user shall make the final repairs within seven (7) days on thoroughfares and collector streets and within thirty (30) days on residential, local and alley streets after the ROW manager makes final inspection. Backfill failures shall remain the responsibility of the ROW user. No permanent pavement may be constructed until ROW manager has approved the condition of the backfill. Permanent pavement repairs shall be made according to the specifications herein and as follows: 
(1)  Portland cement concrete (PCC) pavement surface restoration. Existing PCC pavement that has been removed by ROW user shall be replaced to match existing pavement section or as directed by the ROW manager. Pavement section shall be a minimum of class "C" concrete and six (6) inches in thickness and shall be reinforced with #4 bars at eighteen (18) inches on center each way supported on chairs at all intersections. All reinforcing bar intersections shall be wire tied and adjacent existing concrete shall be have dowels drilled and epoxy set a minimum of six (6) inches into existing concrete. All dowels shall be set at same spacing as reinforcing steel. PCC pavement final finish shall be medium broom with lines perpendicular to travel path. Ten-foot straight edge test shall be conducted by ROW user to maintain uniform pavement finish with no high/low sections and to promote ride comfort. More than one-eighth-inch in ten (10) feet will constitute pavement failure subject to ROW manager acceptance. All concrete shall be high early strength when traffic flow is impeded by street pavement repair. All pavement designs shall be approved by ROW manager prior to construction of pavement. Pavement design shall address construction joints, contraction joints, and expansion joints. The finished surface of the PCC pavement shall be at the same elevation and grade as was the original pavement before cutting or as deemed appropriately altered by the ROW manager. Concrete placement shall conform to normal practices for adverse weather placement and shall include protection from freezing and rapid moisture loss. Concrete shall be placed in full depth monolithic placements and construction joints shall be used between concrete placements. Where feasible, entire pavement repair shall be placed in one (1) placement. 
(2)  Hot mix asphalt concrete (HMAC) pavement surface restoration. Existing HMAC pavement that has been removed by ROW user shall be replaced to match existing HMAC thickness. In addition to HMAC placement of equal thickness, a minimum of six (6) inches of PCC concrete shall be placed immediately below the HMAC pavement. The minimum criteria and other related specifications of the PCC pavement shall be that of subsection (1). More than one-eighth-inch in ten (10) feet will constitute pavement failure subject to ROW manager acceptance. All concrete shall be high early strength when traffic flow is impeded by street pavement repair. All pavement designs shall be approved by ROW manager prior to construction of pavement. The ROW user shall clean the surface of the concrete base course completely and apply a tack coat of RC-2 to the surface at the rate of one-fourth (1/4) gallon per square yard. This tack coat shall be mopped on and shall cover the surface of the concrete completely. The contractor may cut back the RC-2 with white gasoline if necessary to make it cover the surface without applying an excessive amount of RC-2. The HMAC shall be applied in lifts no greater than three (3) inches and thoroughly rolled with a flat wheel roller weighing at least three hundred (300) pounds per linear inch. The roller surface may be moistened lightly with water occasionally if necessary to prevent the HMAC from adhering to the roller. The finished surface of the HMAC shall be at the same elevation and grade as was the original pavement before cutting or as deemed appropriately altered by the ROW manager. In the event there is any settlement in the HMAC pavement patch, the contractor shall repair the failed patch as determined by the ROW manager. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-181. - Substandard repair of pavement of ROW. 
    In case the pavement or the surface of the street, alley, or ROW in, over or near any excavation should become depressed, cracked or broken at any time or fails in any way at any time after the excavation has been made and during the two-year warranty, the ROW user shall comply with any applicable obligations of this article, including, without limitation, reimbursement to the city of the cost to restore the street and/or ROW. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-182. - Failure to complete work within specified time. 
    In the event any work governed by this article is not completed by the ROW user within the time required or in accordance with the specifications required herein or by the ROW manager, the ROW manager may cause such work to be performed as is necessary to secure the work area to a safe and passable condition. The ROW user shall reimburse the city for the costs of securing the site. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-183. - Removal and reconstruction where work is defective. 
    All construction work in the streets, ROW, sidewalks and public places of the city is declared to be subject to the exclusive control of the city, and whenever, in the sole opinion of the ROW manager, any such work shall not have been duly completed within a reasonable time or shall have been executed in a defective manner, whether because of bad workmanship or materials or because not true to the lines or grades or specification therefore given to him by the ROW manager, then upon written demand or notice from the ROW manager, such ROW user or contractor shall promptly remedy, complete and/or remove and reconstruct such incomplete or defective work all as the ROW manager may require, and these provisions shall also apply to all repair and maintenance work. If the contractor or ROW user shall fail or refuse to do so within a reasonable time to be specified by the ROW manager, then, if required by the ROW manager, such work shall be completed or corrected or removed and wholly or partially reconstructed by the city, in such a manner as in the opinion of the ROW manager may be necessary to make such work as good as originally required, and such work may be done by contract or otherwise, under the direction of the ROW manager, and the contractor or ROW user shall reimburse city for any and all cost incurred by the city performing the work described in this paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-184. - Cleanup of ROW. 
    In every case, and at all times, the work of removing from the ROW all obstructions, surplus materials, debris and waste matter of every description caused by and/or accumulated from the excavation shall be the sole responsibility of the ROW user. Streets shall be cleaned by use of a regenerative air or vacuum street sweeper. The ROW user shall clean the surrounding area, as outlined above, within one (1) day upon completion and approval of all trench work and pavement restoration unless the ROW manager, sufficient reason therefore having been given to his/her satisfaction, grants a written extension of time. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-185. - Reporting. 
    When the work under permit hereunder is completed, the permittee shall notify the city in accordance with the requirements placed on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-186. - Effect of article on persons engaged in construction. 
    Any permit issued prior to the adoption of this article will remain subject to the terms and conditions of city ordinances and requirements in effect at the time of issuance of the permit and is not affected by this article, except that, upon expiration or conclusion of the permit, a new or renewal permit must be obtained in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-187. - Fees, enforcement, and penalties. 
    The fees in this section shall apply to all ROW users unless governed by an existing agreement, such as a franchise agreement with the city. 
(1)  Permit application fee. There is a permit application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Permits shall be issued or denied within five (5) days from city's receipt of the application. There is an expedited application fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for permits, which shall be issued or denied within two (2) days. An applicant shall pay the fees when a permit is issued. The fees are charged for administration and input of permit data. An expedited permit may be requested upon a showing of good cause, including but not limited to, a pending order for service that cannot be met by means of existing facilities of the ROW user. 
(2)  Saturday inspection fee. The Saturday inspection fee shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per Saturday. 
(3)  Permit expiration fee. A fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) will be charged for any permit that has not been extended before its expiration date and for any permit wherein work has not been completed by the expiration date provided for in the permit. 
(4)  Electronic maps submittal fee. A fee of forty dollars ($40.00) per hour will be charged for each hour of labor necessitated by information submitted to the city in hard copy format in lieu of submittals to the city in electronic format. There is a minimum of two (2) hours. 
(5)  Registration fee. There is a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per ROW user per year for processing registration information fee, which will be collected by city upon registration. 
(6)  Public inconvenience penalty. Public inconvenience penalties are assessed and calculated from the date of expiration of the permit until date of completion of work or repair or of final backfill if turned over to the department for repair. This penalty shall not exceed and is capped by statutory limits. Public inconvenience penalties are charged per day as follows: 
Type of Facility Unit of Cost Penalty (Per Day) 31-75 
days 79-90 
days 90-100 
days >100 days (a) Sidewalk Per square ft. $0.0026 $0.0052 $0.0078 $0.0104 (b) Driveway Per each $39.00 $78.00 $117.00 $156.00 Metered traffic lane *In addition to traffic lane fee  
(7)  Clean up costs. The ROW user shall maintain the area on and around the excavation and related work in a clean, safe and orderly fashion at all times during conduct of the excavation and shall clean the same area upon completion of work. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-188. - Liability of ROW user. 
    To the extent allowed by law, the ROW user shall be liable to the city for any damage or loss occasioned by any act and/or omission occurring in connection with its excavation, and subject to state law, the ROW user shall fully indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its council members, officers, employees, agents, representatives and volunteers from and against any and all suits, actions, judgments, losses, costs, demands, claims, expenses (including attorney's fees), damages, and liabilities of every kind to which the city, its council members, officers, employees, agents, representatives and volunteers may be subjected for injury of any type, death or property damage arising from or connected with any such act and/or omission. The city shall promptly notify a permittee, or ROW user, at the address set forth in the permit, or last known address, of any claim, suit or demand served upon the city and alleging negligent or wrongful conduct by the permittee or ROW user in connection with an excavation. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-189. - Insurance. 
(a)  ROW users shall furnish an original completed certificate of insurance to the department which shall be completed by an agent authorized to bind the named underwriter(s) and their company to the coverage, limits, and termination provisions shown thereon, and which shall furnish and contain all required information referenced or indicated thereon. The original certificate(s) must have the agent's original signature, including the signer's company affiliation, title and phone number, and be mailed directly from the agent to the city. The city shall have no duty to perform under this article until such certificate has been delivered to the department. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements of this section to modify insurance coverage and limits when deemed necessary and prudent by the city based upon changes in statutory law, court decisions, or circumstances surrounding this article, but in no instance will the city allow modification where upon the city may incur increased risk. 
(c)  Subject to the ROW user's right to maintain reasonable deductibles in such amounts as are approved by the city, ROW users shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect for the duration of the permit, and any extension thereof, and/or duration of time it maintains facilities in the public ROW, at the ROW user's sole expense, insurance coverage written on an occurrence basis, by companies authorized and admitted to do business in the State of Texas and rated A - or better by A.M. Best Company and/or otherwise acceptable to the city, in the following types and amounts: 
Type Amount 1. Worker's compensation employer's liability Statutory 
$500,000.00/$500,000.00/$500,000.00 2. Commercial general (public) liability insurance to include coverage for the following: a) Premises/operations 
b) Independent contractors 
c) Products/completed operations 
d) Contractual liability 
e) Personal injury 
f) Explosion, collapse, underground 
g) Broad form property damage, to include fire legal liability Bodily injury and property damage of $2,000,000.00 per occurrence $5,000,000.00 general aggregate or its equivalent in umbrella or excess liability coverage *3. Business automobile liability 
a) Owned/leased vehicle 
b) Non-owned vehicles 
c) Hired vehicles Combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence or its equivalent *4. Professional liability (claims made from) $1,000,000.00 per claim to pay on behalf of the insured all sums which the insured shall become legally obligated to pay as damages by reason of any act, malpractice, error or omission in professional services *5. Contractor's pollution liability coverage $1,000,000.00 written on a claims made form with a two-year extended reporting period *6. Pollution liability motor carrier and trucker coverage endorsing the upset, overturn and remediation of a load in transport Combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence written or an occurrence form *If applicable  
(d)  The city shall be entitled, upon request and without expense, to receive copies of the policies and all endorsements thereto as they apply to the limits required by the city, and may make a reasonable request for deletion, revision, or modification of particular policy terms, conditions, limitations or exclusions (except where policy revisions are established by law or regulation binding upon any party to the policy or the underwriter of such policy). Upon such request by the city, the ROW user shall exercise reasonable effort to accomplish such changes in policy coverage, and shall pay the cost thereof. 
(e)  ROW users shall ensure that all insurance contracts and certificate(s) of insurance contain the following required provisions. 
(1)  Name the city and its council members, officers, employees, volunteers, agents and representatives as additional insured with respect to the operations and activities of, or on behalf of, the named insured performing in the ROW under provision of this article, with the exception of the professional liability, workers' compensation and liability policy; 
(2)  ROW user's insurance shall be deemed primary with respect to any insurance or self-insurance carried by the city; 
(3)  Provide for an endorsement that the "other insurance" clause shall not apply to the city of the city where the city is an additional insured shown on the policy; 
(4)  Workers' compensation and employers' liability will provide for a waiver of subrogation in favor of the city. 
(f)  ROW user shall notify the city in the event of any notice of cancellation, non-renewal or material change in coverage and shall give such notices not less than thirty (30) days prior to the change, or ten (10) days' notice for cancellation due to non-payment of premiums, which notice must be accompanied by a replacement certificate of insurance. All notices shall be given to the city at the following address: 
ROW Manager 
Department of Public Works 
City of Denison 
500 West Chestnut Street 
Denison, Texas 75020 
(g)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed as limiting in any way the extent to which the ROW user may be held responsible for payments of damages to persons (including death) or property resulting from the ROW user's, or its subcontractors', performance of the work performed in the public ROW. 
(h)  The city-owned utilities shall not be required to provide the insurance specified herein. 
(i)  With respect to the ROW user's obligation to comply with the requirements for commercial general (public) liability insurance coverage to include pollution coverage, the city may allow the ROW user to self-insure upon annual production of evidence that is satisfactory to the city. With respect to the ROW user's obligation to comply with the requirements for automobile liability insurance and for workers' compensation insurance, a ROW user may self-insure, provided the ROW user tenders satisfactory evidence of self-insurance as contemplated by the State Motor Vehicle Financial Responsibility Law, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 601.124, and the Texas Workers' Compensation Act, V.T.C.A., Labor Code § 407.001 et seq., as amended. 
(j)  The ROW user has not compensated the city, or is not legally obligated to compensate the city by contract, by agreement, or by law, for using the public property; or the ROW user has failed to timely make required payments. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-190. - Performance/assurance bond. 
    Before a permit shall be issued, the applicant shall execute and deliver to the city, to be kept on file with the city, a good and sufficient bond of performance or assurance, in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to be approved by the city and conditioned that the person making the application shall promptly adjust, pay and settle all legitimate claims for damages that may result by reason of carelessness or negligence in the manner of performing such work or by reason of any defects therein caused or arising from careless, negligent or imperfect construction thereof, and to hold the city, its council members, officers, employees, volunteers, agents, and representatives, free and harmless from liability on all such claims for damages to the performance or assurance bond which shall cover the cost of repairs in or upon the street, sidewalk or other public place where the work is to be done that may become necessary by reason of such cut or excavation having been made. The bond shall be maintained until the work is accepted by the city. With respect to the ROW user's obligation to comply with the requirements for a performance/assurance bond, the city may, in the city's sole discretion, allow the ROW user to self-insure such obligation upon production of evidence that is satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-191. - Operational continuing bond and deposit. 
    In lieu of a bond of performance or assurance required for each permit issued under the performance/assurance bond section of this article, the applicant may maintain a one-time bond of performance or assurance with the ROW manager in the sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for the purposes specified in section 4.3, and shall have on file, with the city, an approved bond of performance or assurance in like amount, being then in full force and effect, against which claims shall not have been presented aggregating more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); provided, further, that section 4.3 shall not apply to applications for permits to make cuts, openings or excavations in any street, plaza or other public place paved under contract with the city, unless the contract of maintenance and the maintenance bond therefore shall have expired. The bond shall be maintained until the applicant is no longer working in or on the ROWs. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-192. - Liability of contractor and sureties for maintenance and repair work. 
    Any defects of workmanship or material relating to work done by an excavator during the initial project or becoming known, or which should have been known, during the guarantee period (the two (2) years) shall be known as maintenance or repair work, and both the excavator and the sureties and/or the contractor's bond shall be fully liable for any default of such contractor under this section. In the event of a failure in the restoration of an excavation, the ROW user shall, at its sole expense, have one (1) opportunity to repair, in a timely manner, the section of the restoration that has failed, which repair shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in this article. In the event of any subsequent failure of that section of the restoration, the city retains the right and option to terminate the ROW user's guaranty, upon written notice to the ROW user. In such event, the ROW user shall reimburse the city for its direct costs associated with the repair of the failure of the restoration work. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-193. - When additional security required. 
    In the event the ROW manager reasonably believes the contractor's or ROW user's solvency is threatened, the ROW manager may, at any time, make written demand on a contractor and/or ROW user for bonds, and the contractor and/or ROW user shall immediately furnish such additional bond or bonds to the city. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-194. - Decision of ROW manager binding on contractor, ROW user and sureties. 
    If any question arises as to when any work was actually begun or other specific dates, the decision of the ROW manager shall be conclusive on the contractor, ROW user, and the sureties on all such bonds. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-195. - Variances and exemptions. 
    A permittee or ROW user may request a variance from any of the requirements of this article by filing a written request with the ROW manager stating the requirement and the basis for the variance. The ROW manager may reject incomplete variance requests. The applicant shall bear its own expenses of the application process. 
(1)  Any request for a variance from any ROW restoration requirement shall be made in writing, in advance of any contemplated work and shall be accompanied by digitally formatted detailed plans of the substituted reconstruction and/or repair of the excavated area, if applicable. 
(2)  Any request for an exemption and/or variance from any penalty and/or fee, other than as provided in this article, shall be made in writing, and shall be accompanied by a written detailed request stating the reasons therefore. 
(3)  Any request for an exemption and/or variance from any permit, or any other requirement of this article shall be made in writing, stating in detail all reasons for the requested exemption and/or variance. 
(4)  The department shall grant or deny an application for a variance and/or exemption within ten (10) days of receipt of the application for variance and/or exemption. 
(5)  Denial of the variance may be appealed in accordance with the section 21-147 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-196. - Certified telecomm providers. 
    A CTP must provide evidence that the CTP has acquired authorization from the PUCT pursuant to state law, prior to obtaining a permit to use public ROW. The CTP's right to use and occupy the public ROW shall not be exclusive and the city shall have the right to exercise its police powers and manage its public ROW, based on the Act and all other state or federal laws. 
    The CTP, and any of its affiliates, are not authorized to provide cable television service as a cable operator or to operate an open video system in the city, but must first obtain a separate franchise agreement from the city for that purpose, under such terms and conditions as may be required by law. This section does not preclude the CTP from providing its services to cable television companies. Unless a cable television operator shows proof of appropriate city authorization, nothing herein shall authorize the CTP to license, sublicense, lease, sublease or by any instrument authorize any cable television operator the right to use or utilize the transmission media or facilities of the CTP. 
    A CTP shall notify the ROW manager of any sale, transfer, merger or assignment of the ownership or control of a CTP's business within thirty (30) days of such sale, transfer, merger or assignment. A CTP shall also maintain and provide current point-of-contact information with the ROW manager at all times during which the CTP uses the ROW. 
    CTPs are exempted from the following fees provided for in this article: 
(1)  Permit application fee, including expedited application fee and permit expiration fee; 
(2)  Additional permit fee; 
(3)  Saturday inspection fee; 
(4)  Registration fee. 
    Unless determined otherwise by the ROW manager a CTP will be exempt from the bonding requirements of this article, including sections 21-190 and 21-191, however, in the event that the ROW manager determines, based upon reasonable grounds, that a bond is necessary to protect the public assets, and/or the health and safety of the public, then the ROW manager may require that a CTP post a reasonable bond not to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). Factors to be considered in determining reasonable grounds may include, but are not limited to, a conviction for violation of this article, a general pattern of substandard adherence to the provisions of this article or the failure to comply with this article. If three (3) years pass from the date that the ROW manager requires a bond of a CTP and it has not been necessary for the city to seek performance under the bond, then a bond will no longer be required pursuant to this section. 
    A CTP shall indemnify the city as specified by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.057, as may be amended. A CTP shall be exempt from all indemnity requirements of this article that are inconsistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.057, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-197. - Bridge weight limit violation. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive, haul, push or tow, wholly or partially, any load upon a posted weight limited bridge, which collectively exceeds the officially designated and posted maximum bridge weight, whether or not all load bearing wheels travel on the bridge. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-198. - Penalty provision. 
    Violations of this article shall be subject to penalty in accordance with section 1-12 of this Code. Each continuing day's violation under this article shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 21-199. - Existing franchise. 
    If any provision of this article conflicts with an existing franchise agreement, the franchise agreement shall prevail until the expiration thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4775, § 2, 3-16-15) 
Secs. 21-200-21-204. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY BY NETWORK PROVIDERS (RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT) 

Sec. 21-205. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to set forth the standards for the city's regulation of the installation of Network Nodes and Network Support Poles pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284 in a way that is fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284 while managing the public right-of-way and balancing the interests of Network Providers with the health, safety, and welfare of the public and while acting on behalf of the state of Texas as the fiduciary trustee of public property under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. This Division shall be construed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284, to the extent no in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the United States or of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 4895, § II, 8-21-17) 
Sec. 21-206. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this division, the definitions found in the City of Denison Design Manual for the Installation of Network Nodes and Node Support Poles ("the Design Manual") are hereby incorporated into this division and shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The definitions contained within the city's right-of-way management ordinance(s) currently in effect, and as amended, (the "general definitions") shall be applicable to this division to the extent that there is no conflict between the general definitions and the definitions contained herein or the definitions in the design manual. In the event of a conflict between the definitions in this division, the definitions in the design manual and the general definitions, the definitions contained in this division and the design manual shall control. The following definitions are specifically applicable to this Division: 
    Applicable codes means: 
(1)  The city adopted uniform or international building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization; and 
(2)  Local amendments to those codes as adopted by the city to the extent not inconsistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
    Chapter 284 means V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284, as amended. 
    City means the City of Denison, Texas or its lawful successor. 
    City council means the municipal governing body of the City of Denison, Texas. 
    City manager means the city manager of the City of Denison or his/her designee. 
    City owned utility pole means a utility pole owned or operated by a City owned utility, as defined by V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 11.003, and located in a public right-of-way. 
    Collocate and collocation mean the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
    Decorative pole means a streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to nondiscriminatory city ordinances and applicable codes. 
    Design district means an area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by city's ordinances and applicable codes, and for which the City maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis. 
    Easement means and shall include any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for the provision of utilities. 
    Federal Communications Commission or FCC means the Federal Administrative Agency, or lawful successor, authorized to oversee cable television and other multi-channel regulation on a national level. 
    Highway right-of-way means public right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway. 
    Historic district means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under municipal, state, or federal law. 
    Law means common law or a federal, state, or local law (municipal or county), statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance. 
    Local means within the geographical boundaries of the city. 
    Location means the city-approved and lawfully permitted location for the network node, pole, or other equipment of the network provider. 
    Macro tower means a guyed or self-supported pole or monopole greater than the height parameters prescribed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.103 of Chapter 284 and that supports or is capable of supporting antennas. 
    Mayor means the mayor of the City of Denison, Texas, or designee. 
    Micro network node means a network node that is not larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than eleven (11) inches. 
    Municipal park means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by the city or city ordinance as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity. 
    Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term: 
(1)  Includes: 
a.  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
b.  Radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and 
c.  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation; and 
(2)  Does not include: 
a.  An electric generator; 
b.  A pole; or 
c.  Macro tower. 
    Network provider means: 
(1)  A wireless service provider; or 
(2)  A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider: 
a.  Network nodes; or 
b.  Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. 
    Node support pole means a pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
    Permit means a written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way or collocation on a service pole required from the city before a network provider may perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project over which the municipality has police power authority. 
    Pole means a service pole, city-owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole. 
    Private easement means an easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their successors and assigns. 
    Provider has the same meaning as "network provider." 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest. The term does not include: 
(1)  A private easement; or 
(2)  The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
    Right-of-way management ordinance means the right-of-way ordinance codified in the City of Denison Code of Ordinances as article VII, "Right-of-Way Management," sections 21-130 through 21-199, as may be amended from time to time in the future, including amendments adopting additional sections. 
    Service pole means a pole, other than a city-owned utility pole, owned or operated by the city and located in a public right-of-way, including: 
(1)  A pole that supports traffic control functions; 
(2)  A structure for signage; 
(3)  A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and 
(4)  A pole or similar structure owned or operated by the city and supporting only network nodes. 
    Street means only the paved portion of the public right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two (2) parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb. A "street" is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of the entire public right-of-way, while a public right-of-way may include sidewalks and utility easements. A "street" does not include the curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later. 
    Traffic signal means any city owned or operated device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Transport facility means each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
    User means a person or organization which conducts a business over facilities occupying the whole or a part of a public street or public right-of-way, depending on the context. 
    Utility pole means a pole that provides: 
(1)  Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or 
(2)  Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284, V.T.C.A, Utilities Code § 51.002. 
    Wireless service means any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
    Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless service to the public. 
    Wireless facilities mean "micro network nodes," "network nodes," and "node Support Poles" as defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(Ord. No. 4895, § II, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 21-207. - Applicability; use and occupancy of public right-of-way. 
(a)  Applicability. The terms of this division shall apply to all network providers and network providers' facilities used, in whole or part, in the provision of wireless services throughout the city, including any annexed areas upon the effective date of annexation or the date the city provides the company written notice, whichever date occurs later, within the public right-of-way, including without limitation the highway right-of-way as defined herein. The terms of the city's right-of-way management ordinance (defined herein) apply to network providers to the extent that the terms of that ordinance do not conflict with the terms of this division, the design manual, or with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. In the event of a conflict, the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284 shall control. 
(b)  Use and occupancy of public right-of-way. Pursuant to this division and subject to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284, the design manual, applicable city ordinances, and applicable codes, a network provider has the nonexclusive right to use and occupy the public right-of-way in the city only for the purpose of: 
(1)  Conducting activities related to transport facilities for network nodes in the public right-of-way; 
(2)  The activities of a network provider collocating network nodes in the public right-of-way; or 
(3)  Installing, constructing, operating, modifying, replacing, and maintaining node support poles in a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 4895, § II, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 21-208. - Compliance with design manual and applicable codes. 
    All wireless network providers shall comply with the terms of all applicable law, including without limitation, this division 2, Use of Public Right-of-Way by Network Providers (Right-Of-Way Management), the right-of-way management ordinance, other applicable city ordinances, applicable codes, and the city's design manual. 
(Ord. No. 4895, § II, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 21-209. - General construction and maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Standards. A network provider shall construct and maintain network nodes and network support poles described in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284 in a manner that does not: 
(1)  Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way; 
(2)  Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers; 
(3)  Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes; 
(4)  Violate or conflict with the city's design manual; or 
(5)  Violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA). 
(b)  Size of network nodes and equipment cabinets. All network providers shall comply with the size limitations of network nodes and equipment cabinets as set forth in the design manual and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(Ord. No. 4895, § II, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 21-210. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284, a network provider shall obtain one (1) or more permits from the city to install a network node, node support pole, or transport facility in a city public right-of-way. 
(b)  Consolidated permit application. A network provider requesting to install or collocate multiple network nodes inside the municipal limits of the city may file a consolidated permit application with the city for not more than thirty (30) network nodes, and upon payment of the applicable fee(s), receive a permit or permits for the installation or collocation of those network nodes. 
(c)  Required information. The network provider shall provide the following information in its permit applications: 
(1)  Applicable construction and engineering drawings and information to confirm that the applicant will comply with the city's design manual and applicable codes; 
(2)  Any additional information reasonably related to the network provider's use of the public rights-of-way to ensure compliance with the design manual, this division, the right-of-way management ordinance and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284; 
(3)  A certificate that the network node(s) complies with applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission; 
(4)  Certification that the proposed network node(s) will be placed into active commercial service by or for the network provider not later than the sixtieth (60th) day after the date of construction and final testing of each network node is completed; 
(5)  A certificate of insurance that provides that the network provider and its contractor has at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in general liability coverage; and 
(6)  An email address of the contact person for network provider with whom city may communicate regarding the application. 
(d)  Exemption from permit. As provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.157 of chapter 284, a network provider is not required to apply, obtain a permit, or pay a rate to the city for: 
(1)  Routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; 
(2)  Replacing or upgrading a network node or network pole with a node or pole that is substantially similar (as set forth in subsection (e), "substantially similar node or pole" below), in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; 
(3)  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code; 
(4)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection (d): 
a.  The network provider or its contractors shall notify the city at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of work described in subsection (d); 
b.  The network provider may replace or upgrade a pole only with the approval of the pole's owner; and 
c.  The size limitations may not in any event exceed the parameters prescribed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.003 of chapter 284 without the City's approval in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.109 of chapter 284, with the city acting on behalf of the State of Texas as fiduciary trustee of public property. 
(e)  Substantially similar node or pole. A network node or pole is considered to be "substantially similar" if: 
(1)  The new or upgraded network node, including the antenna or other equipment element, will not be more than ten (10) percent larger than the existing node, provided that the increase may not result in the node exceeding the size limitations provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.003 of chapter 284; and 
(2)  The new or upgraded pole will not be more than ten (10) percent higher than the existing pole, provided that the increase may not result in the pole exceeding the applicable height limitations prescribed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.103 of chapter 284. 
(3)  The replacement or upgrade does not include replacement of an existing node support pole; and 
(4)  The replacement or upgrade des not defeat existing concealment elements of a node support pole. 
(f)  Measurement. The determination of whether a replacement or upgrade is substantially similar for purposes of subsections (e)(1) and (e)(2) of this section is made by measuring from the dimensions of the network node or node support pole as approved by the city. 
(g)  Height and distance limitations-Exception. Subject to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284, subch. D, a network provider may only construct, modify, or maintain in a public right-of-way a network node or node support pole that exceeds the height or distance limitations prescribed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284 if the city approves the construction, modification, or maintenance subject to all applicable zoning or land use regulations, the design manual and applicable codes. 
(Ord. No. 4895, § II, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 21-211. - Installation in historic districts or design districts. 
(a)  Installation. A network provider shall obtain advance written consent from the city council before collocating new network nodes or installing new node support poles in an area of the city that has been zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district or as a design district if the district has decorative poles. The network provider shall be required to comply with the general aesthetic requirements specified in the city's design manual and as set forth in this section. The city has the authority and discretion to designate new historic districts and design districts any time, including subsequent to the adoption of this division. 
(b)  Concealment-Submission of proposal for camouflage. Concealment of network nodes and node support poles shall be required by the city in design districts with decorative poles and in historic districts pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.105. All new node support poles shall be camouflaged as much as possible, except those in locations that are zoned for predominantly industrial uses. Network providers shall submit its proposal for camouflage with its permit application. 
(c)  Enclosure. The network node facilities shall be concealed or enclosed as much as reasonably possible in an equipment box, cabinet, or other unit that may include ventilation openings. External cables and wires hanging off a pole shall be sheathed or enclosed in a conduit, so that wires are protected and not visible or visually minimized, to the extent possible, in strict accordance with this division and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(d)  Color. Colors in historic districts and design districts must be approved by the city manager from a palette of approved colors. Unless otherwise provided, all colors shall be earth tones or shall match the background of any structure the facilities are located upon and all efforts shall be made by network provider for the colors to be inconspicuous. Colors in areas other than in historic districts and design districts shall conform to colors of other installations of telecommunication providers in immediately adjacent areas that do not violate this section or the design manual. 
(Ord. No. 4895, § II, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 21-212. - Installation in municipal parks and residential areas. 
(a)  Installation. A network provider shall not install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way without the city council's discretionary written consent, which consent shall be nondiscriminatory, if the public right-of way: 
(1)  Is in a municipal park; or 
(2)  Is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is: 
a.  Not more than fifty (50) feet wide; and 
b.  Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
(3)  In addition to compliance with the requirements of the preceding section, a network provider installing a network node or node support pole in a public right-of way identified in this section shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the area that apply to those facilities. 
(4)  The network provider shall be further required to comply with guidelines set out in the city's design manual, applicable city ordinances and applicable codes. 
(b)  Safety. For the purpose of minimizing negative visual impact to the surrounding area, and in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.102(1) of chapter 284 to enhance the safety requirements of line of sight of pedestrians, particularly small children, the city manager may deny a request for a proposed location if the network provider installs network node ground equipment where existing ground equipment within three hundred (300) feet already occupies a footprint of twenty-five (25) square feet or more. 
(Ord. No. 4895, § II, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 21-213. - City review process. 
(a)  Determination of application completeness. Upon receipt of a permit application, the city shall make a determination regarding whether the permit application is complete and shall notify the applicant of that determination as follows: 
(1)  For network nodes and note support poles. Notice shall be provided no later than thirty (30) days after the date the City received the permit application. 
(2)  For a transport facility. Notice shall be provided no later than ten (10) days after the date the city received the permit application. 
    If city determines that an application is not complete, city shall identify the missing information necessary to complete the review of the application. 
(b)  Approval or denial of application. The city shall approve or deny a completed application as follows: 
(1)  For network nodes. No later than sixty (60) days after the date the city receives a complete application. 
(2)  For network support poles. No later than one hundred fifty (150) days after the date the city receives a complete application. 
(3)  For transport facilities. No later than twenty-one (21) days after the city receives a complete application. 
(c)  Basis for denial of application. If an application is denied by the city, it shall document the basis for the denial, including the specific applicable code provisions or other city ordinance, rule, regulation, or other law on which the denial is based and notify the applicant. The documentation for the denial will be sent by electronic mail to the person designated by applicant on or before the deadline for denial of the application as set forth above. 
(d)  Deemed approved. An application for a permit for a node support pole, network node, or transport facility shall be deemed approved if the application is not approved or denied before the applicable date for such approval or denial. 
(e)  Resubmission of denied application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the denial notice from city without paying an additional application fee, other than a fee for actual costs incurred by the city, if within thirty (30) days from the date the city denies the completed application, the applicant cures the deficiencies identified in the denial documentation and resubmits the revised completed application. 
(f)  Reconsideration of denied application. After providing notice of denial in accordance with this section, the city shall approve or deny the revised completed application no later than ninety (90) days after the city receives a revised completed application. The city's review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial documentation. 
(g)  Nondiscriminatory review. Each completed application shall be processed by the city on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
(Ord. No. 4895, § II, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 21-214. - Time of installation. 
    A network provider shall begin installation for which a permit is granted not later than six (6) months after final approval of the application and shall diligently pursue installation to completion. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager may in his/her sole discretion grant reasonable extensions of time for completion or grant reasonable extensions as requested by the network provider. 
(Ord. No. 4895, § II, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 21-215. - Applicable fees and rental rates to the city. 
(a)  Fees and rental. As compensation for the network provider's use and occupancy of the city public rights-of-way, the network provider shall pay application fees and annual public right-of-way rental rates as set forth below, which shall be in lieu of any lawful tax, license, charge, public right-of-way permit, use, construction, street cut or inspection fee; or other public right-of-way related charge or fee, whether charged to the network provider or its contractor(s) within the city, except the usual general ad valorem taxes, special assessments and sales tax levied in accordance with state law and equally applicable to all general businesses in the city. 
(b)  Network nodes. 
(1)  Application fee. The application fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each network node for up to but not more than thirty (30) network nodes. 
(2)  Annual public right-of-way rate fee. The annual public right-of-way rate shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per network node installed in the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Public Right-of-Way Rate Adjustment. As provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.054 of Chapter 284, the City may adjust the amount of the annual public right-of-way rate not more than annually by an amount equal to one-half (1/2) the annual change, if any, in the Consumer Price Index (CPI). The city shall provide written notice to each network provider of the new rate; and the rate shall apply to the first payment due to the city on or after the sixtieth (60th) day following such written notice. 
(c)  Node support poles. 
(1)  The application fee for each network support pole shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(d)  Transfer facilities. 
(1)  The application fee for each transfer facility shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(2)  The annual transfer facility rental rate shall be twenty-eight dollars ($28.00) monthly for each network node site located in a public right-of-way. However, no rate is required if the network provider is already paying the city an amount equal to or greater than the amount of other city public right-of-way fees for access lines under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 283 of [or] chapter 284 or cable franchise fees under V.T.C.A., Utility Code ch. 66. 
(e)  Micro network nodes. 
(1)  No application fee is required for a micro network node if the installation is attached on lines between poles or node support poles. 
(f)  Collocation of network nodes on service poles. 
(1)  Subject to execution of the city's service pole agreement, the collocation of network nodes on city service poles shall be allowed at a rate of twenty dollars ($20.00) per year per service pole. 
(g)  City-owned utility poles. 
(1)  Annual rate. A network provider shall pay an annual pole attachment rate for the collocation of a network node supported by or installed on a city-owned utility pole based upon the pole attachment rate consistent with V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 54.024, applied on a per-foot basis. 
(h)  In-kind services prohibited. The city may not seek or accept in-kind services unrelated to the installation or collocation for which a permit is sought, including in-kind contributions such as reserving fiber, conduit, or pole space for the city, in lieu of or as additional payment or consideration from any network provider, as a condition for issuing a permit required under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284 for use of the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 4895, § II, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 21-216. - Indemnity. 
    As provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.302 of chapter 284, a wireless network provider shall indemnify, defend, and hold the city harmless from and against all liability, damages, cost, and expense, including reasonable attorney's fees, arising from injury to person or property proximately caused by the negligent act or omission of the network provider accessing a public right-of-way under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. The city and the network provider, as applicable, shall promptly notify each other in writing of any known claim or demand against the other related to or arising out of the network provider's use of the public right-of-way under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284 shall promptly notify the network after such notice, the network provider shall defend the claims. The network provider shall have the right to defend and compromise the claims. The city shall cooperate in the defense of the claims. The foregoing indemnity obligations shall not apply to claims arising solely from the negligence of city; however, they shall apply in the case of all claims which arise from the joint negligence of the network provider and the city; provided that in such cases, the amount of the claims for which the city shall be entitled to indemnification shall be limited to that portion attributable to the network provider. Nothing in this section shall be construed as waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under state law or waiving any defenses of the parties under state law. Further, the indemnification provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284 is solely for the benefit of the city and the network provider and does not create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 4895, § II, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 21-217. - Requirements in regard to removal, replacement, maintenance and repair. 
(a)  Removal or relocation by network provider. 
(1)  Notice. In the event of removal or relocation of a micro network node, network node facilities, node support pole or related ground equipment by a network provider at its own discretion, network provider shall notify the city manager in writing not less than ten (10) business days prior to removal or relocation. Network provider shall obtain all permits required for relocation or removal of its micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment prior to relocation or removal. 
(2)  No refunds. No refunds of any amounts paid by network provider for micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles or related ground equipment that have been removed shall be due from city to network provider. 
(b)  Removal or relocation required for city project. 
(1)  In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.107 of chapter 284, except as provided in existing state and federal law, a network provider shall relocate or adjust micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment in a public right-of-way in a timely manner and without cost to the City of Denison as manager of the public right-of-way. 
(2)  City may require network provider to remove or relocate its micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or any portion thereof from the public right-of-way for city construction projects as allowed by law, including the common-law, without compensation. 
(3)  Network provider shall, at the city manager's direction, remove or relocate the same at network provider's sole cost and expense, except as otherwise provided in existing state and federal law, when the city manager reasonably determines that the relocation or removal is required for the construction, completion, repair, widening, relocation, or maintenance of, or use in connection with, any city construction or maintenance project of a street or public rights-of-way to enhance the use of the public for travel and transportation. 
(4)  If network provider fails to remove or relocate the micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment, or portion thereof as requested by the city manager within ninety (90) days of network provider 's receipt of the request, then the city shall be entitled to remove the micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment, or portion thereof at network provider's sole cost and expense, without further notice to network provider. 
(5)  Network provider shall, within thirty (30) days following issuance of invoice for the same, reimburse the city for its reasonable expenses incurred in the removal (including, without limitation, overhead and storage expenses) of the micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment, or portion thereof. 
(c)  Removal required by city for safety and imminent danger reasons. 
(1)  Public health and safety. Network provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, promptly disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment within the time frame and in the manner required by the city manager if the city manager reasonably determines that the disconnection, removal, or relocation of any part of a micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment: (a) is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, or city property; (b) the micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or portion thereof, is adversely affecting proper operation of streetlights or city property; or (c) network provider fails to obtain all applicable licenses, permits, and certifications required by law for its micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or use of any location under applicable law. If the city manager reasonably determines that there is imminent danger to the public, then the city may immediately disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment at the network provider's sole cost and expense. 
(2)  Notice. The city manager shall provide ninety (90) days written notice to the network provider before removing a micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment under this section, unless there is imminent danger to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(3)  Reimbursement. Network provider shall reimburse city for the city's actual cost of removal of micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment within thirty (30) days of receiving the invoice from the city. 
(Ord. No. 4895, § II, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 21-218. - Installation and inspections. 
(a)  Installation. Network provider shall, at its own cost and expense, install the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the requirements promulgated by the city via the city manager, as such may be amended from time to time. Network provider's work shall be subject to the regulation, control and direction of the city manager. All work done in connection with the installation, operation, maintenance, repair, modification, and/or replacement of the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment shall be in compliance with all applicable laws. 
(b)  Inspections. The city manager, or designee, may perform visual inspections of any micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment located in the public right-of-way as the city manager deems appropriate without notice to network provider. If the inspection requires physical contact with the micro network node, network node, node support poles or related ground equipment, the city manager shall provide written notice to the network provider within five (5) business days of the planned inspection. Network provider may have a representative present during such inspection. 
(Ord. No. 4895, § II, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 21-219. - Requirements upon abandonment of obsolete micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment. 
    Network provider shall remove micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment when such facilities are abandoned regardless of whether or not it receives notice from the city. Unless the city sends notice that removal must be completed immediately to ensure public health, safety, and welfare, the removal must be completed within the earlier of ninety (90) days of the micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment being abandoned or within ninety (90) days of receipt of written notice from the city. When network provider removes, or abandons permanent structures in the public right-of-way, the network provider shall notify the city manager in writing of such removal or abandonment and shall file with the city manager the location and description of each micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment removed or abandoned. The city manager may require the network provider to complete additional remedial measures necessary for public safety and the integrity of the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 4895, § II, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 21-220. - General provisions for right-of-way management. 
(a)  As built maps and records. Network provider shall maintain accurate maps and other appropriate records of its network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment as they are actually constructed in the rights-of-way, including, upon request, the use of auto CAD/GIS digital format. Network provider shall provide additional maps to the city upon request. 
(b)  Courtesy and proper performance. Network provider shall make citizen satisfaction a priority in using the public right-of-way. Network provider shall train its employees to be customer service-oriented and to positively and politely interact with citizens when dealing with issues pertaining to its micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment in the public right-of-way. Network provider's employees shall be clean, courteous, efficient, and neat in appearance and committed to offering the highest quality of interaction with the public. If, in the opinion of the city manager or designee, network provider is not interacting in a positive and polite manner with citizens, he or she shall request network provider to take all remedial steps to conform to these standards. 
(c)  Drug policy. It is the policy of the city to achieve a drug-free workforce and environment. The manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, sale, or use of illegal drugs or alcohol by network provider's employees, contractors, subcontractors, sub-network provider's, or vendors while on city right-of-way is prohibited. 
(d)  Ownership. No part of a micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment erected or placed on the public right-of-way by network provider will become, or be considered by the city as being affixed to or a part of, the public right-of-way. All portions of the micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment constructed, modified, erected, or placed by network provider on the public right-of-way shall be and remain the property of network provider and may be removed by network provider at any time, provided the network provider shall notify the city manager prior to any work in the public right-of-way. 
(e)  Tree maintenance. Network provider, its contractors, and agents shall obtain written permission from the city manager before trimming trees hanging over its micro network node, network node, or node support pole, to prevent branches of such trees from contacting attached micro network node, network node, or node support pole. When directed by the city manager, network provider shall trim under the supervision and direction of the member of city staff designated by the city manager. The city shall not be liable for any damages, injuries, or claims arising from network provider's actions under this section. 
(f)  Signage. Network provider shall post its name, location identifying information, and emergency telephone number in an area on the cabinet of the network node facility that is visible to the public. Signage required under this section shall not exceed four (4) inches by six (6) inches, unless otherwise required by law (e.g. RF ground notification signs) or by the city. Except as required by law or by the utility pole owner, network provider shall not post any other signage or advertising on the micro network node, network node, node support pole, service pole or utility pole. 
(g)  Graffiti abatement. As soon as practical, but not later than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date network provider receives notice thereof, network provider shall remove all graffiti on any of its micro network node, network node, node support pole, and related ground equipment located in the public right-of-way at network provider's sole cost and expense. The foregoing shall not relieve the network provider from complying with any city graffiti or visual blight ordinance, policy, or regulation. 
(h)  Restoration. Network provider shall repair any damage to the public right-of-way, or any facilities located within the public right-of-way, and the property of any third party resulting from network provider's removal or relocation activities (or any other of network provider's activities hereunder) within ten (10) days following the date of such removal or relocation, at network provider's sole cost and expense, including restoration of the public right-of-way and such property shall be returned to substantially the same condition as it was immediately before the date network provider was granted a permit for the applicable location or did the work at such location (even if network provider did not first obtain a permit), including restoration or replacement of any damaged trees, shrubs or other vegetation. Such repair, restoration and replacement shall be subject to the sole, reasonable approval of the city manager. 
(i)  Network provider's responsibility. Network provider shall be responsible and liable for the acts and omissions of network provider's employees, temporary employees, officers, directors, consultants, agents, affiliates, subsidiaries, sub-network provider's and subcontractors in connection with the installations of any micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment in the public right-of-way, as if such acts or omissions were network provider's acts or omissions. 
(Ord. No. 4895, § II, 8-7-17) 
Sec. 21-221. - Effect on other utilities and telecommunication providers. 
    Nothing in this division shall govern attachment of network nodes on poles and other structures owned or operated by investor-owned electric utilities, electric cooperatives, telephone cooperatives, or telecommunication providers as those terms are defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(Ord. No. 4895, § II, 8-7-17) 
Secs. 21-222-21-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN MANUAL 

Sec. 21-231. - Purpose and applicability. 
    The City of Denison ("city") recognizes that the State of Texas has delegated to the city the fiduciary duty, as a trustee, to manage the public right-of-way for the health, safety, and welfare of the public to Texas municipalities. 
(1)  Purpose. V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284 allows certain wireless network providers to install in the public rights-of-way their wireless facilities, described and defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.002 as "micro network nodes," "network nodes," and "node support poles." 
As expressly allowed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.108, and pursuant to its police power authority reserved in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.301, the city enacts these design guidelines in order to meet its fiduciary duty to the citizens of the city, and to give assistance and guidance to wireless telecommunications providers to assist such companies in the timely, efficient, safe and aesthetically pleasing installation of technologically competitive equipment. 
(2)  Applicability. This design manual is for siting and criteria for the installation wireless facilities, including micro network nodes, network nodes, node support poles and related ground equipment being installed pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
This design manual shall apply to any sitings, installations, collocations in, on, over or under the public rights-of-way of network nodes, node support poles, micro network nodes, distributed antenna systems, microwave communications or other wireless facilities, by whatever nomenclature, whether they are installed pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284, or installed pursuant to an agreement as agreed to and consented to by the city in its discretion, or installed as may otherwise be allowed by state law. 
(3)  City rights-of-way management ordinance. A network provider shall comply with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance except where in conflict with this design manual or V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284, subch. C. 
(Ord. No. 4896, § II(Exh. A), 8-21-17) 
Sec. 21-232. - Definitions. 
    The definitions as used in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.002 shall be used in this design manual, unless otherwise noted in this section: 
    Abandon and its derivatives means the facilities installed in the right-of-way (including by way of example but not limited to: Poles, wires, conduit, manholes, handholes, cuts, network nodes and node support poles, or portion thereof) that have been left by provider in an unused or non-functioning condition for more than one hundred twenty (120) consecutive calendar days unless, after notice to provider, provider has established to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that the applicable facilities, or portion thereof, is still in active use. 
    Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
    Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization; and 
(2)  Local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
    City means the City of Denison, Texas or its lawful successor. 
    City manager shall mean city manager or designee. 
    Chapter 284 means V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
    Collocate and collocation mean the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
    Concealment or camouflaged means any wireless facility or pole that is covered, blended, painted, disguised, camouflaged or otherwise concealed such that the wireless facility blends into the surrounding environment and is visually unobtrusive as allowed as a condition for city advance approval under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.105 in historic or design districts. A concealed or camouflaged wireless facility or pole also includes any wireless facility or pole conforming to the surrounding area in which the wireless facility or pole is located and may include, but is not limited to hidden beneath a façade, blended with surrounding area design, painted to match the supporting area, or disguised with artificial tree branches. 
    Decorative pole means a streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to nondiscriminatory municipal codes. 
    Design district means an area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by municipal code, and for which the city maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis. 
    Disaster emergency or disaster or emergency means an imminent, impending, or actual natural or humanly induced situation wherein the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the city is threatened, and includes, but is not limited to any declaration of emergency by city state or federal governmental authorities. 
    Distributed antenna system or DAS shall be included as a type of "network node." 
    Easement means and shall include any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for the provision of utilities. 
    Federal Communications Commission or FCC means the Federal Administrative Agency, or lawful successor, authorized to oversee cable television and other multi-channel regulation on a national level. 
    Highway right-of-way means right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway. 
    Historic district means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under municipal, state, or federal law. 
    Law means common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance. 
    Local means within the geographical boundaries of the city. 
    Location means the city approved and lawfully permitted location for the network node. 
    Macro tower means a guyed or self-supported pole or monopole greater than the height parameters prescribed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.103 and that supports or is capable of supporting antennas. 
    Mayor means the mayor for the city. 
    Micro network node means a network node that is not larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than eleven (11) inches. 
    Municipal park means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by municipal code as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity. 
    Municipally owned utility pole means a utility pole owned or operated by a municipally owned utility, as defined by V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 11.003, and located in a public right-of-way. 
    MUTCD means Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
    Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term: 
(1)  Includes: 
a.  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
b.  A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and 
c.  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation. 
(2)  Does not include: 
a.  An electric generator; 
b.  A pole; or 
c.  A macro tower. 
    Network provider means: 
(1)  A wireless service provider; or 
(2)  A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider: 
a.  Network nodes; or 
b.  Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. 
    Node support pole means a pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
    Permit means a written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way or collocation on a service pole required from a municipality before a network provider may perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project over which the municipality has police power authority. 
    Pole means a service pole, municipally owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole. 
    Private easement means an easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their successors and assigns. 
    Provider has the same meaning as "network provider." 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the municipality has an interest. The term does not include: 
(1)  A private easement; or 
(2)  The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
    Right-of-way management ordinance or public right-of-way management ordinance means an ordinance of the city that complies with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284, subch. C. 
    Service pole means a pole, other than a municipally owned utility pole, owned or operated by a municipality and located in a public right-of-way, including: 
(1)  A pole that supports traffic control functions; 
(2)  A structure for signage; 
(3)  A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and 
(4)  A pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network nodes. 
    Small cell shall be included as a type of "network node." 
    Street means only the paved portion of the right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two (2) parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb. A "street" is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of the entire right-of-way, while a right-of-way may include sidewalks and utility easements, a "street" does not. A "street" does not include the curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later. 
    SWPPP shall mean storm water pollution prevention plan. 
    TAS means Texas Accessibility Standards. 
    Traffic signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Transport facility means each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
    Underground requirement area means an area where poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead or above ground structures have been removed and buried or have been approved for burial underground pursuant to municipal ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way. 
    User means a person or organization which conducts a business over facilities occupying the whole or a part of a public street or right-of-way, depending on the context. 
    Utility pole means a pole that provides: 
(1)  Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or 
(2)  Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 51.002. 
    Wireless service means any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
    Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless service to the public. 
    Wireless facilities mean "micro network nodes," "network nodes," and "node support poles" as defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(Ord. No. 4896, § II(Exh. A), 8-21-17) 
Sec. 21-233. - Prohibited and preferred locations of micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment. 
(a)  Prohibited or restricted areas for certain wireless facilities, except with separate city agreement or subject to concealment conditions. 
(1)  Municipal parks and residential areas. In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.104(a), a network provider may not install a node support pole in a public right-of-way without the city's discretionary, nondiscriminatory, and written consent if the public right-of-way is in a municipal park or is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is: 
a.  Not more than fifty (50) feet wide of paved street surface, being the area measured as the shortest distance between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area measured as the shortest distance between the two (2) parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb; and 
b.  Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.104(b), a network provider installing a network node or node support pole in a public right-of-way described above shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the area that apply to those facilities. 
Each permit application shall disclose if it is within a municipal park and residential areas as described above. 
(2)  Historic district and design districts. In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government § 284.105, a network provider must obtain advance written approval from the city before collocating network nodes or installing node support poles in a design district with decorative poles or in an area of the city zoned or otherwise designated as a design district or historic district. 
As a condition for approval of network nodes or node support poles in design districts with decorative poles or in a historic district, the city requires reasonable design or concealment measures that are equal to, or exceed the standard for such districts for the network nodes or node support poles or related ground equipment. Therefore, any request for installations in a design district with decorative poles or in a historic district, must be accompanied with proposed concealment measures in the permit applications. 
Network provider shall comply with and observe all applicable city, state, and federal historic preservation laws and requirements. 
Each permit application shall disclose if it is within a design district with decorative poles or in an area of the city zoned or otherwise designated as a design district or historic district. 
(3)  Historic landmarks. A network provider is discouraged from installing a network node or node support pole within 300 feet of a historic site or structure or historic landmark recognized by the city, state or federal government (see, for example, and not limited to § V.T.C.A., Texas Government Code § 442.001(3), and 16 U.S.C. § 470), as of the date of the submission of the permit. It is recommended that each permit application disclose if it is with three hundred (300) feet of such a structure. 
(4)  Compliance with undergrounding requirements. In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code 284.107, a network provider shall comply with nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements, including municipal ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way without first obtaining zoning or land use approval. 
Areas may be designated from time to time by the city as underground requirement areas in accordance with filed plats, and/or conversions of overhead to underground areas, as may be allowed by law. 
Each permit application shall disclose if it is within an area that has undergrounding requirements. 
(b)  Least preferable locations. 
(1)  Residential areas and parks. A network provider is prohibited from installing a network node on an existing pole in a public right-of-way without written consent from the city council if the public right-of-way is located in or adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is adjacent to a municipal park or single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.104(b) a network provider installing a network node or a node support pole in a public right-of-way shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the area that apply to those facilities. 
(2)  Historic districts and design districts. A network provider is prohibited from installing a network node or a node support pole in the public right-of-way in any area designated by the city as a design districts or in an area of the city zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district unless such a network node or a new node support pole is camouflaged. 
(c)  Most preferable locations. 
(1)  Industrial areas if not adjacent to a municipal park, residential area, historic district or design district. 
(2)  Highway rights-of-way areas if not adjacent to a municipal park, residential area, historic district or design district. 
(3)  Retail and commercial areas if not adjacent to a municipal park, residential area, historic district or design district. 
(d)  Designated areas. 
(1)  The city council may designate an area as a historic district or a design district under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.105 at any time. 
(2)  Currently designated historic districts are: 
a.  Historic district number 1 is the area referred to as historic preservation district. The historic preservation overlay district includes the downtown historic district as recognized by the National Register of Historic Places and is more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the common point of the east right-of-way line of North Barrett Avenue and the south right-of-way line of West Gandy Street; 
Thence in an easterly direction with the south right-of-way line of West Gandy Avenue, across Houston Avenue, and along the south right-of-way line of East Gandy Avenue to the point where such line intersects the railroad right-of-way of the Union Pacific Railroad; 
Thence in a southerly direction with such railroad right-of-way to the point that intersects the north right-of-way line with East Main Street; 
Thence in an easterly direction along the north right-of-way line of East Main Street to its intersection with the northerly projection of the east boundary line of Lot 14, Block 56, Original Town Plat of the City; 
Thence in a southerly direction across East Main Street with a line that is the extension of the east boundary of said Lot 14, Block 56, (OTP) to a point for a corner being the southeast corner of the Travelers Hotel property that is also the southeast corner of said Lot 14; 
Thence in a westerly direction along the south line of the Travelers Hotel property being the southern boundary of Lots 14, 15, and 16, Block 56, OTP to the point of intersection with the east right-of-way line with South Crockett Avenue; 
Thence in a northerly direction along the east right-of-way line of South Crocket Avenue to the point of intersection with the south right-of-way line of East Main Street; 
Thence in a westerly direction along the south right-of-way line of East Main Street to a point of intersect with the western boundary of the railroad right-of-way of the Union Pacific Railroad; 
Thence in a southerly direction along the western boundary of the railroad right-of-way of the Union Pacific Railroad to a point intersecting the easterly projection of the north right-of-way line of East Crawford Street; 
Thence in a westerly direction along the north right-of-way line of East Crawford Street, across Houston Avenue, along the north right-of-way line of West Crawford Street to its intersection with the east right-of-way line of South Barrett Avenue; 
Thence in a northerly direction along the east right-of-way line of South Barrett Avenue to a point of intersection with the easterly extension of the centerline of the alley separating the 700 blocks of West Main Street and West Chestnut Street; 
Thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of such alley to a point of intersection with the east right-of-way line of South Armstrong Avenue; 
Thence in a northerly direction along the east right-of-way line of South Armstrong Avenue, across West Main Street, then along the east right-of-way line of North Armstrong Avenue to a point of intersection with the south right-of-way line of West Woodard Street; 
Thence in an easterly direction along the south right-of-way line of West Woodard Street to a point of intersection with the east right-of-way line of North Barrett Avenue; 
Thence in a northerly direction along the east right-of-way line of North Barrett Avenue to the point of intersection with the south right-of-way line of West Gandy Street, said point being also the point of beginning. 
(3)  Currently designated design district areas are: 
a.  Design District Number 1 is the area referred to as TIRZ No. 1. Its boundaries are shown in Exhibit A.* 
b.  Design District Number 2 is the area referred to as TIRZ No. 2. Its boundaries are shown in Exhibit B.* 
c.  Design District Number 3 is the area referred to as TIRZ No. 3. Its boundaries are shown in Exhibit C.* 
(4)  The failure to designate an area in this division shall not mean that such an area is not within a defined district, if so designated by the city council. Future areas may be designated as one (1) of these districts at any time. Such a designation does not require a zoning case. 
(5)  While not required under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284 to designate underground compliance areas to prohibit above ground wireless facilities, the city may also, from time to time, also designate underground compliance areas. 
(e)  Exceptions. The city by its discretionary consent and agreement may grant exception to the above prohibited locations and sizes, but only in a non-exclusive, and non-discriminatory manner, as allowed or required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 284.109 and 284.110. 
(f)  Order of preference regarding network node attachment to existing facilities and new node support poles. 
(1)  Existing telephone or electrical lines between existing utility poles. Micro network nodes shall only be lashed on existing telephone or electrical lines between existing utility poles (electric poles or telephones poles), with notice to the pole owner as required by the Federal Pole Attachment Act, and not placed on utility poles, node support poles or service poles. 
(2)  Existing utility poles (electric poles or telephones poles), shall be the preferred support facility for network nodes and related ground equipment. 
(3)  Municipal service poles: 
a.  Non-decorative street lights with a height of more than twenty (20) feet. 
b.  Traffic signal structures when such installation will not interfere with the integrity of the facility and will not interfere with the safety of public and in accordance with an agreement as allowed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 285.056 and 284.101(a)(3), and (b). 
c.  Street signage shall be a low priority use for attachment of a network node. 
d.  Other municipal service pole use is discouraged. 
(4)  New node support poles shall be the least preferred type of allowed facility for attachment of network nodes. 
(5)  Ground equipment. Ground equipment should be minimal and the least intrusive. 
(Ord. No. 4896, § II(Exh. A), 8-21-17) 
Sec. 21-234. - Guidelines on placement. 
(a)  Generally. In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.102, a Network Provider shall construct and maintain Network Nodes and Node Support Poles in a manner that does not: 
(1)  Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way; 
(2)  Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers; 
(3)  Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes; 
(4)  Violate or conflict with the municipality's publicly disclosed public right-of-way management ordinance or this design manual. 
(5)  Violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. Section 12101 et seq.). 
(b)  General requirements and information. 
(1)  Size limits. Network Providers shall provide detailed engineering drawings signed, sealed and dated by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas, with calculations to show strict conformity to the size limitations as set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284, in accordance with, but not limited to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §, 284.002, size of a micro network node, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.003, size of network nodes, and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.103, Max. pole height, with each application and with each request for a permit for each location. 
(2)  State and federal rights-of-way permit. If the project lies within a highway right-of-way, the applicant must provide evidence of a permit from the state or federal government. 
(3)  Confirmation of non-interference with city safety communication networks. 
a.  The network provider needs to provide analysis that the proposed network node shall not cause any interference with city public safety radio system, traffic signal light system, or other city safety communications components in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.304. 
b.  It shall be the responsibility of the network provider to evaluate, prior to making application for permit, the compatibility between the existing city infrastructure and provider's proposed network node. A network node shall not be installed in a location that causes any interference. Network nodes shall not be allowed on city's public safety radio infrastructure. 
(4)  Improperly located network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment. 
a.  Improperly located network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic including sight visibility triangles in the right-of-way. If any network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment is installed in a location that is not in accordance with the construction plans approved by the city manager and impedes pedestrian or vehicular traffic or does not comply or otherwise renders the right-of-way non-compliant with applicable laws, including the American Disabilities Act, then network provider shall promptly remove the network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment. Network provider assumes all liability for any network node facilities that impedes pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic caused by that network node facility, node or ground equipment. 
(b)  Underground requirement areas. 
(1)  In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.107, a network provider shall, in relation to installation for which the city approved a permit application, comply with nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements, including municipal ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way without first obtaining zoning or land use approval. 
(2)  If a location is designated by the city to transits to be an underground requirement area, then a network provider's permit for the location of the micro network node, network node, node support pole, and related ground equipment at such location will be revoked ninety (90) days after the designation, with removal of said the micro network node, network node, node support pole, and related ground equipment at such location within ninety (90) days of such designation, or as otherwise reasonably allowed by the city for the transition of other overhead facilities. 
(c)  Network node facilities placement. 
(1)  Right-of-way. Network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment shall be placed, as much as possible, within two (2) feet of the outer edge of the right-of-way line to minimize any obstruction, impediment, or hindrance to the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way. 
(2)  Height above ground. Network V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.108, and if a network node attachment is projecting toward the street, for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular traffic, the attachment shall be installed no less than sixteen (16) feet above the ground. 
(3)  Protrusions. In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 284.003(a)(1)(C), 284.003(a)(2)(C) and 284.003(a)(3)(B) no protrusion from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole shall be more than two (2) feet. 
(4)  Limit on number of network nodes per site. There shall be no more than one (1) network node on any one (1) pole. 
(d)  New node support poles. 
(1)  New node support poles spacing. New node support poles shall be spaced apart from existing utility poles or node support poles at the same as the spacing between utility poles in the immediate proximity, but no less than at a minimum three hundred (300) feet from a utility pole or another node support pole to minimize the hazard of poles adjacent to road ways and to minimize effect on property values and aesthetics on the area. 
(2)  Height of node support poles or modified utility pole. In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.103 a node support pole or modified utility pole may not exceed the lesser of: 
a.  Ten (10) feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole located within five hundred (500) linear feet of the new pole in the same public right-of-way; or 
b.  Fifty-five (55) feet above ground level. 
(e)  Ground equipment. 
(1)  Ground equipment near street corners and intersections. Ground equipment should be minimal and the least intrusive. In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.102(1), to minimize any obstruction, impediment, or hindrance to the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way the maximum line of sight required to add to safe travel of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and in order to maximize that line of sight at street corners and intersections and to minimize hazards at those locations, ground equipment may not be installed within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a street corner or a street intersection as measured from curb returns of pavement radius for streets without curbs. 
(2)  Ground equipment near municipal parks. For the safety of municipal park patrons, particularly small children, and to allow full line of sights near municipal park property, the network provider shall not install ground equipment in a right-of-way that is within a park or within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the boundary line of a park, unless approved by the city manager in writing. 
(f)  Municipal service poles. 
(1)  In accordance with agreement. Installations on all service poles shall be in accordance with an agreement as allowed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 285.056 and 284.101(a)(3), and (b). 
(2)  Required industry standard pole load analysis. Installations on all Service Poles shall have an industry standard pole load analysis completed and submitted to the municipality with each permit application indicating that the service pole to which the network node is to be attached will safely support the load, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.108. Load analysis shall be completed, signed, sealed and dated by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas. 
(3)  Height of attachments. All attachments on all service poles shall be at least eight (8) feet above grade, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 285.108(a)(1), (2) and if a network node attachment is projecting toward the street, for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular traffic, the attachment shall be installed no less than sixteen (16) feet above the ground. 
(4)  Installations on traffic signals. Installations on all traffic signal structures must not interfere with the integrity of the facility in any way that may compromise the safety of the public and must be in accordance with an agreement as allowed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 285.056 and 284.101(a)(3), and (b). Installation of network node facilities on any traffic signal structures shall: 
a.  Be encased in a separate conduit than the traffic light electronics; 
b.  Have a separate electric power connection than the traffic signal structure; 
c.  Have a separate access point than the traffic signal structure. 
Load analysis shall be completed, signed, sealed and dated by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas. Installations that interfere with future enhancements or replacements of signals, or signal appurtenances on signs shall be relocated by the network provider. 
(5)  Installations on street signage. Installations on all street signage structures must not interfere with the integrity of the facility in any way that may compromise the safety of the public. Installation of network node facilities on any street signage structures that has electrics shall: 
a.  Be encased in a separate conduit than any city signage electronics; 
b.  Have a separate electric power connection than the signage structure; 
c.  Have a separate access point than the signage structure; and 
d.  In the event signals or signs are removed, the network provider shall promptly remove the equipment within thirty (30) days written notice. 
Installations that interfere with future enhancements or replacements of signals, or signal appurtenances on signs shall be relocated by the network provider. 
(Ord. No. 4896, § II(Exh. A), 8-21-17) 
Sec. 21-235. - General aesthetic requirements. 
(a)  Concealment. The network node facilities shall be concealed or enclosed as much as possible in an equipment box, cabinet, or other unit that may include ventilation openings. External cables and wires hanging off a pole shall be sheathed or enclosed in a conduit, so that wires are protected and not visible or visually minimized to the extent possible, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(b)  New node support pole spacing. New node support poles shall be at a minimum three hundred (300) feet from a utility pole or another node support pole to minimize the hazard of poles adjacent to road ways and to minimize effect on property values and aesthetics on the area. 
(c)  Allowed colors. Colors in historic districts and design districts must be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(Ord. No. 4896, § II(Exh. A), 8-21-17) 
Sec. 21-236. - Electrical supply. 
(a)  Network provider shall be responsible for obtaining any required electrical power service to the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles and ground equipment. The city shall not be liable to the network provider for any stoppages or shortages of electrical power furnished to the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment, including without limitation, stoppages or shortages caused by any act, omission, or requirement of the public utility serving the structure or the act or omission of any other tenant or network provider of the structure, or for any other cause beyond the control of the city. 
(b)  Network provider shall not allow or install generators or back-up generators in the right-of-way in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.002(12)(B)(1). 
(Ord. No. 4896, § II(Exh. A), 8-21-17) 
Sec. 21-237. - Insurance, indemnity, bonding and security deposits. 
(a)  Insurance, bonding and security deposits shall be in strict accordance with the City's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(b)  Indemnity shall be in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.302, as provided for in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.057(a) and (b). 
(Ord. No. 4896, § II(Exh. A), 8-21-17) 
Sec. 21-238. - Requirements in regard to removal, relocation, replacement, maintenance and repair. 
(a)  Removal or relocation by network provider. 
(1)  Removal and relocation by the network provider of its micro network node, network node facilities, node support pole or related ground equipment at its own discretion, shall be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(2)  All damage caused by the network provider to city facilities shall be repaired at the time equipment is removed. All ground equipment removed shall have the remaining surface restored to same or better than surrounding ground. 
(b)  Removal or relocation required for city project. 
(1)  Removal and relocation of network provider's micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment, or portion thereof required for a city project shall be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.107, except as provided in existing state and federal law. 
(c)  Removal required by city for safety and imminent danger reasons. 
(1)  Network provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, promptly disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment within the time frame and in the manner required by the city manager if the city manager reasonably determines that the disconnection, removal, or relocation of any part of a micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment: (a) is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, or city property, (b) the micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or portion thereof, is adversely affecting proper operation of streetlights or city property, or (c) network provider fails to obtain all applicable licenses, permits, and certifications required by law for its micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or use of any location under applicable law in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(2)  If the city manager reasonably determines that there is imminent danger to the public, then the city may immediately disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment at the network provider's sole cost and expense in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(Ord. No. 4896, § II(Exh. A), 8-21-17) 
Sec. 21-239. - Installation and inspections. 
(a)  Installation. Network provider shall, at its own cost and expense, install the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment in a good and workmanlike manner in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(b)  Inspections. The city manager, or designee, may perform visual inspections of any micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment located in the right-of-way shall be allowed in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284 
(Ord. No. 4896, § II(Exh. A), 8-21-17) 
Sec. 21-240. - Requirements upon abandonment of obsolete micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment. 
    Abandoned or obsolete micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment shall be removed in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(Ord. No. 4896, § II(Exh. A), 8-21-17) 
Sec. 21-241. - General provisions. 
(a)  As built maps and records. Network provider's as built maps and records shall be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(b)  Courtesy and proper performance. Courtesy and proper performance of network provider's personnel, and contractors shall be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(c)  Drug policy. Drug policy of network provider's personnel, and contractors in the rights-of-way shall be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(d)  Allocation of funds for removal and storage. The city has appropriated zero dollars ($0.00) to pay for the cost of any removal or storage of micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, as authorized under this article, and no other funds are allocated. 
(e)  Ownership. Ownership of network node and related equipment shall be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(f)  Tree maintenance. Tree maintenance shall be in strict accordance with the City's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(g)  Signage. Signage shall be in strict accordance with the City's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(h)  Graffiti abatement. Graffiti abatement shall be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(i)  Restoration. Network provider shall restore and repair of the rights-of-way and city owned signals, signal poles, cabinets, sign posts and the alike from any damage to the right-of-way, or any facilities located within the right-of-way, and the property of any third party resulting from network provider's installation, removal or relocation activities (or any other of network provider's activities hereunder) in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(j)  Network provider's responsibility. Network provider shall be responsible and liable for the acts and omissions of network provider's employees, temporary employees, officers, directors, consultants, agents, affiliates, subsidiaries, sub-network provider's and subcontractors in connection with the installations of any micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, as if such acts or omissions were network provider's acts or omissions in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(Ord. No. 4896, § II(Exh. A), 8-21-17) 
Sec. 21-242-21-249. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21-250. - Design manual-Updates. 
    Placement or modification of micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment shall comply with the city's design manual at the time the permit for installation or modification is approved and as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 4896, § II(Exh. A), 8-21-17) 
Chapter 22 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4681, § 1, adopted Feb. 18, 2013, repealed the former Ch. 22, §§ 22-1-22-11, 22-31-22-35, 22-51-22-57. Section 2(Exh. A) of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 22 as set out herein. The former Ch. 22 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of March 13, 1957, arts. II-IX, XV; Ord. of 1073, §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 1800, §§ 3-5, adopted July 1, 1974; Ord. No. 1819, § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 1974; Ord. No. 1932, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 1975; Ord. No. 1977, § 1, adopted July 6, 1976; Ord. No. 3449, § 1, adopted March 21, 1994; Ord. No. 4296, § 1, adopted July 8, 2005; Ord. No. 4306, §§ 1-7, adopted August 1, 2005; Ord. No. 4496, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 2, 2009. 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 2-96 et seq.; planning and zoning commission approval of subdivision plats, § 2-104; specific code enforcement authority, § 2-126; animals, Ch. 4; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; planning and development, Ch. 17; signs, Ch. 19; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; swimming pools, Ch. 23; taxation, Ch. 24; traffic, Ch. 25; utilities, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference- Subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Purposes. 
    These regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
(a)  To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city. 
(b)  To guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. 
(c)  To ensure safety from fire, flood, and other danger, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population. 
(d)  To guide public and private development in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, drainage, and other public requirements and facilities. 
(e)  To provide for the circulation of traffic and pedestrians required for the beneficial use of land and buildings and to avoid congestion throughout the city. 
(f)  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for platting and replatting to further the orderly layout and use of land, and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of platted land. 
(g)  To ensure that adequate public facilities and services are available and will have sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision or addition and that the community will be required to bear no more than its fair share of the cost of providing the facilities and services. 
(h)  To prevent the pollution of streams and ponds; to ensure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table, and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources, and enhance the stability and beauty of the community and the value of the land. 
(i)  To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land. 
(j)  To remedy the problems associated with inappropriately platted lands, including premature subdivision, incomplete subdivision and scattered subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-2. - Authority, applicability and exemptions. 
(a)  Authority. These subdivision regulations are adopted under the authority of Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code chapter 212, subchapters A and B, and the city's Charter. The subdivision regulations expressly extend to all areas inside the city limits and throughout the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(b)  Extraterritorial jurisdiction. The extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city includes that area within one (1) mile beyond the corporate limits of the city, subject to the limitation of the extraterritorial jurisdiction as set forth in those certain agreements with the City of Sherman and the City of Pottsboro apportioning the area of extraterritorial jurisdiction between the City of Denison and the City of Sherman for overlapping territory as it is defined by the Municipal Annexation Act of Texas, or between the City of Denison and the City of Pottsboro pursuant to their mutual boundary agreement, as the case may be, to which agreements reference is here made for an accurate description of the common boundary between the cities, as may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  Applicability. The subdivision regulations apply to any non-exempt land division or development within the corporate boundaries of the city and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. A final plat, a development plat or a minor plat shall be approved prior to any non-exempt land division or development. 
(d)  Subdivision plat exemptions. The following land divisions are exempt from the requirements of the subdivision regulations applicable to subdivision plats: 
(1)  Inheritance, or land by metes and bounds of tracts upon which no improvements, development, subdivision or alteration are intended; 
(2)  Use of existing cemeteries complying with all state and local laws and regulations; 
(3)  A division of land created by order of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(4)  A division of land that results in the creation of two (2) or more parcels, each of which is greater than five (5) acres inside the city limits, or each of which is greater than ten (10) acres within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, when each parcel has direct access to an existing public street, and no dedication of public facilities is required under these subdivision regulations in connection with the division; and 
(5)  Creation of a remainder tract. 
(6)  Family grants within the ETJ only. A conveyance that grants of a minimum of five (5) acres or more to be sold, given or otherwise transferred to a relative of owner within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity from a "parent tract" of no less than ten (10) acres, which is located within the ETJ only, and which would result in minimum "daughter tracts" of five (5) or more acres and a remaining parent tract of five (5) or more acres. Each resulting daughter tract and the remaining parent tract must all: (a) have direct access to an existing public street or county road (either dedicated in fee or existing by easement of record), (b) be no less than two hundred fifty (250) feet deep measuring from the public street or county road providing access, and (c) not need any dedication of public facilities required under these subdivision regulations in connection with the division. This exemption will not apply to any property lying within the corporate limits of the City of Denison. 
(e)  Development plat exemptions. The following land divisions are exempt from the requirements of the subdivision regulations applicable to development plats: 
(1)  Inheritance, of land by metes and bounds of tracts upon which no improvements, development, subdivision or alteration are intended; 
(2)  Use of existing cemeteries complying with all state and local laws and regulations; 
(3)  Bona fide agricultural activities; 
(4)  Construction of agricultural accessory structures and related development activities. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13; Ord. No. 4821, § 2, 7-18-16) 
Sec. 22-3. - Stages of platting. 
(a)  Inside city. Within city limits, a subdivision plat may be approved in three (3) stages: 
(1)  Master plat; 
(2)  Preliminary plat; and 
(3)  Final plat. 
(b)  Within extraterritorial jurisdiction. Within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, only a final plat is authorized, unless the land to be platted is subject to an approved development agreement, in which case a master plat application or a preliminary plat application may be submitted, as authorized by the agreement. 
(c)  Combined plats prohibited. An applicant may not submit applications for approval of a preliminary plat and a final plat simultaneously. 
(d)  Development plats. A development plat shall be approved prior to development of any tract or parcel for which no subdivision plat is required, or prior to development of any lot in a subdivision for which dedication of any right-of-way for construction or maintenance of public improvements is required by these regulations. A development plat shall be required prior to approval of a manufactured home rental community. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-4. - Annexation regulations. 
    For newly annexed land, no plat or permits may be approved for any use or lot that is not in conformity with the use, use intensity, lot size and dimensional standards for the lowest intensity residential zoning district in the city's adopted Zoning Ordinance, until the annexed property has been permanently classified on the zoning district map. Following annexation, no plat application will be deemed complete for any uses, intensity of use, dimensions or lot sizes not authorized in the lowest intensity zoning district, until the annexed property has been permanently classified on the zoning district map. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-5. - County coordination. 
    The city and the county shall cooperate in processing and deciding plat applications within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction in accordance with the current inter-local agreement between the city and the county, as may be amended from time to time, and which is incorporated hereby within as if fully set forth. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-6. - Definitions. 
(a)  Usage. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense and words used in the plural include the singular. 
(b)  Words and terms defined. 
    Alley. A minor public right-of-way not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Amending plat. A revised plat correcting errors or making minor changes to the original recorded final plat. 
    Amenity. An improvement to be dedicated to the public or to the common ownership of the lot owners of the subdivision and providing an aesthetic, recreational or other benefit, other than those prescribed by this chapter. 
    Arterial street or highway. A street which is used primarily for fast or heavy traffic. 
    Base flood. The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Block. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, shorelines of waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities. 
    Block length. For a residential subdivision, that distance measured along the centerline of the street from the intersection center point of one through street to the intersecting center point of another; or to the midpoint of a cul-de-sac. 
    Building setback line. The line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building or other structure and the adjacent right-of-way line. 
    Capital improvements program (CIP). The official proposed schedule of all future public projects listed together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project, as adopted by city council. 
    City. The City of Denison, Texas. 
    Collector street. A street which carries traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance street of a residential development and a street for circulation within such a development. 
    Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Denison, Texas. 
    Comprehensive Plan. The plan of the city and adjoining areas as adopted by the council, as may be amended from time to time, showing the general locations land uses, transportation routes, public and private buildings, streets, parks, water/wastewater facilities, and other public and private developments and improvements. 
    Construction and design manual. Those standards and specifications established by the city to ensure proper installation of the improvements required by this chapter, including the following: 
(1)  Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, including standard drawings, latest edition, published by the North Central Texas Council of Governments; 
(2)  American Water Works Association (AWWA) Standards; 
(3)  Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) Regulations. 
    Construction plans or drawings. The maps or drawings accompanying a plat and showing the specific location and design of public improvements to be installed in the subdivision or addition in accordance with the requirements of the city as a condition of approval of the plat. 
    Contiguous. In reference to lots, a lot is contiguous to another lot if at least one (1) boundary line of the lot touches the boundary line of the other lot. 
    Council. The City Council of the City of Denison, Texas. 
    County. Grayson County, Texas. 
    Cul-de-sac. A street having only one (1) outlet to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turnaround ("bulb"). 
    Cul-de-sac length. The distance measured from the intersection center point of the adjoining through street to the midpoint of the bulb. 
    Dead-end street. A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one (1) outlet. 
    Development plat. A plat authorized under Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code ch. 212, subchapter B, depicting a lay-out of development for a proposed tract or lot and providing for supporting public facilities. 
    Developer. The person, business, corporation or association responsible for the development of the subdivision or addition. In most contexts the terms developer and property owner are used interchangeably in these regulations. 
    Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, paving, drainage or utilities, but not agricultural activities. 
    Easement, public. An area of land legally restricted as a public right-of-way for construction, installation and maintenance of utilities, or improvements for roads, drainage or other public facilities, by the city or a public utility and upon which the city or the public utility has the right of entry to remove any encroaching building, fence, tree, shrub or other improvement or vegetation which interferes with such construction, installation or maintenance. 
    Escrow. A deposit of cash with the city collected, earmarked and used in accordance with established city policies. 
    Final plat. The official and authentic map of any given subdivision of land prepared from actual field measurement and staking of all identifiable points by a surveyor or engineer, with the subdivision location referenced to a survey corner, and with all boundaries, corners and curves of the land division sufficiently described so that they can be reproduced without additional references, to be recorded after approval by the commission and any accompanying material and additional requirements as described in these regulations 
    Lot. A tract or portion of a subdivision, or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, or possession or for building development. 
    Minor plat. A proposed plat with no more than four (4) contiguous lots, with each lot fronting on an existing street, and not requiring the creation of any new street or any public improvements. 
    On-site facilities or improvements. Those existing or proposed facilities or improvements constructed within the property boundaries of the plat. On-site facilities includes those existing or proposed facilities required to be constructed or improved immediately adjacent to the property and which are required to serve the development. These include streets, alleys, water lines, sewer lines, storm drainage facilities, curbs and gutters, and any other construction or reconstruction needed to serve the property. 
    Off-site facilities or improvements. Those facilities or improvements that are required to serve the site but that are not located within the boundaries of the plat. These include oversizing and extension of streets, sewer lines, water lines and storm drainage facilities, as well as the excess capacity of facilities such as water storage tanks and wastewater treatment plants available for new development. 
    Pavement width. The portion of a street that is available for vehicular traffic. Where curbs are used, it is the portion from the face of one (1) curb to the face of the opposite curb. 
    Perimeter street. Any existing or planned street which abuts the subdivision or addition to be platted. 
    Person. Any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency, or political subdivision. 
    Preliminary plat. The graphic expression of the proposed overall plan for subdividing, improving and developing a tract, shown by superimposing a scale drawing of the proposed land division upon a topographic map and showing in plain view all existing and proposed drainage features or facilities, public utilities, street layouts, and other pertinent features, with such notations as are sufficient to substantially identify the general scope and detail of the proposed development. 
    Private street. A private vehicular access way that is shared by and that serves two (2) or more lots, which is not dedicated to the public, and which is not publicly maintained. Private street includes an alley where provided. 
    Property owner. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land comprising the subdivision or addition, or any representative or agent thereto, who has express written authority to act on behalf of such owner. 
    Public improvement. Any drainage way, street, parkway, sidewalk, utility, pedestrian way, off-street parking area, lot improvement, open space, or other facility for which the city or other governmental entity will ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established. 
    Public works director. A qualified professional, or firm of registered professional consulting engineers, that has been specifically employed by the city to assist in engineering-related matters. 
    Remainder. The residual land left after platting of a portion of a tract. 
    Replatting. Any change in a map of an approved or recorded plat, except as permitted as an amended plat, that affects any street layout on the map or area reserved or dedicated thereon for public use or any lot line, or that affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions or additions. Replatting includes the combination of lots into a single lot for purposes of development. 
    Replat. The re-subdivision of any part or all of a block or blocks of a previously platted subdivision, lot or tract. 
    Road or roadway. A street. 
    Street. A right-of-way (public or private), however designated, which provides vehicular access to adjacent land. Streets may be of the following categories: 
(1)  Major thoroughfare (including arterial streets). A street that provides vehicular movement from one (1) neighborhood to another, to distant points within the urban area, or to freeways or highways leading to other communities. 
(2)  Collector street. A street that provides vehicular circulation within neighborhoods, and from local streets to major thoroughfares. 
(3)  Minor street. A street which is used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
(4)  Marginal access street. A minor street which is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street or highway and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
    Street improvements. Any street, together with all appurtenances required by city regulations to be provided with such street or thoroughfare, including but not limited to sidewalks, drainage facilities to be situated in the right-of-way for such street or thoroughfare, traffic control devices, street lights and street signs, for which facilities the city will ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation. 
    Subdivider. Any person who (1) having an interest in land causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision or platted as an addition or who (2) directly or indirectly, sells, leases, or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or develop, or advertises to sell, lease, or develop, any interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plat in a subdivision or addition, or, who (3) engages directly or through an agent in the business of selling, leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, or development a subdivision or addition or any interest, lot, parcel site, unit or plat in a subdivision or addition, and who (4) is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under direct or indirect common control with any of the foregoing. 
    Subdivision. A division of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits and the city extraterritorial jurisdiction, in two (2) or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any addition of any town or city, or for laying out suburban lots, or building lots, or any lots, and streets, alleys or parts or other portions intended for public use or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting therein or adjacent thereto. Subdivision includes re-subdivision, but it does not include the division of land for agricultural purposes in parcels or tracts of five (5) acres or more and not involving any new street, alley or easement of access. 
    Subdivision improvement agreement. A contract between the developer and the city, by which the developer promises to complete the required public improvements within the subdivision within a specified time period following final plat approval. 
    Substandard street. An existing street or road that does not meet the minimum specifications in the Construction and Design Manual for streets, and which is not constructed to the ultimate configuration for the type of roadway it is designated for on the city's Thoroughfare Plan. 
    Standard street. A street that meets or exceeds the minimum specifications in the Construction and Design Manual for streets, and its designation on the city's Thoroughfare Plan. 
    Surveyor. A licensed land surveyor or a registered public surveyor, as authorized by state statutes to practice the profession of surveying. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-7. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city may enforce provisions of this chapter 22 of the City Code of Ordinances in accordance with section 1-12 of the Code, as may be amended from time to time, against an owner or subdivider, subject to the provisions of subsection (b). The term "owner" does not include the owner of an individual lot in a subdivided tract of land. 
(b)  Within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, the city may enforce the provisions of this chapter 22 of the City Code of Ordinances only through declaratory or injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-8. - Dormant subdivisions. 
(a)  Expiration. Any application for a preliminary plat, or portion thereof, or an application for a final plat that has not been recorded, that was approved or filed before, but that was not subject to an expiration date on May 11, 2000, pursuant to chapter 22 of the Denison Code of Ordinances, or pursuant to any predecessor subdivision regulations, shall expire at 5:00 p.m. on August 31, 2005. 
(b)  Owner's petition. The owner of the land subject to the preliminary or final plat that expires under subsection (a) may petition the city council to reinstate such preliminary or final plat by filing a vested rights petition within six (6) months of the expiration date pursuant to section 22-56. The petition shall clearly state the grounds for reinstatement, and shall be accompanied by documentation of one (1) of the following: 
(1)  As of May 11, 2000, one (1) of the following events had occurred: 
(A)  In the case of an approved preliminary plat application: 
(i)  A final plat application for all or part of the land subject to the approved preliminary plat was approved, or was filed and was subsequently approved, or an application for a final plat was submitted for all or part of the land subject to the approved preliminary plat, but such application was rejected on grounds of incompleteness; 
(ii)  Costs for development of the land subject to the preliminary plat, including but not limited to costs associated with roadway, utility and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve the land in whole or in part, but exclusive of land acquisition costs, were incurred in the aggregate amount of five (5) percent of the most recent appraised market value of the land subject to the preliminary plat; 
(iii)  Fiscal security was posted to ensure performance of an obligation required for development of all or a part of the land subject to the approved preliminary plat; or 
(B)  In the case of an approved, unrecorded final plat application: 
(i)  Costs for development of the land subject to the preliminary plat, including but not limited to, costs associated with roadway, utility and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve the land in whole or in part, but exclusive of land acquisition costs, were incurred in the aggregate amount of five (5) percent of the most recent appraised market value of the land subject to the preliminary plat; 
(ii)  Fiscal security was posted after approval of the final plat to ensure performance of an obligation required for all or a part of the land subject to the approved final plat; or 
(iii)  Utility connection fees or impact fees for all or part of the land subject to the approved final plat were paid. 
(2)  For an approved preliminary plat, one (1) of the following events had occurred after May 11, 2000, but before the expiration date specified in subsection (a): 
(A)  A final plat was approved for all or part of the land subject to the approved preliminary plat, and remained in effect for such land on such expiration date; or 
(B)  A complete application for approval of all or part of the land subject to the approved preliminary plat was pending for decision on such expiration date. 
(c)  Council action. The city council may take one (1) of the following actions: 
(1)  Reinstate the expired preliminary or final plat subject to such expiration dates as may be authorized by law, if it finds that the petitioner has met any one (1) of the criteria listed in subsection (b)(1). 
(2)  Reinstate the expired preliminary plat for all or part of the land subject thereto, if it finds that the petitioner has met any one (1) of the criteria listed in subsection (b)(2), subject to such expiration dates or other conditions that assure that the remaining land that is not subject to an approved or pending final plat application will be developed in a timely fashion. In granting relief under this provision, the council may require that development of such remaining land is subject to standards enacted after initial approval of the preliminary plat. 
(3)  Deny the petition, if it finds that the petitioner has failed to meet any of the criteria in subsection (b). 
(4)  Reinstate the preliminary plat for only that part of the land subject to a pending final plat application, if it finds that the petitioner has met the criteria in subsection (b)(2)(B) and the pending plat application subsequently was approved, and deny the petition for the remaining land within the expired preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-9. - Property owner and homeowner maintenance agreements. 
(a)  Applicability. When a subdivision contains either common open space or other improvements which are not intended to be dedicated to the city for public use (including, without limitation, private streets, private recreation facilities, landscaped entry features), a property owners' or homeowners' association agreement consistent with state and other appropriate laws, must be approved by the commission. The proposed Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions (CCRs) and the association documents (articles of incorporation, by-laws) shall be submitted to the commission for review with the preliminary plat application and made part of final plat approval, and such documents must contain provisions that satisfy the requirements outlined within this section. 
(b)  Membership. An association shall be an incorporated non-profit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which: 
(1)  Each lot owner within the described land area is automatically a member (i.e., membership in the association is mandatory); and 
(2)  Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the property/homeowners association's activities, such as maintenance of common open spaces or the provision and upkeep of common recreational facilities. 
(c)  Requirements. In order to assure the establishment of an association, including its financing, and the rights and responsibilities of the property owners or home owners in relation to the use, management and ownership of common property, the subdivision plat, dedication documents, covenants, and other recorded legal agreements must: 
(1)  Place title to the common property in the association within a reasonable and definite time, but in no event later than the date of acceptance by city of all public improvements, or the date of conveyance of the first lot, whichever date shall first occur; 
(2)  Define limits on the uses of the common property; 
(3)  Give each lot owner the right to the use and enjoyment of the common property; 
(4)  Place responsibility for operation and maintenance of the common property in the association; 
(5)  Place an association charge on each lot in a manner which will both assure sufficient association funds and which will provide adequate safeguards for the lot owners against undesirable high charges; 
(6)  Give each lot owner voting rights in the association; and 
(7)  Identify land areas within the association's jurisdiction that include the following: 
(A)  Property to be transferred to public agencies; 
(B)  The individual residential lots; 
(C)  The common properties to be transferred by the developer to the association; and 
(D)  Other classes of parcels, as applicable. 
(d)  Right of entry. Any governmental authority or agency, including, but not limited to, the city and the county, their agents, and employees, shall have the right of immediate access to the common elements at all times if necessary for the preservation of public health, safety and welfare. Should the association fail to maintain the common elements to city specifications for an unreasonable time, not to exceed ninety (90) days after written request to do so, then the city shall have the same right, power and authority to enforce the association's rules and to levy assessments necessary to maintain the common elements. The city may elect to exercise the rights and powers of the association or its board, or to take any action required and levy any assessment that the property/homeowners association might have taken, either in the name of the property/homeowners association or otherwise, to cover the cost of maintenance (or the possible demolition, if such becomes necessary) of any common elements. 
(e)  City assumption of ownership. The CCRs must provide that, in the event that the association ceases to function for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days or disbands, the city may assume ownership of the private streets (if any) and all other common areas; authorize the city to remove any improvements or amenities from the common areas; sell any buildable land area to recoup the city's expenses for maintenance and/or demolition of the improvements; and retain any monies that remain after the city has recovered all of its expenses shall be retained for future maintenance or upgrading of the streets, common areas (if any remain), screening walls, or other improvements within the subdivision. 
(f)  Covenants. The CCRs shall contain covenants that make the association responsible for the following: 
(1)  The maintenance and operation of all common property; and 
(2)  The enforcement of all other covenants. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-10 - Schedule of fees. 
    A schedule of fees for reviewing plats submitted pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations shall be adopted by the city council and remain on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-11. - Time for decision. 
(a)  Time period for action. All plat applications shall be acted upon within thirty (30) days from the date the application is determined to be complete pursuant to, unless a waiver is submitted in accordance with subsection (b) below. 
(b)  Waiver requests. An applicant may request in writing a waiver of the decision time. The waiver request shall contain a statement of the reasons for the waiver and the time for which a waiver is sought. Waiver requests which have not been received by the responsible official on or before the fourth (4th) calendar day prior to the commission meeting at which action is to be taken on the plat application shall be deemed denied and action shall be taken on the plat application at such meeting as scheduled. 
(c)  Action on the waiver request. The decision-maker shall take action on the waiver request within the thirty-day period for acting on the plat. Where the commission or the council is the decision-maker, action on the waiver request shall be taken at the meeting at which the plat is scheduled for decision. If the waiver is granted, action on the plat application shall be tabled for a time certain consistent with the approved waiver. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
ARTICLE II. - PLATTING PROCEDURES 
DIVISION 1. - COMPLETENESS OF APPLICATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4971, § 3, adopted Oct. 1, 2018, repealed div. 1 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former div. 1, §§ 22-12-22-20, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 18, 2013. 

Sec. 22-12. - Completeness determination. 
    Every application for approval of a plat shall be subject to a determination of completeness by the planning director, or his/her designee. No application shall be accepted for processing unless it is accompanied by all documents required by and prepared in accordance with the requirements of these subdivision regulations. The director from time to time may identify additional requirements for a complete application that are not contained within but are consistent with the application contents and standards set forth in the subdivision regulations. The director also may promulgate a fee for review of the application for completeness. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-13. - Incompleteness as grounds for denial. 
    The processing of an application by any city official or employee prior to the time the application is determined to be complete shall not be binding on the city as the official acceptance of the application for filing, and the incompleteness of the application shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the application. A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of these subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-14. - Pre-application conference. 
    A property owner, qualified representative of the owner or the city may request a pre-application conference with the director for purposes of identifying requirements that are applicable to a proposed plat. The request shall be made in writing on a form prepared by the director and shall state that any proposed development concept discussed at the pre-application conference is not intended as a plan of development or application for plat approval. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-15. - Time for making determination. 
    Following submission of a plan of development or plat application, the planning director shall make a determination in writing whether the plan or application constitutes a complete application for a plat not later than the tenth (10th) business day after the date the application is submitted. The determination shall specify the documents or other information needed to complete the application and shall state the date the application will expire if the documents or other information is not provided. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-16. - When application deemed complete. 
    An application for approval of a preliminary plat that is filed on or after April 28, 2005, or any subsequent final plat application filed after approval of such preliminary plat, shall be deemed complete on the eleventh (11th) business day after the application has been received, if the applicant has not otherwise been notified that the application is incomplete. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-17. - Time for completing application. 
    If an application is not completed on or before the forty-fifth (45th) day after the application is submitted to the planning director for processing the application in accordance with his or her written notification, the application will be deemed to have expired and it will be returned to the applicant together with any accompanying documents. Thereafter, a new application for approval of the plat must be submitted. The city may retain any fee paid for reviewing the application for completeness. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-18. - Sequence of applications. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, an application for a plat shall not be considered complete unless accompanied by a copy of the zoning ordinance or other certification verifying that the proposed use for which the application is submitted is authorized by the zoning district in which the property is located. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-19. - Vested rights. 
    For purposes of determining a vested rights petition pursuant to section 22-56, no vested rights accrue solely from the filing of an application that has expired pursuant to this section, or from the filing of a complete application that is subsequently denied. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-20. - Official filing date. 
    The time period established by state law or these subdivision regulations for processing or deciding an application shall commence on the date that a complete application has been accepted for filing, which date shall be deemed the official filing date. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-21. - Remainder tracts. 
    A remainder tract is that portion of a larger parcel that is not included within the boundaries of a subdivision plat. Remainder tracts shall not be considered lots or tracts of the subdivision. Approval of a subdivision plat shall not constitute approval of development on a remainder tract. The city may require that information be submitted for a remainder tract with a plat application solely for the purpose of determining whether the planned public facilities and improvements proposed to serve the plat will be adequate. Information concerning remainder tracts may be considered in formulating conditions to approval of the plat application. Based upon such information, the approving body may require that additional or less land be included in the subdivision plat in order to satisfy the standards applicable to the plat application. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-22. - Delegation of approval responsibility. 
(a)  In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.0065, approval responsibility for amending plats and minor plats is delegated to the planning director. 
(b)  The planning director may, for any reason, elect to present an amending plat or minor plat to the planning and zoning commission for approval. 
(c)  The planning director shall not disapprove an amending plat or minor plat, and is required to refer any plat that the director cannot approve to the planning and zoning commission within thirty (30) days of filing of a complete application. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLATS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4971, § 3, adopted Oct. 1, 2018, repealed div. 2 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 22-21-22-26, pertained to master plats, and derived from Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 18, 2013. 

Sec. 22-23. - Applicability. 
    A preliminary plat shall be prepared for all subdivisions within the corporate limits of the city, except as provided in section 22-2(d). A preliminary plat is neither authorized nor required in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, unless expressly authorized by a valid and approved development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-24. - Procedures. 
(a)  Commission action. After review of the preliminary plat application by the responsible official and the public works director, the application shall be scheduled for consideration by the planning and zoning commission. The commission shall decide whether to approve, approve with conditions or deny the preliminary plat application based on the criteria for approval in section 22-29. In the event of approval with conditions, a timeline for satisfying the conditions established by the commission shall be a part of the motion for the conditional approval. In the event the applicant fails to satisfy all conditions within the timeframe established by the commission, the application shall be deemed to have been denied. 
(b)  Conditions. The commission may impose such conditions to the approval of the preliminary plat application as are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the criteria in section 22-29. Such conditions may address but are not limited to matters involving conformity with the city's zoning regulations, the availability and capacity of public improvements, or the phasing of development. 
(c)  Revisions following approval of preliminary plat: 
(1)  Minor changes. Minor changes in the design of the subdivision subject to a preliminary plat may be incorporated in an application for approval of a final plat without the necessity of filing a new application for approval of a preliminary plat. Minor changes shall include adjustments in street or alley alignments, lengths, and paving details, and adjustment of lot lines that do not result in creation of additional lots, provided that such changes are consistent with any approved applications. 
(2)  Amendments. All other proposed changes to the design of the subdivision subject to an approved preliminary plat shall be deemed major amendments that require submittal and approval of a new application for approval of a preliminary plat before approval of a final plat. Approval of major revisions to an approved preliminary plat shall occur prior to the date any approved master plat would have expired for the same land. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-25. - Criteria for decision. 
(a)  The following criteria shall be used to determine whether the application for a preliminary plat shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied. 
(1)  The preliminary plat is consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan, including but not limited to the future land use plan, the master thoroughfare plan and master facilities plans; 
(2)  The plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property, and any approved development agreement; 
(3)  The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, drainage and park facilities conform to the master facilities plans for the facilities, including without limitation the water facilities, wastewater facilities, transportation, drainage and other master facilities plans; 
(4)  The plat meets all other requirements of these subdivision regulations; 
(b)  Effect of approval. Approval of a preliminary plat shall authorize the applicant to seek approval of a final plat for the land in conformance with the preliminary plat. Approval of a preliminary plat shall authorize the applicant to submit engineering plans for approval by the public works director. The responsible official shall not accept any engineering plans until such preliminary plat has been approved by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-26. - Expiration and extension. 
(a)  Expiration of preliminary plats. Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall automatically expire and become null and void, and all activities pursuant to such approval thereafter shall be deemed in violation of these subdivision regulations, twelve (12) months from the date of approval by the city planning and zoning commission, unless a final plat application determined to be or deemed complete pursuant to article II, division 1, has been submitted within such period. If a complete final plat application is submitted for only a portion of the land subject to the preliminary plat within such period, the remainder of the preliminary plat shall expire. Upon the expiration of an approved preliminary plat application, a new application for a preliminary plat must be approved subject to regulations in effect at the time the new application is submitted for filing. 
(b)  Extension. The planning director, or the planning and zoning commission on appeal, may grant an extension of the time for expiration of the approved preliminary plat for a period not to exceed one (1) year from the date of expiration of the approval, provided that a request for extension is made in writing at least thirty (30) days before the preliminary plat expires. Every request for extension shall include a statement of the reasons why the expiration date should be extended. The director or the commission on appeal may grant a request for an extension taking into account the reasons for the requested extension, the ability of the applicant to comply with any conditions attached to the original approval, whether extension is likely to result in timely completion of the project, and the extent to which any newly adopted regulations should be applied to the proposed subdivision. In granting an extension, the director or the commission on appeal may impose such conditions as are needed to assure that the land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the public interest is served. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-27. - Application submittal requirements. 
    An application for approval of a preliminary plat along with an accepted digital copy of the proposed subdivision shall be filed with the responsible official at least fourteen (14) days prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning commission at which time approval is asked. After reviewing for compliance with the requirements of the subdivision ordinance, zoning ordinance, and any other ordinance, manual, or policy of the City of Denison, the planning director shall place the plat application on the agenda of the next available meeting of the planning and zoning commission. 
    The subdivider shall submit the preliminary plat on twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-six (36) inch sheet size at a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet unless another scale is authorized by the planning director. Where a master plat has been approved, the information contained in the preliminary plat application shall identify the phase of the master plan which the preliminary plat represents and shall be consistent with the information shown on the master plat. The preliminary plat application shall be accompanied by the following items in accordance with the manual of standard design, manual of water distribution, and manual of street and drainage: 
(1)  Location map. A key map at a scale of not more than four hundred (400) feet to one (1) inch. Such sketch or map shall show existing streets in the vicinity of the subject property. 
(2)  Names of owner. The preliminary plat shall show the name or names of the owner and/or subdivider and the name of the engineer, land planner or surveyor responsible for the preparation of the plat. 
(3)  Identification. The proposed name of the subdivision (which must not be as similar to that of an existing subdivision as to cause confusion) and names of adjacent subdivisions and landowners shall be shown on the plat. 
(4)  Boundary lines. Location of boundary lines, width and location of platted streets and alleys within, or adjacent to, the property, physical features of the property, including location of any existing utilities with the size of sewer and water mains shall be depicted. The outlines of the wooded areas or the location of important individual trees is required. For all plats, contours must be shown at maximum intervals of five (5) feet. All elevations shown shall be referred to sea level datum. The acreage of the property shall be indicated. 
(5)  Location and width of the proposed streets and other features. The location and width of the proposed streets, roads, lots, alleys, easements, widening of existing thoroughfares, and other features, and their location in relation to platted streets, alleys and easements in adjacent subdivisions shall be shown consistent with the thoroughfare plan or other adopted plan for roads and streets. Whenever the proposed subdivision contains, is adjacent to, or is parallel to a railroad, freeway, or expressway right-of-way provision shall be made for a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way to provide reasonable use of the intervening land. Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the land so as to produce useable lots and streets of reasonable gradient. 
(6)  Preliminary utility plans. The plat or an accompanying exhibit shall show the proposed location and size of the development's water distribution system and facilities, including valves, fittings, fire hydrants and line sizes. The plan shall also address the requirements for all offsite water lines and/or oversize requirements and shall conform to the city's water distribution system master plan. The plan shall show the location of all proposed wastewater collection lines and facilities, including manholes, lift stations, and preliminary line sizes. The plan shall also address the requirements of all offsite sanitary sewers and/or oversize requirements and shall conform to the city's wastewater collection system master plan. 
(7)  Preliminary drainage plan. The plan or an accompanying exhibit shall show the drainage areas of the development and all proposed stormwater infrastructure including, but not limited to, detention or retention basins, open channels, and stormwater pipes. 
(8)  Plat contents. The scale of the preliminary-final plat shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch unless approved by the planning director. Additionally, the plat shall show: 
a.  North point, scale and date; 
b.  The boundary line, accurate in scale, of the tract to be submitted; 
c.  The names of all proposed streets; 
d.  The layout, number, and approximate dimension of all proposed lots or building tracts and the square feet of each; 
e.  All parcels of land intended to be dedicated to public use reserved for the common use of owners of lots or sites in the subdivision, and the acreage of such parcels; 
f.  Any and all arrangement of lots or streets proposed; 
(9)  Certificates. The following certifications shall be placed on the preliminary-final plat: 
a.  Planning and zoning commission approval. 
  
Approved for preparation of final plat 
_____
  
Approved this ___ day of _______,___ by the Planning & Zoning Commission of the City of Denison, Texas. 
  
_____
  
   Chairman ___________   Secretary ___________ 
  
_____
  
   Date ___________        Date ___________ 
   
b.  Owner's certificate of dedication and notary block. 
c.  Surveyor's or engineer's certificate. 
(10)  Subdivider's statement. A preliminary-final plat application shall be accompanied by a written statement, signed by the subdivider stating the developer will comply with all the city requirements in the proposed subdivision and all such proposals shall conform to or exceed the standards for such improvements prescribed by the city. 
(11)  Fee payments. Certification that all city taxes and fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
DIVISION 3. - FINAL PLATS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4971, § 3, adopted Oct. 1, 2018, repealed div. 3 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former div. 3, §§ 22-27-22-31, pertained to preliminary plats, and derived from Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 18, 2013. 

Sec. 22-28. - Purpose and applicability. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of a final plat is to assure that the division or development of the land subject to the plat is consistent with all standards of these subdivision regulations and all other city ordinances pertaining to the adequacy of public facilities, that public improvements to serve the subdivision or development have been installed and accepted by the city or that provision for such installation has been made, and that all other requirements and conditions have been satisfied or provided for to allow the plat to be recorded. 
(2)  Applicability. Approval of a final plat shall be required prior to any non-exempt division of land and prior to any site preparation activities for a lot or tract of land that requires installation of public improvements on or adjacent thereto. A final plat application shall not be required for any land division that may be approved through the minor plat procedures in article II, division 5. 
(3)  Effect. Approval of a final plat authorizes the responsible official to record the plat upon completion of public improvements or posting of security in accordance with section 22-65. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-29. - Procedures. 
(a)  Planning director action. The planning director shall take action on the final plat within thirty (30) days of the official filing date unless the applicant requests and consents in writing to waive any time deadline for action upon the plat. If the final plat meets all the requirements of these subdivision regulations and substantially conforms to any approved preliminary plat of the subject property, the planning director shall approve the plat. If the plat does not meet the requirements of these subdivision regulations, the planning director shall disapprove the plat. If the plat does not substantially conform to the approved preliminary plat of the subject property, the applicant shall submit a new preliminary plat for consideration in accordance with section 22, division 3. The planning director may, at their sole discretion, forward a final plat to the planning and zoning commission for action. 
(b)  Final plat in ETJ. The only plat application authorized within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction is a final plat application (or minor plat, if the subject property is eligible under section 22, division 5). The applicant may propose a subdivision of land that creates a remainder tract, as defined in section 22-22. The applicant must submit the information required by the city for a remainder tract with the application for final plat approval. The planning director may approve the proposed subdivision, or require that the remainder tract be included within the final plat. If the city allows the applicant to create the remainder tract, the provisions of section 22-21 shall apply. No conceptual plan of development may accompany a final plat application in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction where the final plat application does not contain all contiguous land in common ownership, unless the application also proposes a remainder tract. Where a conceptual plan of development is presented with a final plat application and designation of a proposed remainder tract, such conceptual plan shall be deemed denied with approval of the final plat application and designation of the remainder tract. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-30. - Criteria for decision. 
    The following criteria shall be used to determine whether the application for a final plat shall be approved or denied. 
(1)  The final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat except for minor changes authorized under section 22-24(c) and that may be approved without the necessity of revising the approved preliminary plat. Where no preliminary plat is authorized, the final plat shall satisfy any criteria under section 22-25 for preliminary plat approval which are not identified below. 
(2)  Where public improvements have been installed, the improvements conform to the approved construction plans and have been approved for acceptance by the public works director. 
(3)  Where the commission has authorized public improvements to be deferred, the subdivision improvement agreement and surety have been executed and submitted by the property owner in conformity with article III, division 2. 
(4)  The final layout of the subdivision meets all standards for adequacy of public facilities contained in these subdivision regulations and city ordinances. 
(5)  The plat meets any county standards to be applied under an interlocal agreement between the city and a county under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 242, where the proposed development is located in whole or in part in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city within the county. 
(6)  The plat conforms to city's adopted comprehensive plan, including its future land use plan (within city limits), the master plans for current and future streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, and public utility facilities, as well as extension of the city's roads, streets, and public highways within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, taking into account access to and extension of sewer and water mains and the instrumentalities of public utilities 
(7)  The plat conforms to the city's zoning regulations or regulations contained in an approved development agreement affecting the land, and all other applicable city ordinances and regulations. 
(8)  Where no preliminary plat is authorized, plat notes have been added as required for preliminary plats. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-31. - Expiration and extension. 
(a)  Expiration. 
(1)  A final plat shall expire one (1) year from the date of its approval by the planning director unless facilities required for approval have been accepted by the city and the plat has been recorded with the county. 
(2)  A final plat approved after May 11, 2000, and prior to the effective date of this section [August 1, 2005], that has not been recorded by the effective date of this section, shall expire the later of two (2) years from the date the plat was approved by the city planning and zoning commission or at 5:00 p.m. on September 1, 2005, unless the property owner can demonstrate that: 
(A)  Costs for development of the land subject to the preliminary plat, including but not limited to, costs associated with roadway, utility and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve the land in whole or in part, but exclusive of land acquisition costs, were incurred in the aggregate amount of five (5) percent of the most recent appraised market value of the land subject to the preliminary plat; 
(B)  Fiscal security was posted after approval of the final plat to ensure performance of an obligation required for all or a part of the land subject to the approved final plat; or 
(C)  Utility connection fees or impact fees for all or part of the land subject to the approved final plat were paid. 
(3)  Expiration of a final plat pursuant to this section results in automatic termination of any approved preliminary plat for the same land. 
(b)  Extension. The planning director or the planning and zoning commission on appeal may grant an extension of the time for expiration of the approved final plat for a period not to exceed one (1) year from the date of expiration of the approval, provided that a request for extension is made in writing at least thirty (30) days before the final plat expires. Every request for extension shall include a statement of the reasons why the expiration date should be extended. The director or the commission on appeal may grant a request for an extension taking into account the reasons for the requested extension, the ability of the applicant to comply with any conditions attached to approval of the final plat, whether extension is likely to result in timely completion of the project, and the extent to which any newly adopted regulations should be applied to the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-32. - Recording. 
(a)  Procedure. After approval of the final plat, the responsible official shall record the final plat with the county clerk of the county in which the land is located upon the subdivider's performance of one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Completion of the construction of required improvements prior to recordation; or 
(2)  Filing of security in lieu of completing construction in accordance with section article III, division 2. 
(b)  Submittal of record drawings where improvements installed. Where public improvements have been installed prior to recording of the plat, the property owner shall submit a maintenance bond in accordance with section 2-6 from each contractor and a digital copy of all plans (in a format as determined by the public works director), bearing sealed certification by the design engineer that all public improvements have been constructed in compliance with all city construction standards. The property owner also shall submit copies of the approved final plat, revised to reflect the "as built" plans. 
(c)  Submittal of record drawings where improvements not installed. Where public improvements have yet to be completed in connection with an approved final plat, the property owner shall have the approved final plat revised to reflect any changes required by the city council. 
(d)  Recording. Upon receipt of a printed copies of an approved final plat in a format acceptable to the county in which the plat will be recorded, final plat, the responsible official shall sign the plat and promptly cause the plat to be recorded. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-33. - Application submittal requirements. 
    After the preliminary plat, where required and allowed, has been approved by the commission, a final plat, in digital format, shall be prepared in accordance with the conditions of approval and submitted to the city's engineer and responsible official for review. Where no preliminary plat is authorized, the final plat application must meet all the submittal requirements for a preliminary plat that are not included in the list of application requirements that follow. 
    The final plat shall be submitted as a digital file with a sheet size of twenty-four (24) inches by eighteen (18) inches at a scale of one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch or other scale approved by the planning director. The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)  The names of the owner and subdivider and of the licensed state land surveyor, or registered engineer responsible for the plat. 
(2)  The name of the subdivision and adjacent subdivisions, the names of streets (to conform whenever possible to existing street names) and numbers of lot and blocks, in accordance with alphabetical block arrangements and numerical lot arrangement. In case of branching streets, the lines of departure shall be indicated. (See general requirements). 
(3)  An accurate boundary survey and description of the property, with bearings and distances referenced to survey lines and established subdivisions, and showing the lines of adjacent lands and the fines of adjacent streets and alleys, with their width and names. Streets, alley and lot lines in adjacent subdivisions shall be shown in dashed lines. North point, scale and date shall be shown. 
(4)  Location map. A key map at a scale of not more than four hundred (400) feet to one (1) inch. Such sketch or map shall show existing streets in the vicinity of the subject property. 
(5)  Locations and square footage of proposed lots, streets, public highways, alleys, parks and other features, with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals fractions of feet, with the length of radii and of arcs of all curves, all angles, and with all other engineering information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground. Dimensions shall be shown from all angle points. All lots or building sites shall conform to the standards prescribed by the zoning ordinance for the district or districts in which the subdivision is located. All streets, alleys, drainage and public utilities shall conform to the specifications of the city. 
(6)  Location of utility easements. 
(7)  An instrument of dedication, signed and acknowledged by the owner or owners and by all other parties who have a mortgage or lien interest in the property, showing all restrictions, reservations, and/or easements, if any, to be imposed and reserved in connection with the addition. Such restrictions shall contain the following provisions, along with any other restrictions which may be imposed: 
"No house, dwelling unit or other structure shall be constructed on any lot in this addition by the owner or any other person until: 
a.  Such time as the developer and/or owner has complied with all requirements of the subdivision ordinance of the City of Denison regarding improvements with respect to the entire block on the street and/or streets on which the property abuts (a corner lot shall be regarded as abutting on both intersection streets adjacent to such lot,) including the actual installation of streets, water, sewer, drainage structures, and storm sewer and alleys, all according to the specifications of the City of Denison; or 
b.  Until the escrow deposit, sufficient to pay for the cost of such improvements, as determined by the public works director and/or city manager, computed on a private commercial rate basis, has been made with the finance director, accompanied by an agreement signed by the developer and/or owner, authorizing the city to make such improvements at prevailing private commercial rates, or have the same made by a contractor and pay for the same out of the escrow deposit, should the developer and/or owner fail or refuse to install the required improvements within the time stated in such written agreement, but in no case the city be obligated to make such improvements itself. Such deposit may be used by the owner and/or developer as progress payments as the work progresses in making such improvements by making certified requisitions to the city secretary, supported by evidence of work done; or 
c.  If approved by the city manager, until the developer and/or owner files a corporate surety bond with the finance director in a sum equal to the cost of such improvements for the designated area, guaranteeing the installation thereof within the time stated in the bond, which time shall be fixed by the city manager, or his designee of the City of Denison. 
These restrictions with respect to required improvements are made to ensure the installation of such required improvements and to give notice to each owner and to each prospective owner of lots in the subdivision until said required improvements are actually made or provided for on the entire block on the street and/or streets on which the property abuts as described herein and in compliance with the City of Denison specifications. 
_____ 
(8)  A certificate of dedication of all streets, public highways, alleys, parks and other land intended for public use, signed by the owner or owners and by all other parties who have mortgage or lien interests in the property and acknowledged before a notary public. All deed restrictions that are to be filed with the plat shall be shown or filed separately. The certificate of dedication shall be substantially in the following form: 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF _______ 
I (we) the undersigned owner(s) of the land shown on this plat, and designated herein as the ___________ subdivision to the City of Denison, Texas, and whose name is subscribed hereto, hereby dedicate to the use of the public forever all streets, alleys, parks, water courses, drains, easements and public places thereon shown on the purpose and consideration therein expressed. I (we) further certify that all other parties who have a mortgage or lien interest in the ___________ subdivision have been notified and signed this plat. 
I (we) further acknowledge that the dedications and/or exactions made herein are proportional to the impact of the subdivision upon the public services required in order that the development will comport with the present and future growth needs of the City; I (we), my (our) successors and assigns hereby waive any claim, damage, or cause of action that I (we) may have as a result of the dedication of exactions made herein. 
___________ 
Owner 
___________ 
Signature of Party with 
Mortgage or Lien Interest 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF _______ 
I (we) the undersigned owner(s) of the land shown on this plat, and designated herein as the ___________ subdivision to the City of Denison, Texas, and whose name is subscribed hereto, hereby dedicate to the use of the public forever all streets, alleys, parks, water courses, drains, easements and public places thereon shown on the purpose and consideration therein expressed. I (we) further certify that all other parties who have a mortgage or lien interest in the ___________ subdivision have been notified and signed this plat. 
Given upon my hand and seal of office this ___ day of _______, 20___. 
___________ 
Notary Public in and for 
the State of Texas 
My Commission Expires: ___________ 
My Commission Expires: ___________ 
(9)  A waiver of claim for damages against the city occasioned by the establishment of grades or the alteration of the surface of any portion of existing streets and alleys to conform to the grades established in the subdivision. 
(10)  Certification by a registered engineer or a licensed state land surveyor, duly licensed by the state, to the effect that the plan represents a survey made by him, and that all the necessary survey monuments are correctly shown thereon. 
(11)  The following certificate shall be placed on the plat after it has been finally approved by the planning director: 
I hereby certify that the above and foregoing plat of ___________ Addition to the City of Denison, Texas, was approved by the Planning Director of the City of Denison on the ___ day of _______, 20___. 
  ___________ 
  Planning Director 
(12)  Certificates from Grayson County showing that all taxes have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
_____
DIVISION 4. - MINOR PLATS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4971, § 3, adopted Oct. 1, 2018, repealed div. 4 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former div. 4, §§ 22-32-22-37, pertained to final plats, and derived from Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 18, 2013. 

Sec. 22-34. - Applicability. 
    An application for approval of a minor plat may be filed only when all of the following circumstances apply: 
(1)  The proposed division results in four (4) or fewer lots; 
(2)  All lots in the proposed subdivision front onto an existing public or private street and the construction or extension of a street or alley is not required to meet the requirements of these subdivision regulations; and 
(3)  The plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-35. - Procedures. 
(a)  Decision. The planning director shall decide whether to approve, approve with conditions, or refer the minor plat to the planning and zoning commission for consideration and action. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-36. - Criteria for decision. 
    The director of planning, or the planning and zoning commission, if the director cannot approve, shall decide whether to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the minor plat application based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  The minor plat application is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property, all other requirements of these subdivision regulations that apply to the plat, and standards of any approved development agreement; 
(2)  All lots to be created by the plat already are adequately served by all required utilities and services, and 
(3)  The plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-37. - Expiration and recording. 
(a)  Expiration. The approval of a minor plat application shall remain in effect for a period of one (1) year from the date that the application was approved or conditionally approved by the director, or the commission on appeal, during which period the applicant shall submit any required revisions for approval. If the minor plat has not been recorded within the one-year period, the minor plat approval shall expire and the plat shall be deemed null and void. 
(b)  Recording. The property owner shall submit the approved minor plat, following any required revisions, to the director, who shall cause the minor plat to be recorded in the property records of the county in which the land is located. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
DIVISION 5. - DEVELOPMENT PLATS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4971, § 3, adopted Oct. 1, 2018, repealed div. 5 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former div. 5, §§ 22-38-22-41, pertained to minor plats, and derived from Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 18, 2013. 

Sec. 22-38. - Purpose and applicability. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the development plat is to assure the adequacy of public facilities needed to serve the intended development and the overall compliance of such development with applicable requirements of these subdivision regulations where the land to be developed is not intended for division. 
(b)  Applicability. For purposes of this section, the term "development" means the construction of any building, structure or improvement of any nature (residential or nonresidential), or the enlargement of any external dimension thereof. This section shall apply to any land lying within the city or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The parcel is undeveloped; 
(2)  The development of any tract of land which has not been platted or replatted prior to the effective date of this ordinance [from which this article derives], unless expressly exempted herein; 
(3)  The development of any tract of land for which the property owner claims an exemption from the city's requirements for subdivision plats, including requirements to replat; 
(4)  The development of any tract of land for which the only access is a private easement/street; 
(5)  The division of any tract of land resulting in parcels or lots each of which is greater than five (5) acres in size, and where no public improvement is proposed to be dedicated; 
(6)  The development of a manufactured housing rental community. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-39. - Procedures. 
    The development plat application shall be processed and decided in the same manner as a final plat application. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-40. - Criteria for decision. 
    The following criteria shall be used to determine whether the application for a development plat shall be approved, or denied: 
(1)  The development plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property, and any approved development agreement; 
(2)  The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, drainage and park facilities to serve the development site conform to the master facilities plans for such facilities, including without limitation the water facilities, wastewater facilities, transportation, drainage and other master facilities plans; 
(3)  The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, drainage and park facilities are adequate to serve the development; 
(4)  Easements or rights-of-way for all public water, wastewater, roadway and drainage facilities have been designated; 
(5)  Fire lanes access easements or street rights-of-way have been provided for access to all fire hydrants and fire department connections; and 
(6)  The plat meets any county standards to be applied under an interlocal agreement between the city and a county under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 242, where the proposed development is located in whole or in part in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and in the county. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-41. - Expiration and extension. 
    Expiration and extension of a development plat shall be the same as for final plats. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-42. - Application submittal requirements. 
    A development plat application shall include all information required for a final plat, and additionally, shall show the location of each existing or proposed building, structure or improvement or proposed modification of the external configuration of the building, structure or improvement involving a change therein. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
DIVISION 6. - REPLATTING AND AMENDMENT PROCEDURES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4971, § 3, adopted Oct. 1, 2018, repealed div. 6 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former div. 6, §§ 22-43-22-47, pertained to development plats, and derived from Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 18, 2013. 

Sec. 22-43. - Replats. 
(a)  Replat required. Unless otherwise expressly provided for herein, a property owner who proposes to replat any portion of an already approved final plat, other than to amend or vacate the plat, must first obtain approval for the replat under the same standards and by the same procedures prescribed for the platting of land by these regulations. 
(b)  Replatting without vacating preceding plat. A replat of a final plat or portion of a final plat may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that plat if the replat: 
(1)  Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted; 
(2)  Is approved, after a public hearing on the matter at which parties in interest and citizens have an opportunity to be heard, by the commission; and 
(3)  Does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions previously incorporated in the final plat. 
(c)  Additional requirements for certain replats. 
(1)  In addition to compliance with subsection (b), a replat without vacation of the preceding plat must conform to the requirements of this section if: 
(A)  During the preceding five (5) years, any of the area to be replatted was limited by an interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than two (2) residential units per lot; or 
(B)  Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more than two (2) residential units per lot. 
(C)  Compliance with this subsection (c) is not required for approval of a replat of part of a preceding plat if the area to be replatted was designated or reserved for other than single or duplex family residential use by notation on the last legally recorded plat or in the legally recorded restrictions applicable to the plat. 
(2)  Notice of the hearing required under subsection (b) shall be given before the fifteenth (15th) day before the date of the hearing by publication in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the county and by written notice, with a copy of subsection (c) attached, forwarded by the commission to the owners, as indicated on the most recently approved ad valorem tax roll of the city, of property in the original subdivision within two hundred (200) feet of the property upon which the replat is requested. The written notice may be delivered by depositing the notice, properly addressed with postage prepaid, in a post office or postal depository within the boundaries of the city. 
(3)  If the proposed replat requires a variance and is protested in accordance with subsection (A) below, approval of the replat requires the affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the commission members present. 
(A)  A legal protest consists of written instruments signed by the owners of at least twenty (20) percent of the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed replat and extending two hundred (200) feet from that area, but within the original subdivision. The protest must be filed with the planning and zoning commission prior to the close of the public hearing. 
(B)  In computing the percentage of land area under subsection (A), the area of streets and alleys shall be included. 
(4)  Any replat which adds or deletes lots must include the original lot boundaries. 
(d)  Procedures. Procedure applicable to final plats shall apply to replats, except that a public hearing shall be convened by the commission in accordance with subsection (b). 
(e)  Criteria for approval. The replat of the subdivision shall meet all the requirements for a final plat for a new subdivision that are applicable, as well as the requirements of this section. 
(f)  Application submittal requirements. The application for replatting shall be accompanied by the number of copies required for a final plat application, a completed application form, the required filing fee, and a certificate showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that no delinquent taxes exist against the property. 
(g)  Recording. Replats are subject to the same recording requirements as final plats. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-44. - Amending plats. 
(a)  Applicability. An amending plat may be filed to: 
(1)  Correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat; 
(2)  Add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat; 
(3)  Correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat; 
(4)  Indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments; 
(5)  Show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character or that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat; 
(6)  Correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the municipal authority responsible for approving plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded plats; 
(7)  Correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two (2) adjacent lots if: 
(A)  Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat; 
(B)  Neither lot is abolished; 
(C)  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and 
(D)  The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the owners in the plat; 
(8)  Relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line or easement; 
(9)  Relocate one (1) or more lot lines between one (1) or more adjacent lots if: 
(A)  The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat; 
(B)  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and 
(C)  The amendment does not increase the number of lots; or 
(10)  Make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six (6) or fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat if: 
(A)  The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the city; 
(B)  The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and 
(C)  The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the city has approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area; or 
(11)  Replat one (1) or more lots fronting on an existing street if: 
(A)  The owners of all those lots join in the application for the amending plat; 
(B)  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; 
(C)  The amendment does not increase the number of lots; 
(D)  The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities. 
The amended plat shall be entitled and clearly state that it is an "amended plat." It shall also state the specific lots affected or changed as a result of the amended plat, and shall include the original subdivision plat boundary. All references to "final plat" or "replat" shall be removed. 
(b)  Procedures. 
(1)  The planning director shall decide whether to approve, approve with conditions, or refer the amending plat to the planning and zoning commission for consideration and action. 
(2)  Legal notice, a public hearing, and the notification of adjacent and nearby property owners are not required for the approval and issuance of an amending plat. 
(3)  Approval of an amended plat shall expire unless the amended plat is recorded within ninety (90) days after the date of final approval of the amended plat. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-45. - Plat vacation. 
(a)  By property owner. The property owner of the tract covered by a plat may vacate, upon the approval of the planning and zoning commission, the plat at any time before any lot in the plat is sold. The plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the plat vacated is approved and recorded in the manner prescribed for the original plat. 
(b)  By all lot owners. If some or all of the lots covered by the plat have been sold, the plat, or any part of the plat, may be vacated on the application of all the owners of lots in the plat with approval obtained in the manner prescribed for the original plat. 
(c)  Criteria. The commission shall approve the petition for vacation on such terms and conditions as are in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.013, and as are reasonable to protect the public health, safety and welfare. As a condition of vacation of the plat, the commission may direct the petitioners to prepare a revised final plat in accordance with these regulations such that the property does not become "unplatted". 
(d)  Effect of action. On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the vacated plat shall have no effect. Regardless of the city's action on the petition, the property owner or developer will have no right to a refund of any monies, fees or charges paid to the city nor to the return of any property or consideration dedicated or delivered to the city, except as may have previously been agreed to by council. 
(e)  City-initiated plat vacation. 
(1)  General conditions. The planning and zoning commission, on its motion, may vacate the plat of an approved subdivision in whole or in part when: 
(A)  No lots within the approved plat have been sold within five (5) years from the date that the plat was signed by the city; 
(B)  The property owner has breached an improvement agreement and the city is unable to obtain funds with which to complete construction of public improvements, except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by property owner or its successor; or 
(C)  The plat has been of record for more than five (5) years and the city determines that the further sale of lots within the subdivision or addition presents a threat to public health, safety and/or welfare, except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the property owner or its successors. 
(2)  Procedure. The city shall publish notice in the official city newspaper of general circulation, and shall also notify the property owner(s) within the boundaries of the plat proposed to be vacated. The notice shall state the time and place for a public hearing on the motion to vacate the subdivision or addition plat. The commission shall approve the vacation only if the criteria and conditions cited above are satisfied. 
(3)  Record of notice. If the commission approves vacating a plat, the city secretary shall record a copy of the resolution or ordinance in the office of the county clerk of the county with a copy of the area or plat vacated. If the commission adopts a resolution or ordinance vacating a plat in part, it shall cause a revised final plat to be recorded which shows that portion of the original plat that has been vacated and that portion that has not been vacated. On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument the vacated plat has no effect. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
DIVISION 7. - CONVEYANCE PLATS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4971, § 3, adopted Oct. 1, 2018, repealed div. 7 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former div. 7, §§ 22-48-22-50, pertained to replatting and amendment procedures, and derived from Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 18, 2013. 

Sec. 22-46. - Purpose and applicability. 
(a)  Purpose. A conveyance plat may be used solely for the purpose of subdividing land into large tracts solely for purposes of sale but not for purposes of development. 
(b)  Applicability. Conveyance plats may only be used within city limits or within areas subject to an executed development agreement authorized by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.172 et seq. Unless provided otherwise in a development agreement, all parcels created by conveyance plats must be a minimum five (5) acres in size. 
(c)  Effect. 
(1)  Conveyance plat approval and acceptance by the city does not relieve the owner from obligations, including fees, required by other sections of this or other ordinances of the city pertaining to the improvement of the property or extension of services as required to make the property suitable for development. 
(2)  Reservation of right-of-way shall not relieve the property owner from obligations for street dedication, construction or assessments associated with public street improvement programs. 
(3)  Final platting requirements. 
(A)  No building permits shall be issued nor permanent utility service provided for land which has only received approval as a conveyance plat. 
(B)  A conveyance plat may be superseded by a preliminary plat, final plat, or minor plat in total or in part through compliance with the procedures and requirements of these subdivision regulations. This process does not require a replat as described in section 22-48. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-47. - Procedures. 
(a)  A conveyance plat application shall be decided under the procedures for deciding a minor plat application pursuant to article II, division 5. 
(b)  Filing and signing. After the approval of the conveyance plat by the planning director, the applicant shall submit filing fees and the required number of copies for filing to the secretary to the commission for filing with the county. Any conveyance plat which has not been filed with the county within six (6) months of the date of approval shall be void. Prior to filing, the planning director shall endorse approval of the conveyance plat. One (1) copy of the recorded conveyance plat will be forwarded to the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-48. - Criteria for decision. 
(a)  Access. All tracts, parcels, lots or sites created by a conveyance plat shall have frontage and access to an existing or proposed public street defined on the master thoroughfare plan or an existing standard street meeting city construction standards and accessing the existing city street system. 
(b)  Reservation of rights-of-way. Conveyance plats must provide for the reservation of future rights-of-way of planned roadways. Right-of-way reservation acknowledges the future obligation to dedicate right-of-way for public thoroughfares and streets specified on the city's master thoroughfare plan or approved concept plan. Reservation of right-of-way does not grant any right or interest in the property to the city or other entity. The final alignment may be adjusted upon final platting in order to meet engineering design standards. 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
Sec. 22-49. - Application submittal requirements. 
    A conveyance plat and associated documents shall include all information listed below: 
(1)  The boundary lines with accurate distances and bearings and the exact location and width of all existing or recorded streets intersecting the boundary of the tract. 
(2)  True bearings and distances to the nearest established street lines or official monuments, which shall be accurately described on the plat; 
(3)  Municipal, township, county, or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision or addition by distances and bearings. 
(4)  The location of the subdivision or addition with reference to the abstract and survey records of the county. 
(5)  The exact layout including: 
(A)  Street names (if known or proposed). 
(B)  The length of all arcs, radii, internal angles, points of curvature, length, and bearings of the tangents. 
(C)  Rights-of-way specifying their provision by reservation. 
(D)  All lot numbers and lines with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths of feet and with bearings and angles to street and alley lines. 
(6)  The accurate location, material, and approximate size of all monuments and corners, as provided in section 22-107. 
(7)  Proposed name of the subdivision or addition. 
(8)  Name and address of the property owner. 
(9)  North point, scale, and date. 
(10)  Certification by a registered public surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him and that all the monuments shown thereon actually exist, and their location, size, and material description are correctly shown. 
(11)  Boundary survey closure and area calculations. 
(12)  A certificate of ownership and dedication of all street and alley rights-of-way to public use forever, signed and acknowledged before a notary public by the owner and lien holder of the land along with complete and accurate description of the land subdivided and the streets reserved. 
(13)  All conveyance plats must be titled "conveyance plat" and carry the following wording: 
"A conveyance plat is a record of property approved by the city for the purpose of sale or conveyance in its entirety or interests thereon defined. No building permit shall be issued nor permanent public utility service provided until a final plat is approved, filed of record and public improvements accepted in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Denison. Selling a portion of this property by metes and bounds, except as shown on an approved, filed and accepted conveyance plat, final plat or replat is a violation of the city Ordinance and State Law." 
(Ord. No. 4971, § 3, 10-1-18) 
DIVISION 8. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4971, § 3, adopted Oct. 1, 2018, repealed former div. 8, §§ 22-51-22-54, which pertained to conveyance plats, and derived from Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 18, 2013. 

Secs. 22-50-22-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - APPELLATE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 22-55. - Petition for variance. 
(a)  Hardship. Where the planning and zoning commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. 
(b)  Conditions. In granting variances and modifications, the planning and zoning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(c)  Applicability. The procedures and standards of this section do not apply to an appeal to the city council granted pursuant to section 22-57 of these subdivision regulations, or to any relief granted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-55A. - Plat appeals. 
    The applicant, the city manager or his designee may appeal the decision of the commission with regard to a master plat, preliminary plat, final plat, development plat, replat, conveyance plat, or minor plat by filing a written notice of appeal with the planning department no later than ten (10) days after the date on which the commission notifies the applicant of its decision. The notice of appeal shall set forth the basis for the appeal. The city council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than thirty (30) days after the date on which the notice of appeal is filed. The council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the commission. The decision of the city council is final. If no appeal is filed, the decision of the commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 4930, § 3, 2-5-18) 
Sec. 22-56. - Petition for vested rights. 
(a)  Vested rights petition. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of a vested rights petition is to determine whether one (1) or more standards of these subdivision regulations should not be applied to a preliminary or final plat application by operation of state law, or whether certain plats are subject to expiration. 
(2)  Applicability. A vested rights petition may be filed with an application for a preliminary or final plat application. A vested rights petition also may be filed to prevent expiration of certain plats pursuant to sections 22-8, 22-30 or 22-35. 
(3)  Effect. Upon granting of a vested rights petition in whole or in part, the plat application shall be decided in accordance with the standards specified in the relief order based on prior subdivision requirements or development standards, or the approved plat otherwise subject to expiration shall be extended. 
(b)  Petition requirements. 
(1)  Who may petition. A vested rights petition may be filed by a property owner or the owner's authorized agents, including the applicant, with a preliminary or final plat application, or by the holder of a plat subject to expiration pursuant to sections 22-8, 22-30 or 22-35. 
(2)  Form of petition. The vested rights petition shall allege that the petitioner has a vested right for some or all of the land subject to the plat application under chapter 245, Texas Local Government Code, or successor statute, or pursuant to section 43.002, Texas Local Government Code, or successor statute, that requires the city to review and decide the application under standards in effect prior to the effective date of the currently applicable standards. The petition shall include the following information and documents: 
(A)  A narrative description of the grounds for the petition; 
(B)  A copy of each approved or pending development application which is the basis for the contention that the city may not apply current standards to the plat application which is the subject of the petition; 
(C)  The date of submittal of the plat application, or of a development plan pursuant to which the plat was subsequently filed, if different from the official filing date established under section 22-12; 
(D)  The date the project for which the application for the plat was submitted was commenced; 
(E)  Identification of all standards otherwise applicable to the plat application from which relief is sought; 
(F)  Identification of the standards which the petitioner contends apply to the plat application; 
(G)  Identification of any current standards which petitioner agrees can be applied to the plat application at issue; 
(H)  A copy of any prior vested rights determination by the city involving the same land; and 
(I)  Where the petitioner alleges that a plat subject to expiration under sections 22-8, 22-30 or 22-35 should not be terminated, a description of the events, including any plat or other development applications on file, that should prevent such termination. 
(3)  Time for filing petition. A vested rights petition shall be filed with a plat application for which a vested right is claimed, except that the petition may be filed before the date of expiration of a plat subject to expiration under sections 22-8, 22-30 or 22-35. 
(c)  Processing of petition and decision. 
(1)  Responsible official. The planning and zoning administrator shall process the vested rights petition. A copy of the petition shall be forwarded to the city attorney following acceptance. 
(2)  Decision by commission on petition. The commission shall render a decision on the vested rights petition in conjunction with its decision on the plat application, based upon the report and recommendation of the administrator. 
(3)  Appeal of decision on petition. The petitioner or any interested person may appeal the commission's decision on the vested rights petition within ten (10) working days of the date of such decision to the city council. An appeal under this subsection stays acceptance of filing of any related development applications. 
(4)  Decision by city council. The city council on appeal shall decide the vested rights petition. The request must be accompanied by a waiver of the time for decision on the plat application imposed under these subdivision regulations pending decision by the council, which shall stay further proceedings on the application. The council shall decide the petition, after considering the administrator's report and the decision by the planning and zoning commission within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal. 
(d)  Action on petition and order. 
(1)  Action on the petition. The decision-maker on the vested rights petition may take any of the following actions: 
(A)  Deny the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the plat application shall be reviewed and decided under currently applicable standards; 
(B)  Grant the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the plat application shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with the standards contained in identified prior subdivision regulations; or 
(C)  Grant the relief requested in part, and direct that certain identified current standards shall be applied to the plat application, while standards contained in identified prior subdivision regulations also shall be applied; or 
(D)  For petitions filed pursuant to sections 22-8, 22-30 or 22-35, determine whether the approved plat should be terminated, or specify the expiration date or the conditions of expiration for such plat. 
(2)  Order on petition. The administrator's report and each decision on the vested rights petition shall be memorialized in an order identifying the following: 
(A)  The nature of the relief granted, if any; 
(B)  The approved or filed plat application(s) or other development application(s) upon which relief is premised under the petition; 
(C)  Current standards which shall apply to the plat application for which relief is sought; 
(D)  Prior standards which shall apply to the plat application for which relief is sought, including any procedural standards; 
(E)  The statutory exception or other grounds upon which relief is denied in whole or in part on the petition; 
(F)  For petitions filed pursuant to section 22-8, 22-30 or 22-35, determine whether the approved plat should be terminated, and specify the expiration date or the conditions of expiration for the plat. 
(e)  Criteria for approval. The decision-maker shall decide the vested rights petition based upon the following factors: 
(1)  The nature and extent of prior plat or other development applications filed or approved for the land subject to the petition; 
(2)  Whether any prior vested rights determinations have been made with respect to the property subject to the petition; 
(3)  Whether any prior approved applications for the property have expired or have been terminated in accordance with law; 
(4)  Whether any statutory exception applies to the standards in the current subdivision regulations from which the applicant seeks relief; 
(5)  Whether any prior approved plat or other development applications relied upon by the petitioner have expired; 
(6)  For petitions filed pursuant to section 22-8, 22-30 or 22-35, whether any of the events preventing expiration have occurred. 
(f)  Application following relief order. Following the city's final decision on the vested rights petition, the property owner shall conform the plat application for which relief is sought to such decision. If the plat application on file is consistent with the relief granted on the vested rights petition, no revisions are necessary. Where proceedings have been stayed on the plat application pending referral of the vested rights petition to the city council, proceedings on the application shall resume after the council's decision on the vested rights petition. 
(g)  Expiration. Relief granted on a vested rights petition shall expire on occurrence of one (1) of the following events: 
(1)  The petitioner or property owner fails to submit a required revised plat application consistent with the relief granted within thirty (30) days of the final decision on the petition; 
(2)  The plat application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition is denied under the criteria made applicable through the relief granted on the petition; or 
(3)  The plat application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition expires. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-57. - Proportionality appeal. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Public infrastructure improvement means a water, wastewater, roadway, drainage or park facility that is a part of one (1) or more of the city's public facilities systems development. 
(2)  Public facilities system means the collection of water, wastewater, roadway, drainage or park facilities owned or operated by or in behalf of the city for the purpose of providing services to the public, including existing and new developments. 
(b)  Purpose, applicability and effect. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of a proportionality appeal is to assure that a requirement to dedicate, construct or pay a fee for a public infrastructure improvement imposed on a proposed plat as a condition of approval does not result in a disproportionate cost burden on the property owner, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the demands created by the proposed development on the city's public facilities systems. 
(2)  Applicability. An appeal under this section may be filed by a property owner to contest any requirement to dedicate land, to construct improvements or to pay development fees, other than impact fees, for a public infrastructure improvement, which requirement is imposed under the city's subdivision regulations to a plat application pursuant to this chapter, whether the requirement is applicable under uniform standards, or is imposed pursuant to an individual evaluation of the proposed subdivision. 
(c)  Proportionality determination by public works director. Prior to a decision by the planning and zoning commission on a preliminary plat application, or if no preliminary plat application is required, on a final plat application, filed under this chapter, the public works director, or his designee, shall prepare a report affirming that each public infrastructure improvement to be imposed as a condition of plat approval is roughly proportionate to the demand created by the development on the city's public facilities systems, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the development proposed. The cost of such proportionality analysis shall be borne solely by the applicant. 
(1)  In making his proportionality determination, the public works director may rely upon categorical findings pertaining to on-site improvements; the proposed or potential use of the land; the timing and sequence of development in relation to availability of adequate levels of public facilities; impact fee studies or other studies that measure the demand for services created by the development and the impact on the city's public facilities systems; the function of the public infrastructure improvements in serving the proposed development; the degree to which public infrastructure improvements to serve the subdivision are supplied by other developments; the anticipated participation by the city in the costs of such improvements; any reimbursements for the costs of public infrastructure improvements for which the proposed development is eligible; or any other information relating to the mitigating effects of the public infrastructure improvements on the impacts created by the development on the city's public facilities systems. 
(2)  Based upon his proportionality determination, the public works director shall affirm that the public infrastructure improvement requirements of the subdivision regulations do not impose costs on the developer for such improvements that exceed those roughly proportionate to those incurred by the city in providing public facilities to serve the development. 
(3)  The public works director may promulgate any application requirements that may assist in making the proportionality determination required by this subsection. 
(d)  Commission determination. The city planning and zoning commission shall take into account the public works director's report concerning the proportionality of public infrastructure improvement requirements to be applied to a proposed preliminary or final plat application, as the case may be, in making its decision on the plat application, and shall identify any variation to the requirements that are to be included as conditions to plat approval. 
(e)  Appeals. 
(1)  Who may appeal. An appeal to the city council under this section may be filed by a property owner or the applicant for a preliminary or final plat, in which a requirement to dedicate land for, construct or pay a fee, other than an impact fee, for a public infrastructure improvement has been applied or attached as a condition of approval, or as grounds for denying the plat application. 
(2)  Time for filing and request for extension of time. The appeal shall be filed in writing within ten (10) days of the date the planning and zoning commission takes action applying the public infrastructure improvement requirement to the plat application. The appeal shall be filed with the city secretary and shall be forwarded to the city council for consideration in conjunction with its deliberations on the plat application. The applicant may request postponement of consideration of the plat application by the city council pending preparation of the study required by subsection (4), in which case the applicant shall also waive the statutory period for deciding plats for the time needed to decide the appeal by the city council. 
(3)  Form of appeal. An appeal under this section shall allege that application of the standard or the imposition of conditions relating to the dedication, construction or fee requirement is not roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed development on the city's public facilities systems, or does not reasonably benefit the proposed development. 
(4)  Study required. The appellant shall provide a study in support of the appeal that includes the following information within thirty (30) days of the date of appeal, unless a longer time is requested: 
(A)  Total capacity of the city's water, wastewater, roadway, drainage or park system to be utilized by the proposed development, employing standard measures of capacity and equivalency tables relating the type of development proposed to the quantity of system capacity to be consumed by the development. If the proposed development is to be developed in phases, such information also shall be provided for the entire development proposed, including any phases already developed. 
(B)  Total capacity to be supplied to the city's water, wastewater, roadway, drainage or park facilities system by the dedication of an interest in land, construction of improvements or fee contribution. If the plat application is proposed as a phased development, the information shall include any capacity supplied by prior dedication, construction or fee payments. 
(C)  Comparison of the capacity of the city's public facilities system(s) to be consumed by the proposed development with the capacity to be supplied to such system(s) by the proposed dedication of an interest in land, construction of improvements, or fee payment. In making this comparison, the impacts on the city's public facilities system(s) from the entire development shall be considered. 
(D)  The amount of any city participation in the costs of oversizing the public infrastructure improvement to be constructed in accordance with the city's requirements. 
(E)  Any other information that shows the alleged disproportionality between the impacts created by the proposed development and the dedication, construction or fee requirement imposed by the city. 
(f)  Land in extraterritorial jurisdiction. Where the subdivision or the public infrastructure improvements are located in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and are to be dedicated to a county under an interlocal agreement under V.C.T.A. Local Government Code ch. 242, an appeal or study in support of the appeal shall not be accepted as complete for filing by the planning and zoning administrator unless the appeal or study is accompanied by verification that a copy has been delivered to the county in which the facilities are to be located. 
(g)  Processing application. 
(1)  Responsible official. The public works director is the responsible official for evaluation and processing of an appeal under this section. Where the appeal is for relief from dedication of rights-of-way for or construction of a facility in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction that is to be dedicated to a county under an interlocal agreement under V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, ch. 242, the public works director shall coordinate a recommendation with the county responsible for reviewing plats in the county. 
(2)  Evaluation, recommendation. The public works director shall evaluate the appeal and supporting study and shall make a recommendation to the city council based upon the information contained in the study, any comments received from the county, and the public works director's analysis based upon the same factors considered in making his original proportionality determination. 
(h)  Decision. The city council shall decide the appeal in conjunction with its decision on the plat application. The council shall base its decision on the criteria listed in subsection (i), and may take one (1) of the following actions. 
(1)  Deny the appeal, and impose the standard or condition on the plat application in accordance with the public works director's recommendation or the planning and zoning commission's decision on the plat; or 
(2)  Deny the appeal, upon finding that the proposed dedication, construction or fee requirements are inadequate to offset the impacts of the subdivision on the public facilities system for water, wastewater, roadway, drainage or park improvements, and either deny the plat application or require that additional public infrastructure improvements be made as a condition of approval of the application; or 
(3)  Grant the appeal, and waive in whole or in part any dedication, construction or fee requirement for public infrastructure improvements to the extent necessary to achieve proportionality; or 
(4)  Grant the appeal, and direct that the city participate in the costs of acquiring land for or constructing the public infrastructure improvement under standard participation policies. 
(i)  Criteria for approval. In deciding an appeal under this section, the city council shall determine whether the application of the standard or condition requiring dedication of an interest in land for, construction of, or payment of a fee for public infrastructure improvements is roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed subdivision on the city's public facilities systems for water, wastewater, roadway, drainage or park facilities, and reasonably benefits the development. In making such determination, the council shall consider the evidence submitted by the appellant, the public works director's report and recommendation, considering in particular the factors identified in subsection (c), and, where the property is located within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, any recommendations from the county. 
(j)  Action following decision. If the relief requested under the proportionality appeal is granted in whole or in part by the city council, the dedication, construction or fee requirement initially imposed by the planning and zoning commission as a condition of plat approval shall be modified accordingly, and the standards applied or the conditions attached to commission's approval of the plat application shall be conformed to the relief granted. Thereafter, the appellant shall resubmit the plat application to the city council within ninety (90) days of the date relief under the appeal is granted, in whole or in part, showing conformity with the city council's decision on the appeal. 
(k)  Expiration of relief. If an applicant for plat approval prevails on a proportionality appeal, but fails to conform the plat to the relief granted by the city council with the ninety-day period provided, the relief granted by the city council on the appeal shall expire. 
(1)  The council may extend the time for filing the revised plat application for good cause shown, but in any event, the expiration date for the relief granted shall not be extended beyond one (1) year from the date relief was granted on the appeal. 
(2)  If the plat application is modified to increase the number of residential units or the intensity of non-residential uses, the responsible official may require a new study to validate the relief granted by the city council. 
(3)  If the plat application for which relief was granted is denied on other grounds, a new petition for relief shall be required on any subsequent application. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT, SURETY AND CITY PARTICIPATION 
DIVISION 1. - CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 22-58. - Withholding services and permits. 
(a)  No building permit nor certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a lot, building site, building or use unless all subdivision improvements have been completed and a final plat or development plat has been approved by the city and recorded at the county. 
(b)  The city will withhold all city services and improvements of whatsoever nature, including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of all other city services from any subdivision or property until all of the street, utility, storm drainage and other public improvements, as well as lot improvements such as retaining walls and grading and installation of improvements required for proper lot drainage and prevention of soil erosion on the individual residential lots, are properly constructed according to the approved engineering plans and to city standards, and until such public improvements are dedicated to and accepted by the city. 
(c)  No grading or other land disturbance shall occur on property to be subdivided or developed until construction plans, grading and stormwater management plans have been approved and a grading permit has been issued. 
(d)  The procedures and standards in this article shall apply equally to subdivision improvement located within the boundaries of the plat and to off-site improvements serving the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13; Ord. No. 4718, § 1, 11-18-13) 
Sec. 22-59. - Construction plans. 
(a)  The public works director shall review and approve, approve with conditions or disapprove construction plans following approval of a preliminary plat, or where no preliminary plat is authorized, prior to application for final plat approval and within thirty (30) business days after the plans have been determined to be complete in accordance with the procedures in section 22-12. Incomplete plans shall be returned to the applicant. 
(1)  If construction plans are approved, the plans shall be marked "approved" and one (1) set shall be returned to the applicant, and at least two (2) sets shall be retained in the city's files. 
(2)  Once the construction plans are approved, the property owner shall provide additional sets of the approved plans to the city, as specified by the public works director, for use during construction. A full set of the city-approved and stamped construction plans must be available for inspection on the job site at all times. 
(b)  If the conditions of approval require revision(s) to the construction plans, one (1) set shall be marked with objections noted (on the plans themselves and/or in memo format) and returned to the applicant for correction, whereupon the applicant's engineer shall correct the plans as requested and resubmit them for decision. A properly revised set of construction plans shall be submitted to the public works director within ten (10) working days of receipt of the notice of the city's engineer's decision. 
(c)  Approval of construction plans authorizes the property owner to install public improvements in rights-of-way offered for dedication to the public under an approved preliminary or final plat, subject to the requirements of this division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-60. - Timing of public improvements. 
(a)  Completion prior to final plat approval. Except as provided below, after approval of a preliminary plat and before an approved final plat application is filed, the installation of all public improvements required to serve the subdivision, whether to be located off-site or on-site, including but not limited to water, wastewater, drainage, roadway and park improvements, shall be finally completed in accordance with the approved construction plans. The installation of improvements required for proper drainage and prevention of soil erosion on individual residential lots, and improvements on any common areas, also shall be finally completed prior to final plat approval in accordance with the approved construction plans. 
(b)  Deeds in escrow. As a condition of preliminary plat approval, the commission may require the property owner to deposit deeds in escrow describing by metes and bounds street rights-of-way, park land, and easements required by these regulations, conveying such rights-of-way, park land and easements to the city, pending acceptance of improvements by the city and recordation of the final plat. In the event the property owner fails to complete the public improvements, and the improvements are deemed necessary for the preservation of the public health and safety, the city may compel the delivery and recording of the deeds in order to complete the improvements as required. 
(c)  Installation after final plat approval. The commission on request of the applicant may defer the obligation to install one (1) or more public improvements to serve the subdivision until after final plat approval. The request shall be submitted with an application for preliminary plat approval, or if no preliminary plat is required or allowed, the request shall be submitted with the final plat application. In either case, deferral of the obligation to install public improvements shall be conditioned on execution of a subdivision improvement agreement and sufficient surety to secure the obligations defined in the agreement pursuant to article III, division 2. 
(d)  Off-site easements. All necessary off-site easements required for installation of off-site public improvements to serve the subdivision or development shall be acquired by the subdivider and conveyed solely to the city by a deed approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-61. - Subdivision improvement agreement. 
(a)  Obligations under agreement. Following final plat approval, but prior to recordation, and whenever public improvements to serve the development are to be constructed pursuant to these regulations, the property owner shall enter into a subdivision improvement agreement. The owner shall be bound to complete all required public improvements, including residential lot improvements for drainage or erosion control, and common area improvements, either before the final plat is recorded, or, in the event that a request for delay in improvements has been approved, no later than one (1) year following the date upon which the final plat is approved. The agreement shall be subject to review and approval by the city attorney, and shall be approved by the city council. The agreement shall contain the following provisions: 
(1)  Covenants to complete the improvements; 
(2)  Covenants to warrant the improvements for a period of one (1) year following acceptance by the city; 
(3)  Covenants to provide a surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit issued by a financial institution acceptable to the city in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the costs of the improvements for such period; 
(4)  Provisions for participation in the costs of the improvements by the city, where applicable, and a performance bond for such improvements from the contractor, with the city as a co-obligee; 
(5)  Provisions for securing the obligations of the agreement, where the city has approved a request to delay installation of the facilities until after final plat approval; and 
(6)  Such other terms and conditions as are agreed to by the property owner and city. 
(b)  Covenants to run with the land. The subdivision improvement agreement shall provide that the covenants contained in the agreement run with the land and bind all successors, heirs and assignees of the property owner. All existing lienholders shall be required to execute the agreement or provide written consent to the covenants contained in the agreement. The city shall deliver a release to bona fide third party purchasers of individual lots when all required public improvements have been accepted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-62. - Pre-construction procedures. 
(a)  Initial authorization of construction. Following plat approval, written authorization is required from the city prior to beginning any development in the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction which affects erosion control, storm drainage, vegetation or tree removal, or a flood plain. 
(b)  Pre-construction conference. The city shall require that all contractors participating in the construction meet for a pre-construction conference to discuss the project prior to release of a grading permit and before any filling, excavation, or clearing. All contractors shall be familiar with and shall conform to the applicable standards in the city's subdivision regulations. 
(c)  Conditions prior to authorization. Prior to authorizing release for construction, the public works director shall be satisfied that the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The plat has been approved by the city (and any conditions of such approval have been satisfied); 
(2)  All required construction plans and engineering documents have been completed and approved by the city's engineer; 
(3)  All necessary off-site easements and dedications required for city-maintained facilities and not shown on the plat has been conveyed solely to the city, such as by filing of a separate instrument, with the proper signatures affixed. The original of the documents and the appropriate fees for filing the documents at the county shall be returned to the city prior to approval and release of the engineering plans by the public works director; 
(4)  All contractors participating in the construction shall be presented with a set of approved plans bearing the stamp of approval of the public works director, and at least one (1) set of these plans shall remain on the job; 
(5)  A complete list of the contractors, their representatives on the site, and telephone numbers where a responsible party may be reached at all times must be submitted to the city; and 
(6)  All applicable fees must be paid to the city. 
(d)  Nonpoint source pollution controls and tree protection. All nonpoint source pollution and erosion controls shall be in place, to the public works director's satisfaction, prior to commencement of construction on any property. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-63. - Inspection of public improvements. 
(a)  General procedure. With the concurrence of the city and at the subdivider's sole expense, the subdivider may provide inspection service through an engineer to ensure that construction is being accomplished in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the public works director once approved by the director. The subdivider shall notify the public works director forty-eight (48) hours prior to commencement of construction. This notice shall give the location and date of the start of construction. If the public works director determines it necessary, he shall have the right to inspect any construction work being performed to ensure that it is proceeding in accordance with the intent of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Changes in design. Any change in design that is required during construction should be made by the licensed professional engineer whose seal and signature are shown on the plans. Another engineer may make revisions to the original engineering plans if so authorized by the owner of the plans, and if those revisions are noted on the plans or documents. All revisions shall be approved by the public works director. 
(c)  Non-compliance with standards. If the public works director finds, upon inspection, that any of the required public improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the city's standards and criteria and design manuals, the property owner shall be responsible for completing and correcting the deficiencies (at his/her expense) such that they are brought into conformance with the applicable standards. 
(d)  Testing. Testing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in City of Denison standards for like work at the frequency specified thereon as directed by the public works director. It shall be the responsibility of the developer's engineer to coordinate the scheduling of all required tests with the testing laboratory. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-64. - Acceptance of public improvements. 
(a)  Submission of as-built plans or record drawings. The city shall not accept dedication of required public improvements until the applicant's engineer has certified to the public works director, through submission of a detailed "as-built" record drawing or survey plat of the property and any off-site easements, the location, dimensions, materials, and other information establishing that the public improvements have been built in accordance with the approved construction plans. Each as-built sheet shall show all changes made in the plans during construction and on each sheet there shall be an as-built stamp bearing the signature of the engineer and date. Required formats include: 
(1)  One (1) full-size mylar set (22" × 34" sheet size) 
(2)  Electronic drawing files of: 
(A)  Final plat; 
(B)  Water, wastewater and storm drainage layouts. 
(b)  Acceptance of improvements. When the public works director has determined that the public improvements have been installed in accordance with the approved construction plans, the public works director shall accept such improvements on behalf of the city. Acceptance of the improvements shall mean that the property owner has transferred all rights to all the public improvements to the city for use and maintenance. The public works director may accept dedication of a portion of the required public improvements, provided adequate surety has been given for the completion of all of other improvements. Upon acceptance of the required public improvements, the city shall issue a certificate to the property owner stating that all required public improvements have been satisfactorily completed. 
(c)  Acceptance of improvements for land in extraterritorial jurisdiction. Where the facilities to be constructed under the subdivision improvement agreement are located within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, and are to be dedicated to the county, the county shall satisfy itself that the public improvements have been constructed in accordance with approved construction plans, and are ready for acceptance by the county. The county shall notify the public works director of its findings with regard to the adequacy of public improvements constructed. 
(d)  Disclaimer. Approval of a preliminary or final plat by the city shall not constitute acceptance of any of the public improvements required to serve the subdivision or development. No public improvements shall be accepted for dedication by the city except in accordance with this section. The city may require the plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
DIVISION 2. - PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES 

Sec. 22-65. - Security for improvements. 
(a)  Security. Whenever the city permits an applicant to defer installation of public improvements until after approval of the final plat, it shall require the applicant to provide sufficient security, covering the completion of the public improvements. The security shall be in the form of cash escrow or, where authorized by the city, a performance bond or letter of credit or other security acceptable to the city attorney, as security for the promises contained in the improvement agreement. Security shall be in an amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the estimated cost of completion of the required public improvements and lot improvements. The issuer of any surety bond and letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the public works director and the city attorney. 
(b)  Letter of credit. If the city authorizes the applicant to post a letter of credit as security for its promises contained in the improvement agreement, the letter of credit shall: 
(1)  Be irrevocable; 
(2)  Be for a term sufficient to cover the completion, maintenance and warranty periods, but in no event less than one (1) year; 
(3)  Require only that the city present the issuer with a sight draft and a certificate signed by an authorized representative of the city certifying to the city's right to draw funds under the letter of credit; and 
(4)  The warranty period for the work shall be for one (1) year beyond the time required to complete the improvements. 
(c)  Performance bond. 
(1)  If the city authorizes the applicant to post a performance bond as security for its promises contained in the improvement agreement, the performance bond shall comply with the following requirements: 
(A)  All performance bonds must be in the forms acceptable to the public works director and the city attorney; 
(B)  All performance bonds must be executed by such sureties as are named in the current list of "Companies Holding Certificates of Authority as Acceptable Sureties on Federal Bonds and as Acceptable Reinsuring Companies," as published in Circular 570, as may be amended, by the Financial Management Service, Surety Bond Branch, U.S. Department of the Treasury; 
(C)  All performance bonds must be signed by an agent, and must be accompanied by a certified copy of the authority for him or her to act; 
(D)  All performance bonds shall be obtained from surety or insurance companies that are duly licensed or authorized in the State of Texas to issue performance bonds for the limits and coverage required. 
(2)  If the surety on any performance bond furnished by the applicant is declared bankrupt, or becomes insolvent, or its right to do business is terminated in the State of Texas, or the surety ceases to meet the requirements listed in Circular 570, the developer shall, within twenty (20) calendar days thereafter, substitute another performance bond and surety, both of which must be acceptable to the city. The city may withhold building permits, certificate or occupancy permits or utility connections until such improvements are completed or other surety is provided to the city. 
(d)  Release of obligation. As portions of the public improvements are completed in accordance with the criteria and design manuals and the approved engineering plans, the applicant may make written application to the public works director to reduce the amount of the original security. If the city is satisfied that such portion of the improvements has been completed in accordance with city standards, the city manager may, but is not required to, cause the amount of the security to be reduced by such amount that he or she deems appropriate, so that the remaining amount of the security adequately insures the completion of the remaining public improvements. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-66. - Failure to complete improvements. 
    If public improvements have not been installed within the terms of the subdivision improvement agreement, or have not been completed within the period specified by the city, the city may: 
(1)  Declare the agreement to be in default and require that all the public improvements be installed regardless of the extent of completion of the development at the time the agreement is declared to be in default; 
(2)  Suspend final plat approval until the public improvements are completed, and may record a document to that effect for the purpose of public notice; 
(3)  Obtain funds under the applicable security and complete the public improvements itself or through a third party; 
(4)  Assign its right to receive funds under the security to any third party, including a subsequent owner of the subdivision for which public improvements were not constructed, in whole or in part, in exchange for that subsequent owner's promise to complete the public improvements on the property; or 
(5)  Exercise any other rights or remedies available under the law. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-67. - Maintenance. 
    The property owner shall maintain all required public improvements for a period of one (1) year following acceptance of the subdivision by the city, and shall also provide a one-year maintenance bond (warranty) for one hundred (100) percent of the cost of improvements that all public improvements will be free from defects for a period of one (1) year following such acceptance by the city. Items to be maintained by the property owners' or homeowners' association shall be perpetual. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
DIVISION 3. - CITY PARTICIPATION 

Sec. 22-68. - Participation policies. 
(a)  City's share of improvement costs. The city shall participate in the costs of public improvements which are not for the primary benefit of the development and which have been oversized to serve developments other than for which the plat has been submitted for approval, only to the extent and according to the standards stated in this article and pursuant to the procedures herein set forth and only if an subdivision improvement agreement is entered into between the city and owner as provided in these regulations. 
(b)  Owner's responsibility. 
(1)  The subdivider shall be responsible for the entire costs of designing and installing all public improvements which primarily serve the subdivision or addition. Facilities required by these regulations shall be considered as primarily serving the subdivision unless otherwise determined by the city. 
(2)  The subdivider shall also be responsible for its share of the costs of oversized or offsite public improvements needed to assure adequacy of public facilities and services for the addition or subdivision, subject to participation and escrow policies contained in this article. 
(3)  The subdivider shall be responsible for extending streets, water, sewer or drainage facilities offsite to his property as required by the commission and/or required to ensure adequacy of public facilities.. 
(4)  Should a lift station be necessary to provide a sanitary sewer service to the subdivision or addition, the property owner shall construct the station and all appurtenances, at his own expense. A pro rata charge for such lift stations and appurtenances may be established as prescribed in division 4 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-69. - Facilities eligible for city participation. 
(a)  City participation. The city shall participate in the costs of installing public improvements, when such improvements have been authorized in a subdivision improvement agreement, or where the city council has authorized such approval following a proportionality appeal pursuant to section 22-57. 
(b)  Exceptions. The city shall not participate in the following costs: 
(1)  Those portions of the costs of any public improvements not expressly described in subsection (a). 
(2)  Costs of clearing and grubbing for streets and thoroughfares. 
(3)  Costs of constructing streets built wider than called for in the Thoroughfare Plan. 
(4)  Costs of lights, decorative finishes or other similar expenses, unless required by the public works director. 
(5)  Costs of pipe or box culvert, headwalls, regardless of size, or the costs of retention/detention ponds or slope protection, except rip-rap under a bridge. 
(6)  Costs of detours, pavement transitions and cross-overs. 
(7)  Costs of relocating or adjusting private utility company facilities. 
(8)  When reimbursing the property owner or developer pursuant to this division, the city shall pay a maximum of ten (10) percent of the city's participation cost for engineering fees, which includes surveying, construction staking and supervision, and the city shall not be responsible for any other incidental expenses or costs. 
(9)  Costs of underground box culverts not required by city. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-70. - Procedures for city participation. 
    Public works director determination. The public works director shall initially determine the city's participation in the cost of public improvements, if any, subject to approval of the city council following award of a bid submitted in accordance with the city's bidding procedures. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-71. - Escrow policies and procedures. 
(a)  Deposit with city. Whenever the city agrees to accept escrow deposits in lieu of construction by the owner of the property under these regulations, the property owner or developer shall deposit an amount equal to his share of the costs of design and construction in escrow with the city. Such amount shall be paid prior to release of construction plans by the public works director. In lieu of such payment at such time, the city may permit the property owner to contract with the city and shall agree in such contract that no building permit shall be issued for any lot included within said plat, or increment thereof, until the full amount of the escrow is paid, or a pro rata part thereof for the full increment if developed incrementally. The obligations and responsibilities of the property owner shall become those of property owner's transferees, successors and assigns; and the liability therefore shall be joint and several. 
(b)  Determination of escrow amount. The amount of the escrow shall be determined by using the average of the comparable bids awarded by the city in the preceding six (6) months or, if none exist, then in the preceding year or, if none exists current market value of construction as determined by an estimate by the public works director. Such determination shall be made as of the time the escrow is due here under. 
(c)  Termination of escrow. Escrows which have been placed with the city under this section which have been held for a period of ten (10) years from the date of such payment or agreement, in the event that the city has not authorized the preparation of plans and specifications for construction of such roadway facilities for which the escrow was made, shall upon written request be returned to the property owner, with accrued interest. Such return does not remove any obligations of the owner for construction of the required facilities if a building permit has not been issued on the subject lot or if a new building permit is applied for. 
(d)  Refund. If any street or highway for which escrow is deposited for, is constructed, or is reconstructed by another governmental authority at no cost to the city, the escrowed funds and accrued interest shall be refunded to the property owner or developer after completion and acceptance of the public improvements. In the event that a portion of the cost is borne by the city and the other portion of the cost by another governmental authority, the difference between the owner's actual proportionate cost and the escrowed funds, including accrued interest, if any, shall be refunded after completion and acceptance of the improvements. 
(e)  Interest limitation. If money is refunded within six (6) months of deposit, only the principal will be refunded. Monies returned after this date will be refunded with interest accrued, calculated at one (1) percent less than the rate of actual earnings. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
DIVISION 4. - PRO RATA FEES 

Sec. 22-72. - Pro rata agreements. 
(a)  Eligible facilities. A developer or property owner that agrees to construct a water or wastewater line or an associated facility that on acceptance will become part of city's water and wastewater system and which supplies capacity to other existing or new developments, may apply to the city to establish pro rata fees to be paid by other users of the facilities and to reimburse the developer or property owner a proportional amount of the costs of constructing such improvements. 
(b)  Study required. The amount of the cost reimbursement for an improvement, if any, shall be based on engineering cost estimates agreed upon in writing by the public works director and the applicant, and verified in a study provided by the applicant, unless the public works director waives the study requirement in writing. The study shall aggregate the costs of associated improvements where feasible. The city may establish guidelines for eligible costs to administer the policy in this section. The study shall contain the following minimum elements: 
(1)  Identification of the area and all properties to be served by the water or wastewater lines or associated facilities to be installed; 
(2)  Identification of the costs of the facilities to be installed; 
(3)  Apportionment of the costs of the facilities to be installed among lots, tracts or parcels to be served by the improvements, based upon capacity to be utilized by such properties, using accepted engineering standards and practices; 
(4)  Calculation of the maximum amount of the costs which are to be reimbursed to the developer or property owner, net of costs attributable to the developer's or property owner's utilization of capacity of the lines or associated facilities; and 
(5)  Calculation of a pro rata fee to be charged per unit of land that is to be connected to the water or wastewater lines or associated facilities. 
(c)  Approval process. The public works director shall review each request for cost reimbursement from pro rata fees or cost participation for oversizing lines. The public works director may approve the study for cost reimbursement from pro rata fees, with or without modifications, only if the public works director determines that: 
(1)  The size of each proposed line or facility complies with the generally accepted engineering practices and other planning criteria of the city and final design and routing will comply with the standards in the criteria and design manual regarding such lines; 
(2)  The study proposing pro rata fees fairly apportions the extension costs among prospective users of the facilities to be installed; and 
(3)  The proposed line or facility is a reasonable extension or addition to the water and wastewater utility system. 
(d)  Upon approval of the request for reimbursement from pro rata fees, any development on or user of property identified in the approved fee study thereafter that connects to or utilizes the capacity of the water or wastewater line or associated facility for which a pro rata fee has been established shall pay the applicable fee. Pro rata fees shall be collected by the city before construction commences on any water or wastewater improvements to serve such land or before connection to the facility, whichever first occurs. 
(e)  Conditions of reimbursement. A developer or property owner constructing a water or wastewater line or an associated facility that is eligible for cost reimbursement from pro rata fees may not receive cost reimbursement payment for the line or facility unless the entity constructing the line or facility submits documentation showing the entity's compliance with each requirement described below and the line or facility is accepted in writing by the city. 
(1)  The public advertising of the line or facility; 
(2)  The bidding on the line or facility; 
(3)  A performance or payment bond for the line or facility; and 
(4)  A warranty on the line or facility. 
(f)  Payment of pro rata fees. 
(1)  For a period of ten (10) years following the city's acceptance of the water line, wastewater line, or associated facility, the developer or property owner holding the subdivision improvement agreement shall be entitled to reimbursement from the proceeds of the pro rata fees established pursuant to this section, up to the maximum amount of the reimbursement established in the approved study. The city may deduct two (2) percent of the amount of pro rata fees collected from the amount of the fees reimbursed to the developer or property owner as an administration fee. 
(2)  The city may establish one (1) or more pro rata fee accounts for purposes of administering the policies of this division. The city shall deposit all pro rata fees collected pursuant to this division into such account(s). Expenditures from such accounts shall be earmarked solely for reimbursement of developers or property owners for the installation of water lines or wastewater lines or associated facilities for which pro rata fees have been established pursuant to this division. 
(3)  It shall be the responsibility of the subdivision improvement agreement holder or his assignee to provide to the city in writing current contact information. The city will mail reimbursement payments to the last contact of record reflected on its books. In the event that the agreement holder or his assignee has not collected pro rata payments sent to the contact of record for a period of one (1) year from the date such payments are due pursuant to this section, such accrued amounts shall become the funds of the city for purposes of expenditure on cost participation for oversizing lines or other system improvements in the city's sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN 
DIVISION 1. - ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES POLICY 

Sec. 22-73. - Policy. 
    Land proposed for subdivision or development in the city and in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction must be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, including water facilities, wastewater facilities, roadway and pedestrian facilities, drainage facilities and park facilities. Land shall not be approved for platting or development unless and until adequate public facilities necessary to serve the development exist or provision has been made for the facilities, whether the facilities are to be located within the property being developed or off site. 
(a)  New development must be supported by adequate levels of public facilities and services. 
(b)  It is necessary and desirable to provide for dedication of rights-of-way and easements for capital improvements to support new development at the earliest stage of the development process. 
(c)  Requirements for dedication and construction of public infrastructure improvements to serve a proposed new development should be attached as conditions of approval of any development application that contains a specific layout of the development. 
(d)  There is an essential nexus between the demand on public facilities systems created by a new development and the requirement to dedicate rights-of-way and easements and to construct capital improvements to offset such impacts. 
(e)  The city desires to assure both that development impacts are mitigated through contributions of rights-of-way, easements and construction of capital improvements, and that a development project contributes not more than its proportionate share of such costs. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-74. - Conformance to plans and incorporation of manuals. 
(a)  Master plans. Proposed capital improvements serving new development shall conform to and be properly related to the city's master plans for public facilities and services, and applicable capital improvements plans, and shall meet the service levels specified in such plans. 
(b)  Manuals incorporated. The following construction and design manuals are incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth: 1) Latest version of North Central Texas Council of Governments Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction (NCTCOG Standards), and 2) Latest version of American Water Works Association Standards (AWWA 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-75. - City options. 
    In order to maintain prescribed levels of public facilities and services for the health, safety and general welfare of its citizens, the city may require the dedication of easements and rights-of-way for or construction of on-site or off-site public infrastructure improvements for water, wastewater, road, drainage or park facilities to serve a proposed development, or require the payment of fees in lieu thereof. If adequate levels of public facilities and services cannot be provided concurrent with the schedule of development proposed, the city may deny the development until the public facilities and services can be provided, or require that the development be phased so that the delivery of facilities and services coincides with the demands for the facilities created by the development. The city may impose any conditions relating the provision of public infrastructure specified by an ordinance establishing or amending the zoning for the property. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-76. - Property owner's obligation. 
(a)  Dedication and construction of improvements. The property owner shall dedicate all rights-of-way and easements for, and shall construct, capital improvements within the rights-of-way or easements for those water, wastewater, road or drainage improvements needed to adequately serve a proposed development consistent with the applicable master facilities plans, whether the facilities are located on, adjacent to or outside the boundaries of the property being developed. 
(b)  Utility systems. In addition to satisfying this section and all applicable construction and design manuals, the applicant must demonstrate the ability to satisfy the requirements set forth herein prior to development, at each stage of the platting process, including applications for master plats, preliminary plats, and final plats. The commission may deny a master plat or preliminary plat if the applicant cannot demonstrate the ability to satisfy these requirements prior to approval. 
(c)  Adjacent road improvements. In the case of adjacent or abutting roads, the city may require that the entire right-of-way be dedicated and improved to city design standards, depending on factors such as the impact of the development on the road, the timing of development in relation to need for the road, and the likelihood that adjoining property will develop in a timely manner. In the case of frontage or service roads for state and federally designated highways, the entire abutting right-of-way shall be dedicated and improved to applicable design standards. 
(d)  Substandard road improvements. Where an existing road that does not meet the city's right-of-way or design standards abuts a proposed development, the city may require the property owner to dedicate the right-of-way for a standard width, and to improve the street according to the dimensions and specifications in the applicable thoroughfare plan, depending on factors such as the impact of the development on the thoroughfare, the timing of development in relation to the need for the thoroughfare, and the likelihood that adjoining property will develop in a timely manner. 
(e)  Facilities impact studies. The city may require that a property owner prepare a comprehensive traffic impact study, drainage study or other public facilities study in order to assist the city in determining whether a proposed development will be supported with adequate levels of public facilities and services concurrent with the demand for the facilities created by the development. The study shall identify at a minimum the adequacy of existing facilities and the nature and extent of any deficiencies, and the capital improvements needed to meet the adopted level of service assuming development at the intensity proposed in the development application. The study shall be subject to approval by the public works director. The city also may require, at the time of approval of a subordinate development application, an update of a public facilities study approved in connection with a priority development application. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-77. - Timing of dedication and construction. 
(a)  Initial provision for dedication or construction. The city shall require an initial demonstration that a proposed development shall be adequately served by public facilities and services at the time for approval of the first development application that portrays a specific plan of development, including but not limited to a petition for establishing a planned development zoning district, or other overlay zoning district; a petition for an annexation agreement or a development agreement; an application for a cluster development plan; an application for a subdivision concept plat, or an application for a preliminary or final subdivision or development plat. As a condition of approval of the development application, the city may require provision for dedication of rights-of-way or easements for, and construction of, capital improvements to serve the proposed development. 
(b)  Deferral of obligation. The obligation to dedicate rights-of-way for or to construct one (1) or more capital improvements to serve a new development may be deferred until approval of a subsequent phase of the subdivision, at the sole discretion of the public works director, upon written request of the property owner, or at the city's own initiative. As a condition of deferring the obligation, the city may require that the developer enter into a capital improvements agreement, specifying the time for dedication of rights-of-way for or construction of capital improvements serving the development. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
DIVISION 2. - WATER FACILITIES 

Sec. 22-78. - Adequate water for domestic use and fire protection. 
    All lots, tracts or parcels on which development is proposed shall be connected to a public water system which has capacity to provide water for domestic use and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection. Additional standards and requirements are defined in this division. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-79. - Water utility extensions and connections. 
(a)  Water connections. The city shall not provide any water utility connection to land proposed for subdivision until all of the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The water supply, treatment, storage and off site distribution system to serve the subdivision meet the requirements of section 22-80; 
(2)  The owner or developer of the subdivision has executed a developer agreement with the city, providing for the offsite extension of water mains to serve the development, in accordance with the current water main extension regulations; and 
(3)  Off site mains have been extended to the subdivision pursuant to the agreement and this section. 
(b)  Adequate water system. 
(1)  No general master plat, preliminary plat, final plat or development plat application shall be approved unless the applicant demonstrates that there will be a sufficient volume and pressure for domestic use and fire protection to provide continuous and adequate service to the subdivision concurrent with development. The water system serving the subdivision shall be deemed adequate when in conformance with section 22-80 and one (1) of the following options, as applicable: 
(A)  Where the city is not the supplier, the applicant must provide assurance of continuous and adequate service, in accordance with the standards contained within section 22-80, from the entity holding the certificate of convenience and necessity for the land to be subdivided. Such entity must have sufficient water supply, water storage, water treatment, pressure maintenance, and transmission capacity to serve the development, considering all other commitments, in accordance with city standards. The applicant shall present written verification from the water supplier that it has agreed to provide water service to the development in conformance with construction and design standards. The applicant shall provide assurances that water mains will be extended to serve the subdivision prior to the time of final plat approval for the second phase of a master plat or phased preliminary plat. 
(B)  Where city distribution mains are to be used for supplying water, and there is an existing distribution main with adequate capacity to serve the development within one (1) mile of the boundary of the proposed subdivision, the applicant may, at his initial expense, and subject to standard city participation policies, extend one (1) or more approach mains from the existing distribution main to the subdivision, of a size sufficient to serve the development. The city reserves the right to require oversizing of the line in accordance with applicable master plans. This requirement does not apply where the approach main is already a component of a funded capital improvement project that the city has initiated, consistent with its adopted capital improvements plan for water facilities. 
(c)  The applicant shall demonstrate that the water system serving the development will be sufficient to provide continuous and adequate service to the development at the time of preliminary plat approval, or where no preliminary plat is authorized, prior to final plat approval. Where a master plat or phased preliminary plat is proposed, the applicant shall demonstrate that each phase of the development will be provided with continuous and adequate service under this standard. Water mains shall be extended to serve the entire development subject to a development plan or phased preliminary plat prior to the time of final plat approval for the second phase of the master plat or phased preliminary plat, unless the extension is part of a funded capital improvement project that the city has initiated consistent with its adopted capital improvements plan for water facilities. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-80. - Water system improvements. 
(a)  General. If it the responsibility of the designer to ensure that the final design of the water system is in conformance with the North Central Texas Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction (NCTCOG Standards), American Water Works Association (AWWA) in addition to the latest Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems set forth by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
(b)  Size of Water Distribution Mains. Water mains shall be sized to comply with the City of Denison Water Master Plan in addition to the following guidelines: 
(1)  The water system shall provide for a sufficient number of services to serve each lot. 
(2)  Water lines shall be minimum 6-inch diameter. The standard sizes shall be 6", 8", 10", 12", 14", 16", 18", 20", 24", 30", 36", and 42". 
(3)  The following criteria shall be used for sizing water mains: 
 Average Daily Demand = 180 GPCD. 
 Maximum Daily Demand/Average Daily Demand = 2.2. 
 Peak Hour Demand/Maximum Demand = 1.7. 
 Single Family Resident-3.0 people/unit. 
 Multi-Family-2.5 people/unit. 
(4)  Water mains shall be sized such that velocities do not exceed 6 ft./sec. and head losses do not exceed 6 ft./1,000 ft., unless otherwise approved by the director of public works. 
(c)  Fire protection. Every development shall provide adequate water capacity for fire protection in conformance with the Uniform Fire Code. Fire Hydrants shall be installed at a maximum spacing of five hundred (500) feet in the residential areas and three hundred (300) feet in the commercial/industrial areas. 
(d)  Depth of cover for water mains. All water mains shall be installed with a minimum depth of cover of thirty-six (36) inches to the top of pipe. Additional depths may be required for low lying areas or as deemed necessary by the public works director. 
(e)  Pipe material for water mains. The following guidelines are for area based on pipe size only and in no way relieves the designer of the responsibility of pipe material specifications applicable to a specific project. Director of public works may approve other types of pipe. 
(1)  All 6" through 12" shall be PVC AWWA C-900 DR-18 (150 psi) or Ductile Iron AWWA C 151 Pressure Class 350. 
(2)  All 16" through 24" shall be PVC AWWA C-905 DR-18 (235 psi) or Ductile Iron AWWA C-151 Pressure Class 250. 
(3)  All 30" through 42" shall [be] Ductile Iron AWWA C-151 Pressure Class 250. 
(f)  Water pipe embedment. Embedment for water mains shall comply with pipe manufacturer recommendation in addition to NCTCOG Standards 6.2.9., with a minimum embedment of six (6) inches below and on the sides of the pipe and minimum of twelve (12) inches above the pipe. 
(g)  Valving. Water valves shall be placed so that they may be easily located and shall be placed so that the isolation of sections of main will not unduly impact water customers or reduce fire coverage. All isolation valves shall be AWWA approved Gate Valves. 
(1)  Valves should be located at street intersections. 
(2)  Valves for lines twelve (12) inch diameter or smaller should not be spaced any further apart than one thousand (1,000) feet. 
(3)  Valves should be generally located so that no more than four (4) valves are required to isolate a section of main. 
(4)  Valves shall be installed on fire hydrant leads to isolate the hydrant. 
(h)  Water sources, water treatment facilities, water storage facilities, and water distribution facilities (including pressure maintenance facilities) shall be designed to comply with the minimum requirements set forth by TCEQ in Chapter 290 of 30 TAC - Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems. 
(i)  Testing requirements. All components of the water system including lines, valves, and fire hydrants shall be pressure tested in accordance with TCEQ regulations as set forth in 30 TAC Chapter 290 prior to being accepted by the City of Denison. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
DIVISION 3. - WASTEWATER FACILITIES 

Sec. 22-81. - Adequate wastewater system. 
    All lots, tracts or parcels on which development is proposed shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. The public works director shall be responsible for determining the approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. The city may require the phasing of development and/or improvements in order to maintain adequate wastewater capacity. Additional standards and requirements are defined in this division. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-82. - Wastewater utility extensions and connections. 
(a)  The city shall not provide any wastewater connection to land proposed for subdivision until all of the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The wastewater treatment and collection system to serve the subdivision meet the requirements of section 22-84; 
(2)  The owner or developer of the subdivision or addition has executed a subdivision improvement agreement with the city, providing for the offsite extension of wastewater mains to serve the development, in accordance with the current wastewater main extension regulations; and 
(3)  Off site mains have been extended to the subdivision pursuant to the agreement and this section. 
(b)  Adequacy of wastewater system. No master plat, preliminary plat, final plat or development plat application shall be approved unless the applicant demonstrates that there will be an adequate wastewater system to serve the subdivision concurrent with development. Adequacy of treatment facilities cannot be demonstrated by reliance upon package treatment plants. The wastewater system serving the development shall be deemed adequate when in conformance with section 22-84 and one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Where the city's wastewater system is not to be used, the applicant must provide assurance that the entity collecting the sewage holds a certificate of convenience and necessity for the land to be subdivided, that collection systems are adequate to accommodate sewage flows from the development and that the treatment system to be used has adequate capacity in accordance with the standards in section 22-84. The applicant shall provide assurances that wastewater mains will be extended to serve the subdivision prior to the time of final plat approval for the second phase of a master plat, or phased preliminary plat. 
(2)  Where city collection mains are to be used for collecting sewage, and there is an existing collection main with adequate capacity to serve the development within one (1) mile of the boundary of the proposed subdivision, the applicant may agree to extend one (1) or more existing collection mains to the subdivision of a size adequate to serve the development, at his expense, including the cost to construct all necessary lift stations and force mains, in accordance with standard city participation policies. The city reserves the right to require oversizing of the line in accordance with applicable master plans. This requirement does not apply where the approach main is already a component of a funded capital improvement project that the city has initiated, consistent with its adopted capital improvements plan for wastewater facilities. 
(c)  The applicant shall demonstrate that the wastewater system serving the development will be adequate at the time of preliminary plat approval, or where no preliminary plat is authorized, prior to final plat approval. Where a master plat or phased preliminary plat is proposed, the applicant shall demonstrate that each phase of the development shall be served by an adequate wastewater system under this standard. The approach main shall be extended to serve the entire development subject to a master plat or phased preliminary plat prior to the time of final plat approval for the second phase of the master plat or phased preliminary plat, unless the extension is part of a funded capital improvement project that the city has initiated consistent with its adopted capital improvements plan for wastewater facilities. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-83. - Wastewater system improvements. 
(a)  General. It is the responsibility of the designer to ensure that the final design of the sewer system is in conformance with the North Central Texas Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction (NCTCOG Standards) and the latest Design Criteria for Domestic Wastewater Systems as set forth by TCEQ in 30 TAC Chapter 217. 
(b)  Estimated wastewater flows. Sewer lines and lift stations shall be designed for the estimated future population to be served, plus adequate allowance for institutional and commercial flows. Flows and Organic Loadings as set forth by TCEQ shall be used as a guide to generate wastewater flows, however, minimum flow capacity for sizing of sewer peak flow conditions shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  Delineation of proposed development that will drain into sewer main and lift station in addition to up stream sub-basins. 
2.  Calculated flows based on four (4) units per acre for off-site area in addition to the proposed subdivision lots. 
3.  Use 3.2 capita per lot with average daily flow of 100 gpcd. 
4.  Use Peak 2-Hour flow factor of 4.5 to average daily flow. 
(c)  Separation between sewer and water mains. Separation distances between public water supply pipes and wastewater collection system pipes or manholes shall be as set forth in TCEQ requirements 30 TAC Chapter 217. 
(d)  Size and slope of sewer. After the designer has determined the wastewater flows, the sewer main size shall be determined using the Manning's Equation as shown below: 
v = (1.49 (F) 0.67 /n) (s 0.50 ) where; 
 v = Velocity (feet per second) 
 n = Manning's Coefficient of Roughness 
 r = Hydraulic Radius (feet) 
 s = Slope of Energy Grade Line (feet/feet) 
Sewer mains shall be designed with slopes sufficient to give a velocity of not less than 2.0 feet per second when flowing full. The minimum acceptable "n" value shall be 0.013. 
No sewer line other than service laterals and force mains shall be less than six (6) inches in diameter. 
All sewer mains shall comply with the minimum and maximum pipe slopes for each size of pipe as set forth in TCEQ 30 TAC Chapter 217. 
(e)  Sewer main depth. Minimum depth for the design of sewer mains shall be determined by providing a two (2) percent grade for the service lateral from the center of the structure to the center of the proposed main and adding an additional two (2) foot drop. 
(f)  Recommended cover. Recommended cover for all sewer mains shall be four (4) feet to six (6) feet with the minimum cover being three (3) feet. 
(g)  Sewer main alignment. Sewer mains shall be laid straight between manholes with no horizontal or vertical bends allowed between manholes. 
(h)  Sewer laterals. Preferred grade for laterals is two (2) percent, however, no laterals shall be designed with less than one (1) percent grade. Minimum size laterals shall be four (4) inches for single family, six (6) inches for local retail, light commercial and apartments and eight (8) inches minimum for manufacturing and industrial. 
(i)  Sewer pipe materials. All gravity sewer pipe six (6) inches through fifteen (15) inches diameter shall be Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) SDR-35. All gravity sewer pipe eighteen (18) inches through twenty-four (24) inches diameter shall be PVC ASTM F-679. 
Force main pipe shall be pressure rated PVC pipe (Min. 150 psi) and shall be designed to meet the working and surge pressure requirements of the system. 
(j)  Sewer pipe embedment. The sewer main embedment shall comply with pipe manufacturers recommendation and shall be Standard Crush Rock-Aggregate Grade 4 as specified in Item 2.1.8 of the NCTCOG Standards. Embedment shall extend a minimum of six (6) inches below to six (6) inches above the sewer main. 
(k)  Manholes. Manholes shall be constructed on the sewer mains and shall be sized as follows: 
(1)  For pipes six (6) inches through twelve (12) inches diameter the manholes shall be four (4.0) feet in diameter. 
(2)  For pipes fifteen (15) inches through twenty-seven (27) inches diameter the manholes shall be five (5.0) feet in diameter. 
(3)  For pipes thirty (30) inches through thirty-six (36) inches diameter the manholes shall be six (6.0) feet in diameter. 
(4)  Access into sewer manholes shall be minimum of 30" diameter. 
(5)  All manholes shall be constructed of reinforced concrete and may be pre-cast or cast-in-place. Pre-cast sections shall meet ASTM C-478 and manhole joints shall be O-Ring type rubber gasket joints. 
(l)  Manhole locations. Manholes shall be provided at all locations where diameter of pipe changes or where the horizontal or vertical alignment changes. For straight runs of sewer main, manholes shall be provided at intervals of five hundred (500) feet on lines fifteen (15) inches diameter and smaller, at intervals of eight hundred (800) feet on lines eighteen (18) inches through thirty (30) inches diameter and at intervals of one thousand (1,000) feet on lines thirty-six (36) inches through forty-eight (48) inches diameter. 
(m)  Lift stations. The need to construct a lift station should be determined only after a thorough analysis of the physical and economic factors involved. A preliminary engineering report is required which list all factors and adheres to the latest TCEQ regulations. The city reserves the right to review each proposal and determine whether there is enough merit to justify a lift station. 
All lift stations, including site requirements, wet well design, pump design, force main, emergency power provisions and testing shall comply with TCEQ regulations as set forth in 30 TAC Chapter 217. 
(n)  Sewer system testing requirements. All components of the sewer system including gravity lines, manholes, force mains, wet wells, and lift station components shall be tested in accordance with TCEQ regulations as set forth in 30 TAC Chapter 217 prior to being accepted by the City of Denison. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-84. - Adequacy where utility connection not required. 
    Where the installation of a central wastewater system is not required, the size of the subdivided lots shall meet the minimum lot size standards of the zoning district in which the land is located, and the city's minimum lot size requirements for individual wastewater disposal facilities for land inside city limits, and the minimum lot size requirements for individual disposal facilities for the county for land in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. The lot shall be of sufficient size for individual disposal facilities, including the necessary lateral lines, and the subdivider shall install individual disposal devices for each lot at the same time improvements are erected thereon. Any such individual sewage disposal system shall be constructed in accordance with TCEQ On-Site Sewage Facilities regulation as set forth in 30 TAC Chapter 285 - On-Site Sewage Facilities and subject to the approval of Grayson County. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
DIVISION 4. - STREETS AND ROADWAY FACILITIES 

Sec. 22-85. - Adequacy of supporting road network. 
    Proposed roads serving new development shall provide a safe, convenient and functional system for vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation and shall be properly related to the applicable master thoroughfare plan and any amendments thereto, and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each proposed subdivision or development. New developments shall be supported by a thoroughfare network having adequate capacity, and safe and efficient traffic circulation. Each development shall have adequate access to the thoroughfare network. Additional standards and requirements are defined in this division. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-86. - Thoroughfare standards. 
(a)  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
(b)  Where such is not shown in the master thoroughfare plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
(1)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or 
(2)  Conform to a plan for a neighborhood approved or adopted by the planning and zoning commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable. 
(c)  Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(d)  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed semi-freeway street, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(e)  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
(f)  Reserve strips of land controlling access to or egress from other property or to or from any street or alley or having the effect of restricting or damaging the adjoining property for subdivision purposes or which will not be taxable or accessible for special improvements shall not be permitted in any subdivision. 
(g)  Street jogs with center line offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be avoided. 
(h)  Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable. 
(i)  At each street intersection the property line of each block corner shall be rounded with a curve or radius of not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
(j)  Street right-of-way widths shall be: 
Street Type Right-of-Way 
Width in Feet AA Major Arterial 120 A Major Arterial 100 B Minor Arterial 90 C Major Collector 80 D Minor Collector 60 E Minor Local Residential Street 50 F Rural Street 60  
(k)  Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and these regulations; and wherever a half street is within a tract to be subdivided and is essential within the meaning of this paragraph, the other half of the street shall be required to be dedicated along with the dedication of the half street within the proposed subdivision. 
(l)  Dead-end streets may be platted, where the planning and zoning commission deems desirable and where the land adjoins property not subdivided, in which case the streets shall be carried to the boundaries thereof. 
(m)  Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than six hundred (600) feet and, at the closed end, shall have a turn-around provided for, having an outside roadway diameter of at least eighty (80) feet, and a street property line diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-87. - Street improvements. 
(a)  Minor residential streets shall be thirty-one (31) feet wide from back of curb to back of curb. Minor apartment streets and secondary collector streets shall be thirty-seven (37) feet wide from back of curb to back of curb. Other streets shall be paved a width as shown in the thoroughfare plan. 
(b)  Standard pavement widths and sections shall be constructed over an approved prepared subgrade. Lime stabilization shall be required for soils with a plasticity index (PI) of greater than fifteen (15). For soils with a PI of fifteen (15) or less cement stabilization may be required. 
(c)  Curb and gutter sections shall be required for all new developments unless otherwise approved by the public works director. 
(d)  Residential and minor streets shall be constructed utilizing the following pavement section: 
(1)  Six (6) inch Flexible Base over on approved subgrade with a two (2) inch Type D Hot Mix Asphalt surface applied by an asphalt lay-down machine, or 
(2)  Seven (7) inch Reinforced Concrete Pavement (3500 psi compression strength @ 28 days) with No. 3 reinforcing steel at eighteen (18) inches on centers each way applied with a vibratory screed. 
(e)  Commercial and collector streets shall be constructed with a minimum pavement thickness of seven (7) inches of Reinforced Concrete (3500 psi compressive strength @ 28 days) with No. 3 reinforcing steel at eighteen (18) inches on centers each way, or No. 4 reinforcing steel at twenty-four (24) inches on centers each way applied with a vibratory screed. 
(f)  All street construction materials and construction methods shall comply with NCTCOG Standards. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-88. - Alleys. 
(a)  Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the planning and zoning commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the use proposed. 
(b)  In residential areas, alleys shall be provided parallel, or approximately parallel, to the frontage of the street. The decision as to the requirement of residential alleys shall be left to the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  The minimum width of a residential alley shall be twenty (20) feet. The minimum width of a commercial or industrial alley shall be thirty (30) feet. 
(d)  Where two (2) alleys intersect, a cutoff of not less than ten (10) feet along each property line from the normal intersection of the property lines shall be provided. 
(e)  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end as determined by the planning and zoning commission. 
(f)  Alley pavement sections shall consist of seven (7) inches of Reinforced Concrete (3500 psi compressive strength @ 28 days) with No. 3 reinforcing steel at eighteen (18) inches on centers each way. 
(g)  Concrete pavement shall be prepared over an approved subgrade. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-89. - Street lights. 
(a)  As a minimum, one (1) street light shall be installed at each street intersection within a residential subdivision, however spacing of lights shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet. 
(b)  The street light location, height and type of lumenaire shall be approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-90. - Traffic impact study. 
(a)  Applicability. This section requires a traffic impact study for any residential or non-residential subdivision application for which proposed development generates traffic in excess of one thousand (1,000) average daily trips, based upon the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual. In the event that land uses for the development are not specified at the time of subdivision application, the daily trip generation rate shall be computed based upon the maximum land use intensity allowed under the Comprehensive Plan for the land to be subdivided. For multi-phased subdivisions, the commission may require that a master traffic impact study be prepared for the development, and that the study be updated prior to approval of each subsequent phase. 
(b)  Scope of analysis. The traffic impact analysis shall include a detailed description of the roadway network within one (1) mile of the site, a description of the proposed land uses, the anticipated states of construction, and the anticipated completion date of the proposed land development. This description, which may be in the form of a map, shall include the following items: 
(1)  All major intersections; 
(2)  All proposed and existing ingress and egress locations; 
(3)  All existing roadway widths and rights-of-way; 
(4)  All existing traffic signals and traffic-control devices; 
(5)  Any changes to the roadway network that are proposed by any government agency or other developer; and 
(6)  Any other pertinent information required by the public works director. 
(c)  Impacts evaluated. The traffic impact study shall address the following: 
(1)  Trip generation. The average weekday trip generation rates (trip ends), the average weekend trip generation rates (for uses other than residential or institutional), the highest average a.m. and p.m. hourly weekday trip generation rates, and the highest hourly weekend generation rates (for uses other than residential or institutional) for the proposed use(s) shall be determined based upon the trip generation rates contained in the most recent edition of the (ITE) Trip Generation Manual; or shall be based upon data generated by actual field surveys of area uses comparable to the proposed use and approved by the city. 
(2)  Trip distribution. The distribution of trips to arterial and collector roadways within the study area identified in subsection (b) above shall be in conformity with accepted traffic engineering principles, taking into consideration the land use categories of the proposed development; the area from which the proposed development will attract traffic; competing developments (if applicable); the size of the proposed development; development phasing; surrounding existing and anticipated land uses, population and employment; existing and projected daily traffic volumes; and existing traffic conditions. 
(3)  Intersection analysis. For intersections within the roadway traffic impact analysis area described in subsection (b), a level of service analysis shall be performed for all arterial to arterial, arterial to collector, collector to arterial, and collector to collector intersections, all proposed site driveway locations for all nonresidential developments, and for any other pertinent intersections identified by the city. The city may waive analysis of minor intersections and site driveway locations within the one-mile radius. The level of service analysis shall be based upon the highest hourly average a.m. or p.m. peak weekday volume or highest average hourly peak weekend volume as determined from a two-day survey of weekday volumes and, where necessary, a one-day survey of weekend volumes. The level of service analysis shall take into consideration the lane geometry, traffic volume, percentage of right-hand turns, percentage of left-hand turns, percentage (and typical size) of trucks, intersection width, number of lanes, signal timing and progression, roadway grades, pedestrian and bicycle flows, school routes, number of accidents, and peak hour factor. 
(d)  Level of service standard. The roadway network included within the traffic impact analysis shall be considered adequate to serve the proposed development if existing roadways (arterials and collectors) and intersections can accommodate the existing service volume, and the service volume of the proposed development, and the service volume of approved but unbuilt developments holding valid, unexpired building permits at a level of service "C" or above. 
(e)  Reduction in service level determination. If the adequacy determination for roadways and intersections indicates that the proposed development would cause a reduction in the level of service for any roadway or intersection within the study area identified in subsection (b) that would cause the roadway to fall below the level of service required in subsection (d), the proposed development shall be denied unless the developer agrees to one (1) of the following conditions: 
(1)  The deferral of building permits until the improvements necessary to upgrade the substandard facilities are constructed; 
(2)  A reduction in the density or intensity of development; 
(3)  The dedication or construction of facilities needed to achieve the level of service required herein; or 
(4)  Any combination of techniques identified herein that would ensure that development will not occur unless the levels of service for all roadways and intersections within the traffic impact analysis study are adequate to accommodate the impacts of such development. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-91. - Private streets. 
(a)  Standards. All private streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the city's standards for publicly dedicated streets. The term "private street" shall be inclusive of alleys, if such are to be provided within the subdivision. 
(b)  Applicability. Private streets shall be permitted only within a subdivision satisfying each of the following criteria: 
(1)  The streets to be restricted to private use are not intended for regional or local through traffic circulation; 
(2)  The subdivision is located adjacent to an existing or approved public street subdivision that can be reasonably connected, even though the street connection would require construction of a bridge or culvert; 
(3)  A mandatory property or homeowners' association, which includes all property to be served by the private streets, will be formed and shall hold legal title to the private street and alley right-of-way within the subdivision. See (f) below. 
(c)  Streets excluded. Streets that are shown on the city's Thoroughfare Plan as collectors or arterial shall not be used, maintained or constructed as private streets, and a private street subdivision shall not cross or interfere with an existing or future collector or arterial street. The commission may deny the creation of any other private street if, in their sole judgment, the private street would: 
(1)  Negatively affect traffic circulation on public streets, or 
(2)  Impair access to the subject or adjacent property; or 
(3)  Impair access to or from public facilities, including schools or parks; or 
(4)  Cause possible delays in the response time of emergency vehicles. 
(d)  Access onto public thoroughfare. A private street subdivision shall provide a minimum of seventy (70) feet of access frontage on a public collector or arterial street for subdivision entrances. No more than two (2) gated street entrances may intersect a thoroughfare that is designated on the city's Thoroughfare Plan within one (1) mile segment. We had some discussion about whether this standard was practical or need to be on a different interval 
(e)  Parks and greenbelts excluded. A private street subdivision shall not cross or interfere with an existing or future public pedestrian pathway, hike and bike trail, greenbelt or park as shown on the city's park master plan. 
(f)  Property (homeowners) association required. Subdivisions developed with private streets shall have a mandatory property owners or homeowners association which includes all property served by the private streets. The association shall own and be responsible for the maintenance of private streets and appurtenances. In addition to all other requirements of section 22-9, the association documents must establish a reserve fund for the maintenance of streets and other improvements. The association documents shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney to ensure that they conform to this and other applicable city rules and regulations. The documents shall be filed of record prior to final plat approval. Lot deeds must convey membership in the association, and must provide for the payment of dues and assessments required by the association. The association may not be dissolved without the prior written consent of the city council. No portion of the association documents pertaining to the maintenance of private streets and alleys, and assessments therefore, may be amended without the written consent of the city council. 
(g)  Private street lot. Private streets must be constructed within a separate lot owned by the property owners association. This lot must conform to the city's standards for public street rights-of-way. An easement covering the street lot shall be granted to the city providing unrestricted access to and use of the property for any purpose deemed necessary by the city. This right shall also extend to all utility providers operating within the city. The easement shall also permit the city to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the street lot that may impair emergency access. 
(h)  Construction and maintenance cost. The city shall not pay for any portion of the cost of constructing or maintaining a private street. 
(i)  Infrastructure and utilities. All water, sewer and drainage facilities, street lights, and traffic control devices (e.g., signs) placed within the private street lot shall be installed to city standards, and shall be dedicated to the city upon the filing of the record plat for the subdivision. 
(1)  All private traffic control devices and regulatory signs shall conform to the "Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices." All city regulations relating to infrastructure financing, developer cost participation, and capital cost recovery shall apply to developments with private streets. 
(2)  The metering for utilities such as water, gas and electricity shall be located on the individual lots to be served, not grouped together in a single (or multiple) centralized location. 
(j)  Plans and inspections. Development applications for subdivisions with private streets must include the same plans and engineering information required for public streets and utilities. city requirements pertaining to inspection and approval of improvements shall apply, and fees charged for these services shall also apply. The city may periodically inspect private streets, and may require any repairs necessary to ensure efficient emergency access and/or to protect the public health, safety, convenience and welfare. 
(k)  Restricted access. The entrances to all private streets must be clearly marked with a sign, placed in a prominent and visible location, stating that the streets within the subdivision are private, and that they are not maintained by the city. Guard houses, access control gates, and cross arms, if used, shall be constructed per subsection (k) below. All restricted access entrances must be manned twenty-four (24) hours every day, or they must provide an alternative means of ensuring access to the subdivision by the city and other utility or public service providers (e.g., postal carriers, utility companies, etc.) with appropriate identification. If the association fails to maintain reliable access as required herein, the city may enter the subdivision and remove any gate or device which is a barrier to access at the sole expense of the association. The association documents shall contain provisions in conformity with this Section that may not be amended without the written consent of the city council. 
(l)  Access restricted entrance design standards. Any private street which has an access control gate or cross arm must have a minimum uninterrupted pavement width of twenty-two (22) feet at the location of the gate or access control device (both ingress and egress) regardless of the type of device used. If an overhead barrier is used, it must be a minimum of fourteen (14) feet in height above the road surface, and this clearance height shall be extended for a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet in front of and behind the location of the device. 
(1)  All gates and cross arms must be of a break-away design. A Nox box shall be supplied. 
(2)  A minimum vehicle stacking distance of fifty (50) feet shall be provided from the right-of-way line of the public road from which the private street subdivision is accessed to the first vehicle stopping point. Adequate distance shall be provided between the access request point(s) and the entry barrier to accommodate a vehicle turn-around as described below. 
(3)  A paved turn-around space must be located in front of any restricted access entrance barrier (i.e., between the access request device and the barrier/gate) to allow vehicles that are denied access to safely exit onto public streets without having to back up (particularly into the public street upon which the entrance is located). The design and geometry (i.e., pavement width, inside radius, etc.) of such turn-around shall be such that it will accommodate smooth, single-motion u-turn movements by the following types of vehicles: 
(A)  Larger passenger vehicles (e.g., vans, pick-up trucks, etc.); 
(B)  Passenger vehicles with short trailers up to twenty-four (24) feet in length (e.g., small flatbed, camping or box-type trailers); and 
(C)  The types of service and utility trucks that typically visit or make deliveries to neighborhoods that are similar to the proposed private street development (e.g., utility company vehicles, postal/UPS delivery trucks, two- to three-axle flatbed or box-type trucks used by contractors and moving companies, etc.). 
(4)  Submission of additional drawings, plans and/or exhibits demonstrating that the proposed turn-around will work and that vehicle turn-around movements will not compromise public safety on the entry roadway or on the adjacent public street(s) may be required. The design of all proposed access restricted entrances (i.e., a site plan) must be submitted for review and approval by the public works director, police services and fire department along with the construction plans for the subdivision prior to construction and approval of the final plat. 
(m)  Petition to convert to public streets. The property owners association may petition the city to accept private streets and any associated property as public and right-of-way upon written notice to all association members and upon the favorable vote of the majority of the membership. However, in no event shall the city be obligated to accept said streets as public. Should the city elect to accept the streets as public, then the city has the right to inspect the private streets and to access the lot owners for the expense of needed repairs concurrent with the city's acceptance of the streets. The city shall be the sole judge of whether repairs are needed. The city may also require, at the association's or the lot owner's expense, the removal of any guard houses, access control devices, landscaping or other aesthetic amenities located within the street lot or within any common area. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-92. - Street names and addresses. 
(a)  Streets shall be named and addressed as provided in the Denison City Code, chapter 5, article IX. 
(b)  New streets shall be so named as to provide continuity of names with existing streets. Similar or identical street names to streets already existing in other parts of the city shall be avoided. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
DIVISION 5. - DRAINAGE AND STORMWATER FACILITIES 

Sec. 22-93. - Adequacy of drainage facilities. 
(a)  Drainage improvements serving new development shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area under developed conditions and shall be designed to prevent overloading the capacity of the downstream drainage system. The city may require the phasing of development, the use of control methods such as retention or detention, the construction of off-site drainage improvements, or drainage impact fees in order to mitigate the impacts of the proposed development. Additional standards and requirements are defined in this division and chapter 8 of the [Denison] City Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Development or re-development projects that add more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of impervious cover shall comply with the drainage requirements in the city's Code of Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13; Ord. No. 4863, § 2(2.03), 4-17-17) 
Sec. 22-94. - Stormwater management plan. 
(a)  Stormwater management plan. All new subdivisions shall provide a complete stormwater management plan as part of the final engineering drawings. The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following: a complete review of all on-site, upstream and downstream drainage within the impacted watershed; determination of all on-site and downstream drainage facility improvements expected from the increased runoff from the proposed development and future upstream and downstream developments; and calculations necessary to determine compliance with the design standards in this section. 
(1)  The plan shall assume intensities of use allowed under current zoning or land uses identified in the future land use element of the Comprehensive Plan (whichever generates the greatest stormwater runoff), with maximum development considered throughout the watershed. The storm drainage plan shall show all necessary improvements with flow data provided at each point of interception of water. 
(2)  As part of the stormwater management plan, the subdivider shall show a lot grading plan to direct all water to proper intersection points avoiding cross flow of water from lot to lot. 
(3)  All upstream discharge shall be intercepted and carried through the proper intersection points avoiding cross flow of water from lot-to-lot. All upstream discharge shall be intercepted and carried through the proposed development in compliance with the standards in this section. 
(b)  Lot drainage and grading plan. All lots shall be graded at the time of development in accordance with the lot drainage and grading plan. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-95. - Floodplains and creeks. 
    All creeks and drainage channels shall be preserved and protected in their natural condition wherever possible, unless significant storm drainage improvements are required by the city in these areas. All development adjacent to creeks and drainage channels shall be in accordance with chapter 8, entitled "Flood Damage Prevention" of the Denison Code of Ordinances, and the Denison Stormwater Design and Construction Manual. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-96. - Design of drainage and stormwater facilities. 
    Stormwater collection systems shall be designed in accordance with this section by a licensed professional engineer, and must be approved by the public works director. All plans submitted to the public works director for approval shall include a layout of the drainage system together with supporting calculations for the design of the system, in accordance with the Denison Storm Drainage System Design Manual. With approval by the director of public works, exceptions to the Denison Storm Drainage System Design Manual criteria may be granted. 
(1)  Design based on maximum build-out configuration. Drainage improvements shall accommodate runoff from the upstream drainage area in its anticipated maximum "build-out" condition, and shall be designed to prevent overloading the capacity of the downstream drainage system. The city may require the phasing of development, the use of control methods such as retention or detention, or the construction of off-site drainage improvements in order to mitigate the impact of the proposed development. 
(2)  Design storm event. All drainage facilities (including street curbs, gutters, inlets and storm drains) shall be designed to intercept and transport runoff from a 25-year frequency storm, at a minimum. The drainage system shall be designed to convey those flows greater than a 25-year frequency, up to and including a 100-year frequency storm, as required by the Storm Drainage System Design Manual, or at a minimum, within defined rights-of-way or drainage easements. 
(3)  Street drainage. Plans for street and drainage improvements located within developments requiring compliance with this article shall be designed on the basis of a 25-year frequency rainfall and the 100-year frequency as required by the Storm Drainage System Design Manual. No lowering of the standard height of street crown shall be allowed for the purposes of obtaining additional hydraulic capacity. For bridges and culverts in residential streets, runoff from the 100-year frequency flow shall not overtop the roadway or any top of upstream curb elevation, whichever is lower. For bridges and culverts in streets other than residential areas, the structure shall convey the fully developed 100-year flow without overtopping. 
(4)  Use of natural contour lines. In order to help reduce stormwater runoff, and resulting erosion, sedimentation and conveyance of nonpoint source pollutants, the layout of the street network, lots and building sites shall, to the greatest extent possible, be sited and aligned along natural contour lines, and shall minimize the amount of cut and fill on slopes in order to minimize the amount of land area that is disturbed during construction. 
(5)  Design of stormwater retention or detention facilities. All stormwater retention or detention facilities shall be designed using materials and techniques as may be approved by the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13; Ord. No. 4863, § 2(2.03), 4-17-17) 
Sec. 22-97. - Drainage easements. 
    Easements or right-of-way shall be dedicated to the city by the owner of property to be developed for the purpose of containing all drainage facilities, open or enclosed, and all stormwater flows to the limits of the 100-year floodplain as determined by fully developed conditions. No easement or right-of-way for such purposes shall be less than twenty-five (25) feet in width for open drainage systems and fifteen (15) feet for enclosed drainage systems. Additional easements or right-of-way shall be provided as necessary to allow continuous access for operation, maintenance and rehabilitation of all drainage facilities. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-98. - Runoff attenuation and erosion controls. 
(a)  General standards . Necessary stormwater drainage systems and culverts shall be designed to mitigate the impact of erosion and stormwater runoff on water quality through the use of approved control strategies to control sediment and dissipate energy and through the use of multiple smaller outlets whenever practical and by locating discharges to maximize overland flow. 
(b)  Erosion controls. Approved erosion controls shall be provided as part of the development construction on any or all lots within the development to protect the drainage, lot development and adjacent property. Temporary erosion control methods shall be used to abate sediment runoff from construction sites. 
(c)  Erosion control plan implementation and compliance. A responsible party engaging in any land disturbing activity, or any construction activities of one (1) acre or greater or construction activity that is part of larger common plan of development or sale that would disturb one (1) acre or more, shall file a notice of intent and prepare an erosion control plan in accordance with the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System construction general permit, permit number TXR 150000, and file a copy of the notice of intent to comply with the TPDES general permit with the city at least two (2) days prior to commencement of construction activities. 
(1)  The erosion control plan and all approved permits and plans shall be kept on the construction site at all times during the construction and updated as needed to address changing conditions. 
(d)  Limited pollution prevention plan. Operators of construction sites of less than one (1) acre are not required to comply with TPDES general permit number 150000 but are encouraged to prepare a limited pollution prevention plan, for submission at the time of application for a building permit, containing the following: 
(1)  Statement of erosion and sediment controls to be used at the construction site; and 
(2)  Statement of pollution prevention practices to be used at the construction site. 
(e)  Implementation and maintenance of erosion control measures. Each responsible party shall implement and maintain erosion control measures to minimize the erosion and the transport of silt, earth, topsoil, etc., by water runoff or construction activities, beyond the limits of the responsible party's site onto city streets, drainage easements, drainage facilities, storm drains or other city property prior to beginning any land disturbing activity. 
(f)  Design requirements. Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth in the City of Denison Storm Drainage System Design Manual and shall be adequate to prevent movement of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the city. 
(1)  Clearing and grading. 
a.  Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as forests and wetlands, shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with all other chapters of this Code. 
b.  Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation and retain natural drainage patterns, as described in the Storm Drainage System Design Manual, shall be used to the satisfaction of the city. 
c.  Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than thirty (30) acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as approved by the city. 
d.  Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized. 
(2)  Erosion control. 
a.  Soil must be stabilized within fourteen (14) days of clearing or inactivity in construction, using recommended methods described in the manual. 
b.  Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or sediment from the site. 
c.  Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be employed. 
(3)  Sediment controls. 
a.  Sediment controls shall be provided per the criteria and available methods in the Storm Drainage System Design Manual. 
b.  Where possible, settling basins shall be designed in a manner that allows adaptation to provide longterm stormwater management. 
(4)  Waterways and watercourses. 
a.  When a wet watercourse must be crossed regularly during construction, a temporary stream crossing shall be provided and an approval obtained from the city. 
b.  When in-channel work is conducted, the channel shall be stabilized before, during and after work. 
c.  All on-site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed according to the criteria outlined in the Storm Drainage System Design Manual. 
d.  Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion must be provided at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels. 
(5)  Construction site access. 
a.  A temporary access entrance shall be provided at all sites. 
b.  Other measures may be required at the discretion of the city in order to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public streets by construction vehicles, to minimize spills and leaks, to minimize discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing, and to minimize exposure of building materials, including cement, lime, concrete, mortar, trash, waste, paint, chemicals, and other materials present on the construction site from being washed into storm drains. 
(6)  Removal of temporary erosion control devices. Upon final stabilization of a construction project, the responsible party shall submit a notice of termination to the regulatory agency and provide a copy to the city. Upon final occupancy or upon establishing permanent ground cover on a lot, all temporary erosion control devices shall be removed after final inspection and approval by the city. 
(7)  Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction site) shall inspect all disturbed areas of the construction site that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials and staging of construction that are exposed to precipitation, discharge locations, locations where vehicles enter or exit the construction site, and structural controls for evidence of, or potential for, pollutants entering the MS4. All erosion control measures and other identified requirements provided by this subsection shall be inspected regularly for proper installation according to the erosion control plan. 
(g)  Techniques to minimize erosion in constructed channels. Protection of existing creeks and waterways is encouraged by minimizing disturbance and construction activities within the waterway and associated floodplain. The following runoff attenuation strategies and techniques shall be used: 
(1)  All constructed and altered drainage channels shall be stabilized and vegetated immediately after final grading. 
(2)  Effective energy dissipation techniques must be used at inlets to and outlets from ponds and storm drain outfalls. Inlets to ponds must also have sediment traps, with a wall or gabions, designed to trap the bulk of sediments and facilitate sediment removal. 
(3)  Velocity checks must be installed on channel slopes over two (2) percent. 
(4)  For channels with slopes over three (3) percent and with non-erodible velocities (less than six (6) feet per second), a rock or concrete pilot channel must be used to stabilize the channel bed. 
(h)  Post construction stormwater detention and water quality management. Detention required. Drainage facilities will be designed and constructed so that the rate of runoff after construction shall be equal to or less than the site's runoff prior to construction. The rate of runoff shall be computed for the 2-year, 25-year, and 100-year storm events to provide creek erosion protection, settling of pollutants, and flood management. Computation of the developed rate of runoff shall be based on an assumption of a fully developed site. Off-site runoff can be by-passed around the stormwater detention basin or the basin can be designed for the contributing drainage area. 
(i)  Low impact development. For developments with a total impervious cover of twenty (20) percent or greater, the city encourages the use of low impact development techniques to manage stormwater rate, volume and quantity. Provision of these practices in accordance with the criteria and runoff volume requirement in the city's Storm Drainage System Design Manual will negate the 2-year stormwater detention requirement. 
(j)  Construction site pollution prevention plan review and construction inspection fees are hereby established and can be found in the comprehensive schedule of fees attached hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by this reference. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13; Ord. No. 4863, § 2(2.04), 4-17-17) 
_____
EXHIBIT "A"
2018 COMPREHENSIVE SCHEDULE OF FEES 
Environmental Services and Stormwater Department 
A.  Permits, pollution prevention plans. 
Description Fee Categorical Industrial Permit-Annually $500.00 Significant Industrial Permit-Annually 330.00 Permit Modification-Per Request 155.00 Toxic Organic Management Plan 300.00 Copy of Notice of Intent and Stormwater Management Plan 1 100.00 Grease Trap Self-cleaner Application 55.00  
1  A responsible party engaging in any land-disturbing activity, or any construction activities of one (1) acre or greater or construction activity that is part of larger common plan of development or sale that would disturb one (1) acre or more, shall file a copy of their notice of intent and an erosion control plan (SWP3) in accordance with the city's MS4 general permit. 
B.  Inspections. 
Description Fee Inspection (Permitted Facility) $255.00 Inspection (Non-permitted Facility) 125.00 Inspection (Construction Site) 125.00  
1  Fees will be assessed for inspections performed by the city that a) The user has requested which are not a routine part of the city's program, b) Are the result of non-compliance identified through program activities or, c) The user fails to perform as required by permit, notice, agreement, administrative order or compliance schedule issued by the city. 
C.  Sampling. 
Description Fee Composite Sample $275.00 Grab Sample 65.00 Split Sampling Fee 125.00 Laboratory Analysis Actual Cost  
1  Fees will be assessed for laboratory analyses and sampling non-compliance activities performed by the city that a) Are the result of non-compliance identified through program activities or, b) The user fails to perform as required by permit, notice, agreement, administrative order or compliance schedule issued by the city. 
D.  Enforcement. 
Description Fee Notice of Violation (Permitted Facility) $250.00 Notice of Violation (Non-Permitted) 125.00 Notice of Violation (Constructuion) 125.00 Administrative Compliance Order 510.00 Administratvie Complaince Schedule (1 to 3 Months) 580.00 Administrative Compliance Schedule (4 to 6 Months) 1,380.00 Show Cause Order 575.00 Significant Non-Compliance 645.00 Unreasonable Delay to Enter Premises 895.00  
1  Enforcement fees are assessed for administrative cost incurred by the city as a result of a user's non-compliance. These fees are in additional to any fine or penalty levied. 


DIVISION 6. - PARK FACILITIES 

Sec. 22-99. - Parks and open space adequacy. 
(a)  Policy. The requirements contained in this section are intended for the purpose of assuring open space and community park facilities are available and adequate to meet the needs created by development while maintaining current and proposed park and recreation standards pursuant to the Denison Parks and Recreation Master Plan. It is the policy of the city that a park dedication fee is hereby imposed as described herein, and all fees collected shall be used solely and exclusively for the purpose of acquisition and development of new community parks and the improvement of existing park facilities intended for access and use by the entire city. It is also the policy of the city to allow any acceptable park land that meets the criteria established herein to be dedicated as credit in lieu of the imposed park fee. 
(b)  Applicability and exceptions. This division applies to all residential subdivisions, regardless of type where fifty (50) or more dwelling units are planned at maximum build out of all phases. This division shall not apply to either the subdivision of commercial, industrial or other non-residential lots, or to the replatting of previously platted residential lots. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-100. - Park dedication fee. 
(a)  Park dedication fee. A park dedication fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per dwelling unit, or such other amount as amended from time to time by the city council, shall be imposed on all residential development within the extra territorial jurisdiction of the City of Denison and within the corporate boundaries of the City of Denison, as provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-101. - Land dedication in lieu of fee. 
(a)  Land dedication in lieu of required park dedication fee. In lieu of the required park dedication fee, the developer may elect to apply a contribution of land acceptable to the city at the rate of not less than one (1) acre of land per fifty (50) dwelling units, provided that no such dedication of land shall be less than five (5) acres. Acceptable land dedications shall reduce the total required park dedication fees by eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) for the first five (5) acres, plus one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for every additional acre thereafter. 
(b)  Criteria for land dedication. Land dedicated for parks or open spaces shall be appropriate for the intended purpose. The following criteria shall apply to land proposed for parkland or open space dedication: 
(1)  At least fifty (50) percent of the parkland that is required to be dedicated (based on the previously described calculation) shall be acceptable in terms of design, and location, for use as an area of active recreation. 
(2)  Drainage ditches, detention ponds, power line easements, steep slopes and similar sites shall not be accepted for parkland dedication, unless the commission finds, after consultation with the city manager or his/her authorized designee, that the land has exceptional recreational value that warrants its acceptance as parkland or open space. 
(3)  The dedication of land within the 100-year floodplain is acceptable, provided the land consists of the native floodplain that is unaltered by channelization or other man-made stormwater control facilities and the land is accessible to the general public from a public street. 
(4)  All parkland and open space dedication shall be consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the city's adopted Denison Parks and Recreation Master Plan, as amended. 
(5)  The developer shall propose dedication of park land in conjunction with approval of the subdivision plat. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-102. - Conveyance of land, payment for improvements and collection of fees. 
(a)  Parkland conveyance. Land proposed for dedication as public parkland or open space shall be designated on the final plat and shown as "Parkland dedicated to the City of Denison." The acreage of the land included in the dedication shall also be shown on the plat. All land designated as parkland shall be included in a separate lot, or multiple lots, that are shown on the plat. Prior to the city's acceptance of the subdivision improvements, the subdivider shall deliver a warranty deed to the city conveying fee simple title of all parkland shown on the final plat. 
(b)  Payment of park improvements. The city shall be responsible for making any improvements, as it deems necessary, to parkland after it is dedicated and conveyed by the subdivider. Park improvements shall be consistent with the intended use of the park and the overall goals, policies and objectives of the city, as stated in the adopted parks plan of the city, as amended. During the platting of the subdivision, the subdivider may elect to fund certain park improvements that would benefit the character and quality of the subdivision. Where this is done, the subdivider shall be entitled to a partial credit on the total amount of park dedication fees that are required. The city manager or his/her designee shall determine the total dollar value of the proposed parkland improvements and advise the city council regarding a suggested reduction in park dedication requirements. Financial guarantees for the completion of parkland improvements by the subdivider shall be handled in the same manner as infrastructure improvements, as outlined in article III of these subdivision regulations. 
(c)  Collection of required park dedication fees. The developer has the duty to submit with the subdivision plat the information concerning the number of dwelling units at build out of all phases. The city shall calculate the amount of the total fee due. Payment of the required park dedication fee shall be made at the option of the developer from one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Before approval of the plat of record, all required park dedication fees shall be paid in full; or 
(2)  The required park dedication fee shall be collected prior to the issuance of the building permit for the dwelling unit. No permit shall be issued nor shall any construction be allowed to begin until payment of all fees required has been made. 
(d)  Use of required park dedication fees. 
(1)  A special fund known as the Park Dedication Fee Fund shall be established for the deposit of all park dedication fees. 
(2)  Fees collected shall be used solely and exclusively for the purpose of acquisition and development of new community parks and the improvement of existing park facilities intended for access and use by the entire city. 
(3)  All expenditures shall comply with applicable State law. 
(4)  All monies paid into the Park Dedication Fee Fund shall be expended by the City of Denison within ten (10) years from the date received by the city. If such funds are not expended within ten (10) years, the current property owner at that time shall be entitled to a refund of such funds upon written request, less any amounts expended. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-103. - Park access. 
    Parkland shall be easily accessible for the public and open to public view so as to benefit area residents, enhance the visual character of the city, protect public safety, and minimize conflicts with adjacent land uses. All public parkland must be accessible, and any proposed development adjacent to a public park or open space area shall not be designed to restrict reasonable access or visibility into the park (for example, shall not have many lots backing to the parkland). 
(a)  Street connections between residential neighborhoods shall be provided, wherever possible, to provide reasonable access to parks and open space areas. 
(b)  Land dedication for public use and maintenance shall have a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage on a local or collector street. Land shall not be dedicated for parkland along a major thoroughfare unless the city manager or his/her designee determines that the proposed park use is compatible with, and sufficiently buffered from, the adjacent thoroughfare, and that the parkland can be safely accessed by pedestrians, especially children. 
(c)  Proposed access and public availability, both physical and visual, of parkland shall be reviewed by the parks and recreation director and approved by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
DIVISION 7. - GENERAL DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 22-104. - Lots. 
(a)  Dimensions. The lot size, width, shape, depth, and orientation, and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. 
(b)  Public street access. Each lot shall front upon or have access to a public street, or front upon a private street that has direct access to a public street. When circumstances such as topographical characteristics or natural barriers suggest that the fronting of a lot on a public street is impractical or results in the misuse or nonuse of land or creates an unreasonable burden upon the developer, taking into consideration the proposed use of the land to be subdivided, consideration of the use of a private access easement or similar means of ingress or egress may be given. 
(c)  Private access easement. 
(1)  All non-emergency services will be provided to the property served by a private access easement at the point of publicly owned right-of-way. 
(2)  When the subdivider proposes to provide access to a lot by a private access easement, the private access easement to such lot shall be clearly identified on the plat and shall be so labeled. The subdivider shall include on the plat the following language: 
"Lot(s) # ___________ do(es) not front upon a public street, but has/have access to a public street by means of a private access easement depicted on the plat. Maintenance of the private access easement is not an obligation of the public. For information on the maintenance of private access easements, consult the developer or county real property records for documents pertaining to the maintenance of such private access easements or commonly owned areas." 
(3)  A private access easement is not subject to dedication to the public for maintenance purposes. When a private access easement is the principal means of ingress and egress within a planned development district, the subdivider shall file a document in a form recordable in the real property records of the county specifying the method by which the private access will be kept and maintained in good repair. Reference to the existence of the document shall be conspicuously displayed upon the face of the final plat recorded in the plat records of the county. The legal sufficiency of the method by which private access maintenance will be provided may be reviewed by the city. Failure to provide for such maintenance may be grounds for rejecting the plat of the subdivision or of the site plan of the planned development district. 
(d)  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen reservation of at least ten (10) feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
(e)  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
(f)  Where the area is divided into larger lots than for normal urban building sites and, in the opinion of the commission, any or all of the tracts are susceptible of being resubdivided, the original subdivision shall be such that the alignment of future street dedication may conform to the general street layout in the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-105. - Blocks. 
(a)  The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions. 
(3)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(b)  In general, intersecting streets, determining the block lengths and widths shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross traffic adequately and to meet existing streets or customary subdivision practices. Where no existing subdivision controls, the blocks shall not exceed nine hundred (900) feet in length, nor be less than four hundred (400) feet in length. Where no existing subdivision controls, the block width or depth shall not exceed three hundred fifty (350) feet, nor be less than two hundred twenty (220) feet. When possible, the block widths and lengths shall be such as to allow two (2) tiers of lots, back to back. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-106. - Monuments. 
(a)  Monuments. Before approval and acceptance of any final plat, monuments meeting the following specifications shall be provided: 
(b)  Monuments consisting of one-inch iron rod, twenty-six (26) inches in length, shall be placed at all corners of the block lines, the point of intersection of the alley and block lines, and at the points of intersection of curves and tangents of the subdivision. This twenty-six-inch rod shall be in two (2) lengths, one (1) eighteen (18) inches in length, with an eight-inch length of pipe above which shorter length shall be placed flush with the average ground elevation. When extremely loose soil conditions are encountered, upon authorization of the city manager, two-inch by two-inch steel pins as a substitute shall be driven in the top of the eighteen-inch length of one-inch pipe in lieu of the eight-inch length of one-inch pipe. All markers shall be indicated on the final plat. 
(c)  Lot markers shall be a one-half (1/2) inch iron rod placed at each corner of all lots flush with the average ground elevation or they may be counter sunk, if necessary in order to avoid being disturbed. 
(d)  Two (2) of the monuments provided above for block corner or intersection corners shall be permanent survey reference points. These points shall be marked with monuments, the top of which shall be twelve (12) inches below the existing ground and shall be made of two-inch-diameter iron pipe eighteen (18) inches in length, the top twelve (12) inches of which shall be set in concrete. Inside of the two-inch pipe and extending to the surface of the ground a one-inch iron pipe shall be installed. These reference points should be located so as to establish one (1) side of the subdivision. In addition, these monuments shall be referenced and tied to the City of Denison GIS Grid. 
(e)  Within subdivisions where perimeter boundaries, block and/or lot lines traverse land situated within the Flood Management Pool of Lake Texoma, the following monument standards shall be applied in addition to those stated above; to-wit: 
(i)  Two (2) concrete monuments (flush with ground with a gold medallion inset) will be installed at the two points where the six hundred forty-five (645) foot National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NDVD) contour line crosses the boundary lines of the land that is to be conveyed to the City of Denison pursuant to the Water Resources Development Act of 2007; 
(ii)  Each perimeter boundary line of the subdivision that traverses the six hundred forty-five (645) foot contour shall be marked at the intersection of the boundary line and the four hundred sixty-five (465) foot contour by a flush monument; and each block and lot line that traverses the six hundred forty-five (645) foot contour be marked at the intersection of the line and the contour by a pin consisting of one-inch iron rod, twenty-six (26) inches in length; 
(iii)  Flush monuments shall be installed at each perimeter boundary line of the subdivision that traverses the six hundred forty-five (645) foot contour and all plats and site plans shall conspicuously delineate the six hundred forty-five (645) foot contour line as a no building line without proper authorization from the United States Army Corps of Engineers; 
(iv)  Prior to the sale and development of any lot within a subdivided parcel, pins shall be installed at the locations that the six hundred forty-five (645) foot contour line intersects the parcel boundaries (i.e., the block and lot lines); and 
(v)  The City of Denison will not approve any building permits for any permanent, habitable structure below the six hundred forty-five (645) foot contour line or for any other development or ground modifications without the prior authorization of the Corps of Engineers. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-107. - Retaining walls. 
    No retaining wall shall be placed in a public right-of-way, without the approval of the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
DIVISION 8. - SCREENING, LANDSCAPING AND BIKEWAYS 

Secs. 22-108-22-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - SIDEWALKS AND BIKEWAYS 

Sec. 22-111. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Sidewalk requirements. Sidewalks are required to be installed as follows: 
(1)  For all residential and non-residential development when a new public or private street must be built or an existing street extended to serve the development. 
(2)  Along existing perimeter streets where the street is improved or will be improved by the developer to city or Texas Department of Transportation standards. For other perimeter streets, unless exempted by the public works director, the developer may escrow the cost of sidewalks as part of a subdivision improvement agreement, if approved by city council. The city has the right to refuse escrow and to require construction of the sidewalks if, in its sole opinion, immediate provision of the sidewalks is necessary for safe pedestrian circulation or to otherwise protect the public health, safety, convenience or welfare. 
(3)  Sidewalk construction may be delayed until construction occurs on individual lots in single-family and duplex subdivisions, but in locations adjacent to open space lots, common area lots and across bridges and culverts, the sidewalks shall be constructed with other public improvements to the subdivision. 
(b)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Sidewalks shall not be required for redevelopment of property proposed for single-family or duplex residential use if the adjacent lots have no sidewalks. 
(2)  Single-family lots developed in the Agricultural (A) zoning district or that are one (1) acre or larger in size are exempt from the sidewalk requirement. 
(3)  The public works director may waive the requirement for sidewalks along streets with no curb and gutter construction or allow the developer to escrow funds for the future construction of sidewalks. 
(c)  Design and construction standards. 
(1)  All sidewalks and ramps must be constructed in conformance with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act and the standard construction details of the city. The minimum width of a sidewalk shall be five (5) feet, except for walks in the Central Area (CA) zoning district as noted in [subsection] (2) below. 
(2)  Within the Central Area (CA) zoning district, sidewalks shall extend from the property line to the street curb. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13; Ord. No. 4926, § 3, 1-16-18) 
Sec. 22-112. - Curb and gutter. 
(a)  In general, curbs shall be placed symmetrically in the streets as follows: 
Width of Right-of-Way 
(feet) Distance Back to Back of Curb 
(feet) 120 86 100 76 90 66 80 48 60 37-38 50 31  
Different locations for curbs than indicated herein may be made by the director of public works to continue any existing substantial construction to an intersection in the block where such existing construction exists. 
(b)  At street intersections in the central area district, as set forth by the Zoning Ordinance, the curb face line of intersecting curbs shall conform to a five-foot radius. At all other street intersections, the curb face line shall conform to a fifteen-foot radius. 
(c)  Combination curb and gutter shall be constructed unless other types, such as plain curb or curb integral with street pavement or sidewalk, is authorized by the director of public works. 
(d)  Curbs in the central area district, as established by the Zoning Ordinance, shall be eight (8) to ten (10) inches high, six (6) inches wide at the top with one-quarter-inch radius on the back edge, a one-inch radius on the face edge, and a three-inch radius where joining integral gutter or pavement. The gutter integral with the curb shall extend twenty-one (21) inches from the curb face, have a minimum thickness of seven (7) inches and have a drain depth of three-quarters inch. When plain curb is constructed in the central area district, it shall be twenty-four (24) inches overall height, six and one-half (61/2) inches wide below pavement surface and six (6) inches wide at the top with the face battered one-half inch and a one-quarter-inch radius on the back and one-inch radius on the face edge. Curbs constructed integral with the sidewalk shall be designed to eliminate water seepage into the earth below the adjacent construction, all as directed by the director of public works. 
(e)  The curb section in locations other than the central area district shall be seven (7) inches high, six (6) inches wide at the top with a one-half-inch radius on the back edge, a two-inch radius on the face edge, and a three-inch radius where joining integral gutter or pavement. Gutter integral with the curb shall extend eighteen (18) inches from the curb face, have a minimum thickness of six (6) inches, an edge thickness of six (6) inches and have a drain depth of one (1) inch. When plain curb is constructed in locations other than the central area district, it shall be twenty (20) inches overall height, six and one-half (61/2) inches wide below the pavement surface and six (6) inches wide at the top with the face battered one-half inch and a one-half-inch radius on the back and a two-inch radius on the face edge. 
(f)  In the construction of curbs, after the concrete has been struck off to the forms and after it has become sufficiently set, the exposed surfaces shall be thoroughly worked with a wooden float. The exposed edges shall then be rounded to the specified radius with an approved edging tool. When the concrete in the curb has become sufficiently set, the inside curb form shall be carefully removed and the surface thus exposed shall be pointed up where necessary, dummy joints marked with approved jointing tools at approximately six-foot spacing, then wetted and rubbed with a wood block to remove all form marks and other irregularities, producing a finish similar in appearance to that previously finished. 
(g)  Concrete curbs shall be constructed with one-half-inch expansion joints transversal to the section at fifty-foot intervals, at points of tangency where curved for intersections and drives and at any other places required by the director of public works. The joint materials shall be anchored to one (1) section of the curb. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Sec. 22-113. - Drives. 
(a)  Private drives shall have a minimum overall width of eight (8) feet and the thickness shall conform to that of the gutter portion of the applicable curb and gutter set forth in section 21-112(c) at the lower end and uniformly diminished to a thickness of five (5) inches at the sidewalk. The drive shall be constructed with integral curbs making a uniform transition from the street curb section to no curb section at the sidewalk. The back of the drive curb and the street curb shall conform to a minimum radius of two (2) feet. The entire driveway structure shall front the property for which it is constructed. One-half-inch expansion joints shall be placed transversal to the street curb section at the points of tangency to the drive curb radii, and between the drive slab and abutted sidewalk. Dummy joints may be constructed as approved by the director of public works. 
(b)  The design of private drives to be used for business in the central area district, as established in the Zoning Ordinance, shall be adequate for the particular use with due consideration being given toward keeping the sidewalk area so as to not hamper or endanger pedestrian traffic thereon. The design for such drives shall be approved by the director of public works before construction is started. In general, the minimum thickness of the concrete shall be six (6) inches and the grade from the street surface to the walk surface shall be as steep as practical (five (5) to eight (8) horizontal to one (1) vertical.) The surface transition longitudinal to the sidewalk connecting the walk and drive surface shall be sloped approximately five (5) to eight (8) horizontal to one (1) vertical. 
(Ord. No. 4681, § 2(Exh. A), 2-18-13) 
Chapter 23 - SWIMMING POOLS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages prohibited near swimming pools in parks, § 3-11; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; flood prevention and protection, Ch. 8; HUD-code manufactured home and recreational vehicle facilities, Ch. 12; public property, Ch. 18; city swimming pool rules and regulations, § 18-136; subdivision regulations, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Swimming pools and bathhouses, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-1, § 15. 

Sec. 23-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Free chlorine residual shall mean the chlorine concentration, in milligrams per liter (mg/l) units of water, available for rapid and effective bactericidal action. This is the chlorine which remains uncombined with nitrogenous or ammoniacal compounds after the initial chlorine demands of the water have been satisfied. 
    Health department shall mean the county health department or any authorized agent thereof. 
    Lifeguard shall mean an individual schooled and certified in the advanced course of instruction in lifesaving and water safety equivalent to that offered by the American Red Cross. 
    Lifesaving equipment shall consist of: a float board, ring buoy not more than fifteen (15) inches in diameter to which shall be attached a sixty-foot length of three-sixteenths-inch rope; a life pole or shepherd's crook, type of pole having blunted ends with minimum length of twelve (12) feet; a separate throwing line of one-fourth-inch rope with length not less than one and one-half (11/2) times the maximum width of pool. This shall constitute one (1) unit of lifesaving equipment. 
    Manager of operations shall mean the person ultimately responsible for the safe, sanitary maintenance of a public or semipublic pool. 
    Private pool shall mean any pool located on private, residential property under the control of the homeowner or tenant, the use of which is limited to members of the homeowner's or tenant's family or invited guests. 
    Public pool shall mean any pool which is intended to be used by the general public for swimming, bathing or other related purposes and is operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for use. 
    Safety equipment shall consist of a standard first aid kit. Pools using gas chlorinator shall have a gas mask accessible without key located outside of the room in which the chlorinator is maintained. This shall constitute one (1) unit of safety equipment. 
    Semiprivate pool shall mean any pool located on the premises of a hotel, motel, trailer court, apartment building, private club, townhouse complex, or other similar establishment where use of the pool is limited to members or residents and their guests. 
    Swimming pool or pool shall mean any artificial body of water, including a spa, maintained expressly for public recreational purposes, swimming and similar aquatic sports, or therapeutic purposes. 
(Code 1965, § 21-5) 
Sec. 23-2. - Plan review required. 
(a)  No person may construct, modify, or repair public or semipublic pools in the city without obtaining approval from the health department. Application for such approval shall be accompanied by the required fee and a specified number of copies of the plans for which the applicant seeks approval. If the health department is satisfied that the proposed swimming pool will conform in all respects to the requirements of the law, approval shall be issued by the health department to the applicant. 
(b)  The health department may require the submission of other necessary plans, specifications and data including capacity, rate of filtration, skimming devices, and facilities for draining. Plans and specifications for all pools shall at a minimum comply with the current design standards of the state board of health for public swimming pool construction. However, where such standards are less restrictive than the standards of this division, or any other provision of the city codes, the more restrictive code shall apply. 
(c)  Applicants shall have applied for and received a construction permit from the city prior to submitting plans to the health department. 
(d)  The fee for plan review under this section shall be set as set by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 16(a), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 16(a) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 23-2 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 23-2 derived from the 1965 Code, § 21-6; and Ord. No. 4126, § 4, adopted Aug. 19, 2002. 
Sec. 23-3. - Operational permit required. 
(a)  A person shall not operate a public or semi-public pool without an operational permit. To obtain a permit an applicant must complete a form provided by the health department. An applicant must designate a manager of operations of each pool for which a permit is sought, and the person designated as manager of operations of a pool must be employed on the premises where the pool is located. The public pools owned and operated by the city shall obtain operation permits, but the city shall be exempt from application fee. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Operational permits under this section shall be for a term expiring on March 31 following the date of issuance, unless such permit is suspended for cause before the expiration date, and must be renewed each year as described in (a) and (b) above. Failure to renew the operational permit each year by April 15 shall subject the applicant to a late fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) in addition to the fee stated at (b) above. 
(d)  The public pools owned and operated by the city shall obtain operation permits, but the city shall be exempt from application fee. 
(Code 1965, § 21-7; Ord. No. 4126, §§ 5, 6, 8-19-02; Ord. No. 4701, § 16(b), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 23-4. - Inspections. 
    The health department is authorized to conduct such inspections as deemed necessary to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. The health department shall have the right of entry at any reasonable hour upon the premises where a swimming pool is located. The health department shall have authority to collect water samples from the pool. 
(Code 1965, § 21-8) 
Sec. 23-5. - Maintenance and operation. 
(a)  Every public and semipublic pool shall be under the supervision of a manager of operations who shall be responsible for compliance with all parts of this chapter relating to pool maintenance, pool operation and safety of swimmers. It shall be unlawful for such manager of operations to cause or permit the existence of a condition which is in violation of any part of this chapter. 
(b)  All pumps, filters, disinfectant and chemical feeders, drains, ladders, lighting, ropes and other appurtenant equipment used in the operation of all public and semipublic pools shall be maintained in a good state of repair. 
(c)  All public and semipublic pools shall be treated and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  All owners, managers, operators, and other attendants in charge of any public swimming pool shall maintain all such pools in a sanitary condition. The bacterial content of the water in any public swimming pool shall not be allowed to exceed the safe limits as prescribed by established standards of the state department of health. A minimum free residual chlorine of 1.0 parts per million units of water in every public swimming pool other than a spa and a minimum free residual chlorine of 2.0 parts per million units of water in every public spa or any other method of disinfectant approved by the state department of health shall be maintained in every public swimming pool throughout the period of their use. 
(2)  If cyanuric acid is used to stabilize the free available chlorine, or if one (1) of the chlorinated isocyanurate compounds is used as the disinfecting chemical, the concentration of cyanuric acid in the water should be at least thirty (30) mg/l, but shall not exceed one hundred (100) mg/l. A test kit should be available for measuring the concentration of cyanuric acid. 
(3)  Every pool shall have water with a pH of not less than 7.2 and not more than 8.0. A pH test kit, accurate to the nearest 0.2 pH units, shall be available for testing purposes at each pool. The total alkalinity of the pool water shall be at least forty (40) mg/l, but not greater than one hundred fifty (150) mg/l. 
(4)  The presence of organisms of the coliform group in any sample shall be deemed unacceptable water quality. 
(5)  Every pool shall have water clarity sufficient for a black six-inch diameter turbidity test disk placed at the deepest part of the pool to be clearly visible. Failure to meet this requirement shall be sufficient cause for immediate closure of the pool. 
(6)  Every pool shall be free of scum and foreign floating matter, sediment, dirt, slime, algae and all other foreign material that may be conducive to the transmission of disease. 
(7)  The recirculation system of a public or semi-public pool, must be in operation and properly maintained at all times. 
(8)  Areas surrounding a public or semipublic pool including bath houses, dressing rooms, toilets, shower stalls, and lounging areas shall be kept clean and in a state of proper repair at all times. Backwash water from a filter and drainage water from all pools must be disposed of by approved methods. 
(9)  An air gap or antisiphon device must be installed on any pipe or hose bib leading to the pool. 
(Code 1965, § 21-9) 
Sec. 23-6. - Safety provisions. 
(a)  A guard line rope shall be installed separating the shallow portion of the pool from the portion at the breakpoint depth. 
(1)  Semipublic pools, where no lifeguard service is provided, shall post in plain view at each entrance to the pool a warning sign which states, "WARNING-NO LIFEGUARD ON DUTY," with clear, legible letters at least four (4) inches in height. In addition the sign shall also state, "CHILDREN SHOULD NOT USE POOL WITHOUT AN ADULT IN ATTENDANCE." 
(2)  A sign shall be placed in distinct view of swimmers at all semipublic pools giving the emergency telephone number of the police department and the ambulance service, or shall state the location of the nearest telephone and also state that emergency telephone numbers are posted at that location. At public pools, these telephone numbers shall be conveniently located at each telephone location. 
(3)  Depth markings must be visible at or above the water surface of the vertical pool wall and on the edge of the deck next to the pool, at maximum and minimum depth points, at points of break between depth and spaced at not more than twenty-five-foot intervals around the entire perimeter of the pool. Markings must be in numerals of a minimum height of four (4) inches. 
(b)  A sign should be posted requiring a shower before using the pool. 
(c)  All chemicals used in swimming pool water treatment shall be stored in their original containers and kept in a cool, dry and well-ventilated, locked room. 
(d)  Each public or semipublic pool must have at least one (1) unit of safety equipment. 
(e)  All public pools shall be attended by the required number of lifeguards according to swimming pool operational standards of the state department of health. 
(f)  A placard listing pool rules shall be provided and placed in distinct view of swimmers at all public and semipublic pools. 
(g)  All semipublic pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence enclosure at least four (4) feet in height. Openings in the fence shall not permit the passage of a sphere six (6) inches in diameter. The fence enclosure shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching gates capable of being locked. 
(h)  All public pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence at least six (6) feet in height. The fence shall not permit the passage of a sphere two (2) inches in diameter. The fence shall be equipped with lockable, self-closing, self-latching gates. 
(Code 1965, § 21-10) 
Sec. 23-7. - Regulations in pool area. 
    A person commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Allows an animal under his control to enter or remain within the pool area or pool enclosure of a public or semipublic pool; or 
(2)  Has skin abrasions, open sores, skin disease, eye disease, nasal or ear discharge or a communicable disease and swims in a public or semipublic pool; or 
(3)  Works at a public or semipublic pool while infected with a communicable disease; or 
(4)  Alters or removes safety equipment from a public or semipublic pool except in an emergency; or 
(5)  Carries glass within a public or semipublic pool area or enclosure. 
(Code 1965, § 21-11) 
Sec. 23-8. - Suspension of operation permit; violations of closure order. 
(a)  Failure to comply with any section of this chapter may result in the immediate suspension of the operational permit, closure of the pool, and/or the initiation of legal action. Upon determination that the pool does not comply with the provisions of this chapter, the health department shall notify the manager of operations of the existing violations. If the health department determines that the condition of the pool is hazardous to health or safety of the swimmers or of the general public, the operational permit shall be suspended and the pool shall be immediately closed. A reinspection of the pool will be conducted during the regular working hours of the health department at the request of the pool manager of operations. If compliance has been achieved, the operational permit may be reinstated and the manager of operations shall be notified that the pool may be opened. 
(b)  When the health department has suspended an operational permit and has ordered that a pool be closed due to noncompliance with any provision of this chapter the owner of such pool shall not knowingly allow the pool to be used for swimming, diving or bathing purposes and shall immediately take every reasonable step to prevent the use of such pool for such purposes. By way of example and without limiting such duty, the owner shall: 
(1)  Immediately post notices reasonably likely to come to the attention of potential users of the pool, advising of the closure, and 
(2)  Immediately lock all gates and doorways in any fence or other enclosure surrounding such pool. 
Use of the pool by any individual for swimming, diving, or bathing purposes after the health department has ordered such pool to be closed shall be deemed prima facie evidence that the owner of such pool has knowingly allowed the pool to be used for such purposes. 
(Code 1965, § 21-12) 
Sec. 23-9. - Enforcement responsibility. 
(a)  The health department or its authorized representatives shall have enforcement responsibility of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction be fined pursuant to section 1-12. 
(c)  This chapter is declared to be cumulative of all other ordinances of the city, and this chapter shall not operate to repeal or affect any of such other provisions except insofar as the provisions thereof might be inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, in which event such conflicting provisions, if any, in such other ordinance or ordinances are hereby repealed. 
(d)  All of the regulations provided in this chapter are hereby declared to be governmental and for the health, safety and welfare of the general public. Any member of the city council or any city official or health department employee charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting for the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not render himself personally liable; and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. 
(e)  Any violation of this chapter can be enjoined by a suit filed in the name of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy shall be in addition to any penal provision in this Code. 
(Code 1965, § 21-13) 
Chapter 24 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Occupation tax authority, V.T.C.A., Tax Code §§ 101.008, 302.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Sales and use tax on consumption of gas and electricity for residential use. 
    The city, by majority vote of the city council, hereby votes to retain the taxes authorized by the local sales and use tax act (V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.001 et seq.) on the receipts from the sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of, and the use, storage, or other consumption within the city of gas and electricity for residential use, as authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.105. 
(Code 1965, § 24-3) 
State Law reference- Sales and use tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.001 et seq. 
Sec. 24-2. - Additional penalty on all delinquent tax accounts. 
    There is hereby imposed upon all delinquent tax accounts an additional penalty of fifteen (15) percent of the amount of taxes, penalty, and interest due; such additional penalty shall be imposed upon all delinquent accounts as of July first of the year in which the account becomes delinquent. This penalty shall remain in full force and effect until such time as it may be rescinded by action of the city council. 
(Code 1965, § 24-5) 
State Law reference- Additional penalty for collection costs, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.07. 
Sec. 24-3. - Gross receipts tax on bingo games. 
    Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Occupation Code Ch. 2001, there is hereby imposed on bingo games conducted within the City of Denison a one (1) percent gross receipts tax to be collected by the state comptroller and subsequently transmitted to the city's treasury. 
(Ord. No. 3200, § 2, 2-19-90; Ord. No. 4701, § 17(b), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3200, § 2, adopted Feb. 19, 1990, did not specifically amend the Code and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been included herein, as § 24-3. 
Sec. 24-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 24-4 was repealed, per the city, at a council meeting held Nov. 21, 2011. Said section pertained to participation in residential tax abatement and derived from Ord. No. 3454, §§ 1-3, adopted April 4, 1994; Ord. No. 3637, §§ 1-3, adopted April 1, 1996; Ord. No. 4345, §§ 1-3, adopted April 3, 2006. 
Sec. 24-5. - Additional sales and use tax levied; disposition of tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an additional sales and use tax in the amount of one (1) percent of all taxable sales within the corporate limits of the City of Denison. Such tax shall be implemented and collected in a manner consistent with the statutes and regulations pertaining thereto, as administrated by the office of the comptroller of public accounts. The additional sales and use tax shall be levied and collected until repealed in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Pursuant to the provisions of the proposition approved by the voters of the City of Denison at special election held January 20, 1996, the additional sales and use tax levied above shall be apportioned as follows: 
(1)  One-half (1/2) of one (1) percent for economic development; 
(2)  One-half (1/2) of one (1) percent for property tax relief. 
The effective date for the implementation of the additional sales and use tax levied herein shall be in a manner consistent with the law, practices and procedures as applied by the office of the comptroller of public accounts. 
(Ord. No. 3613, §§ 1, 2, 2-5-96) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3613, adopted Feb. 5, 1996, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as § 24-5. 
Sec. 24-6. - Tax on receipts from sale of telecommunications services. 
(a)  A tax is hereby authorized and imposed on all receipts from the sale of telecommunications services within the City of Denison, Texas, as is provided for by state law. 
(b)  The application of the exemption provided for in V.T.C.A. section 321.210(a), Tax Code, is hereby repealed by the city as authorized by section 321.210(b) thereof. 
(c)  The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the State of Texas. 
(d)  The city secretary shall forward to the comptroller of the State of Texas by United States registered or certified mail a copy of Ordinance No. 4163 along with a copy of the minutes of the city council's vote on said ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4163, § 2, 5-5-03; Ord. No. 4701, § 17(a), 6-17-13) 
Secs. 24-7-24-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR SENIOR CITIZENS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Homestead exemption for elderly, V.T.C.A., Tax Code §§ 11.13(d), (f), 11.43(c). 

Sec. 24-26. - Homestead exemption for certain persons. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of the Texas Constitution and sections 11.13(d) and (e) of the Tax Code of the State of Texas and from and after the effective date of Ordinance No. 4301, fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) of the assessed value of residence homesteads of persons who have attained the age of sixty-five (65) years on or before January 1 of the year in which the exemption is claimed shall be exempt from city ad valorem taxes; provided however, that where the ad valorem tax has heretofore been pledged for the payment of any debt the taxing authority of the city shall have the authority to continue to levy and collect the tax against the homestead property at the same rate pledged until the debt is discharged, if the cessation of the levy would impair the obligation of the contract by which the debt is created. 
(b)  The administration and implementation of the homestead exemption herein established shall be accomplished in a manner consistent with the provisions of the Tax Code of the State of Texas. 
(c)  Pursuant to the authority of the Texas Constitution and sections 11.13(d) and (e) of the Tax Code of the State of Texas and from and after the effective date of Ordinance No. 4302, seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) of the assessed value of residence homesteads of persons who are disabled as that term is defined by the Tax Code of the State of Texas or who have attained the age of sixty-five (65) years on or before January 1 of the year in which the exemption is claimed shall be exempt from city ad valorem taxes; provided however, that where the ad valorem tax has heretofore been pledged for the payment of any debt the taxing authority of the city shall have the authority to continue to levy and collect the tax against the homestead property at the same rate pledged until the debt is discharged, if the cessation of the levy would impair the obligation of the contract by which the debt is created. 
(d)  The administration and implementation of the homestead exemption herein established shall be accomplished in a manner consistent with the provisions of the Tax Code of the State of Texas. 
(Code 1965, § 24-16; Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 8-20-81; Ord. No. 4301, §§ 1, 2, 7-18-05; Ord. No. 4302, §§ 1, 2, 7-18-05) 
Sec. 24-27. - Ad valorem tax limitation on residential homesteads. 
    A disabled individual or an individual sixty-five (65) years of age or older is entitled to an ad valorem tax limitation on the total amount of taxes that may be imposed by the city on such individual's residence homestead as prescribed by and in accordance with Article VIII, Section 1-b(h) of the Texas Constitution, and V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.261. 
(Ord. No. 4435, § 1, 1-21-08) 
Secs. 24-28-24-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Hotel occupancy tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. 

Sec. 24-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consideration shall mean the cost of the room in such hotel only if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping, and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy. 
    Hotel shall mean any building in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses, or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but hotel shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes. 
    Occupancy shall mean the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession, or right to use or possession extends for a period of less than thirty (30) days. 
    Occupant shall mean anyone, who, for a consideration uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping. 
(Code 1965, § 24-34) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 24-47. - Established and levied. 
    There is hereby established and levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room ordinarily used for sleeping and furnished by any hotel in the city. Such tax is hereby levied at the rate of seven (7) percent of the consideration paid to the hotel by the occupant of the room. 
(Code 1965, § 24-30; Ord. No. 3824, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 4136, § 1, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 24-48. - Expenditure of revenues. 
    The revenues derived from the hotel occupancy tax levied pursuant to this article shall be expended as follows: 
(1)  That amount equal to eighty-six (86) percent of the revenue generated by such tax shall be expended for advertising for general promotional and tourist advertising of the city and its vicinity and conducting a solicitation and operating program to attract conventions and visitors either by the city or through contracts with persons or organizations selected by the city; and for the furnishing of facilities, personnel and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants; and 
(2)  That amount equal to fourteen (14) percent of the revenue generated by such tax shall be expended for the encouragement, promotion, improvement and application of the arts, including music (instrumental and vocal), dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, television, radio, tape and sound recording, and the arts related to the presentation, performance, execution and exhibition of these major art forms. 
(Code 1965, § 24-31) 
Sec. 24-49. - Collection of tax by hotel and payment to city. 
    The tax levied pursuant to this article upon hotel occupancy shall be collected by each hotel within the city upon collection by said hotel of the consideration paid by the occupant of the sleeping room. Such revenues shall be paid by the hotel to the city through its finance office by the fifteenth (15th) day of the month following each monthly reporting period in which the tax is earned pursuant to section 24-52. 
(Code 1965, § 24-32; Ord. No. 4975, § 2(2.01), 12-10-18) 
Sec. 24-50. - Records to be maintained by hotel. 
    Every hotel within the city shall keep and maintain an accurate record of the consideration and the hotel occupancy tax paid by the occupant of each sleeping room in the hotel, and any employee, agent, officer or representative of the city shall be authorized to have access to the records maintained hereunder at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1965, § 24-33) 
Sec. 24-51. - Rules and regulations for implementation. 
    The director shall have the power to make any rules and regulations necessary to effectively collect the tax. The director shall, upon giving reasonable notice, have access to all books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under this article. 
(Ord. No. 4562, § 1, 5-20-10) 
Sec. 24-52. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  On the 15th day of the month following each month in which a tax is earned, every person required by this article to collect the tax shall file a report with the director showing: 
(1)  The consideration paid for all occupancies in the preceding month; 
(2)  The amount of the tax collected on the occupancies; and 
(3)  Any other information the director may reasonably require. 
(b)  Every person required by this article to collect the tax shall pay the tax due on all occupancies in the preceding month to the director at the time of filing the report required under subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 4562, § 1, 5-20-10) 
Sec. 24-53. - Offenses and penalties. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Fails to collect the tax; 
(2)  Fails to file a report as required by this article; 
(3)  Fails to pay the director the tax when payment is due; or 
(4)  Files a false report. 
(b)  An offense committed under subsection (a) of this section is punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-12. 
(c)  In addition to any penalties imposed under subsection (b) of this section, a person failing to pay the tax to the director within the time required shall pay an additional ten (10) percent of the tax due as a penalty. An additional ten (10) percent of the tax due shall be paid thirty (30) days later if the tax is not paid. The penalty provided by this subsection may never be less than five dollars ($5.00). Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per year beginning thirty (30) days from the date the tax is due. 
(Ord. No. 4562, § 1, 5-20-10; Ord. No. 4975, § 2(2.02), 12-10-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4975, § 2(2.02), adopted Dec. 10, 2018, changed the title of § 24-53 from "Offenses defined" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 24-54. - Collection authorized. 
    Civil action for collections. In addition to any other remedies allowed by state law, the city attorney or other attorney acting for the city may bring suit against a person who is required to file a report required by section 24-52, collect the tax imposed by this chapter and/or pay the collections over to the city if such person has failed to file a tax report, collect the tax and/or pay the tax when due in order to collect the tax not paid, obtain the reports or to enjoin the person from operating a hotel in the municipality until the tax is paid and/or the report filed, as applicable. In addition to the amount of any tax owed under this chapter, the person is liable to the city for the city's reasonable attorney's fees and a penalty equal to fifteen (15) percent of the total amount of the tax owed, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.004. 
(Ord. No. 4562, § 1, 5-20-10; Ord. No. 4975, § 2(2.03), 12-10-18) 
Chapter 25 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; emergency management, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; nuisances, Ch. 13; junked, wrecked and abandoned vehicles, § 13-66 et seq.; peddlers and solicitors and certain other sales, Ch. 15; planning, Ch. 17; driving vehicles or riding animals in public parks or school grounds prohibited, § 18-112; signs, Ch. 19; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; subdivision regulations, Ch. 22; vehicles for hire, Ch. 27. 
State Law reference- Uniform Traffic Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a public way in the city extending either partly or through any city block in the rear of city lots and in a direction generally from avenue to avenue, not more than twenty (20) feet in width and capable of being traversed by a vehicle. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire department (fire patrol), police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the chief of police. 
    Business district means the territory contiguous to and including a roadway when, within any six hundred (600) feet along such roadway, there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes which occupy three hundred (300) feet of frontage on one (1) side or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the roadway. 
    Bus means a commercial vehicle carrying passengers for hire and operating over and along a fixed route. 
    Bus stop means a section of the roadway along the edge thereof, authorized by order of the city council, marked by signs reading "bus stop" as a place for the sole use and convenience of the general public to board and depart from any bus. 
    Crosswalk means that part of a roadway at any intersection included within the connection of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the street, whether marked or not, measured from the curbs or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. The word crosswalk also includes any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Driver means that person who drives or is in actual physical control of the movements of a vehicle. 
    Driveway, private, means any entrance or exit over the sidewalk or sidewalk area of any street affording a means of ingress or egress for vehicles to or from any private property, or the entrance or exit of any private garage into or from any alley. 
    Driveway, public, means any entrance or exit over the sidewalk or sidewalk area of any street affording a means of ingress or egress for vehicles to or from any public property. 
    Exhibition of acceleration means the practice of starting any motor vehicle from a standing position by applying a sudden burst of power, recognized by spinning rear wheels and noise of tires on the surface of the roadway. 
    Intersection means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines, of the roadways of two (2) streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a street includes two (2) roadways, thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting street also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such streets shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
    Laned roadway means a roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
    Limited-access or controlled-access highway means every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway. 
    Loading zone means that portion of any roadway set apart, marked and numbered for the sole use of the public as a place for loading or unloading passengers, merchandise or other cargo. 
    Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
    No parking zone means a space on the roadway adjacent to the curb, whether marked by official signs or not, in which no vehicle may be parked. 
    official traffic-control devices means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than a temporary stopping of such vehicle for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, merchandise or other cargo; except an involuntary stopping of such vehicle by reason of mechanical failure or direction of a policeman. 
    Parking meter means a device to regulate the amount of time a vehicle may be parked in a particular parking space. 
    Parking stall or parking space means that portion or section of a roadway adjacent to the curbing or edge, set apart, marked and bounded by lines painted or marked upon the surface of the roadway and extending into the roadway for the use of parking vehicles; or that portion of any alley marked by official signs showing such space to be a parking zone. 
    Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
    Police officer means any member of the police department of the city authorized by law to make arrests in traffic offenses. 
    Residence district means the territory contiguous to and including a street not comprising a business district, when the property on such street for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is, in the main, improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
    Right-of-way means the privilege of immediate use of the roadway. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a street includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term roadway shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Stop when required, means complete cessation of movement. 
    Stop, stopping or standing when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel. 
    Traffic-control signal means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Truck means a motor vehicle designed primarily for the transportation of cargo. 
    U-turn means the turning or causing the turning of a vehicle, so that when such turn is completed that such vehicle will be headed in the opposite direction from that in which it was headed before such turning was begun, whether or not such vehicle is pulled into a driveway or any space beyond the curbline of the street. 
    Vehicle means any device in, upon or by which any person or property may be or is transported upon any street within the corporate limits of the city, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1965, § 26-1; Ord. No. 4701, § 18(a), 6-17-13) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 1-20. 
Sec. 25-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
    The purpose of the regulations prescribed by this chapter is to insure to the people the maximum use and benefit of the public streets of the city and yet retain the maximum degree of safety to prevent injury to person and property. 
(Code 1965, § 26-2) 
Sec. 25-3. - Authority of police officers to direct traffic. 
    Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with this chapter and other traffic laws. In the event of fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter and other traffic laws. 
(Code 1965, § 26-3) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of police officers, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(2). 
Sec. 25-4. - Authority of officers of fire department to direct traffic. 
    Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1965, § 26-4) 
Sec. 25-5. - Obedience to traffic officers. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official given to direct or control traffic as authorized in this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 26-5; Ord. No. 4701, § 18(b), 6-17-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 22. 
Sec. 25-6. - Vehicle equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle on any street, alley or other public way in the city, unless such vehicle is equipped in accord with all state laws governing vehicles, particularly sections 108 through 139a of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, or to fail to use such equipment as required by such laws, or to use any equipment contrary to such laws. 
(Code 1965, § 26-6) 
Sec. 25-7. - Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers. 
    No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1965, § 26-7) 
Sec. 25-8. - Riding motorcycles. 
    A person operating a motorcycle shall not ride other than upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or carry any other person, nor shall any other person ride upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached seat to the rear or side of the operator. 
(Code 1965, § 26-8) 
Sec. 25-9. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles. 
    No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1965, § 26-9) 
Sec. 25-10. - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Code 1965, § 26-10) 
Sec. 25-11. - Use of roller skates, skateboards, bicycles, etc., on roadways and sidewalks. 
    No person upon or riding upon any roller skates, skateboard, toy vehicle, coaster or similar device shall go upon any street or roadway within the city, except while crossing a street at a designated crosswalk or at the intersection of streets. Within the central area district as defined by the zoning map of the city, no person upon or riding upon any bicycle, roller skates, skateboard, toy vehicle, coaster or similar device shall go upon any sidewalk or driveway; provided, however, nothing herein is intended to prevent the city council from granting specific exemptions for planned special events. 
(Code 1965, § 26-11; Ord. No. 3278, § 1, 5-20-91) 
Sec. 25-12. - Glass, nails, etc., not to be deposited in street; removal of same. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or alley any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such street or alley. 
(b)  Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any street or alley any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from any street or alley shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon such street or alley from the vehicle. 
(Code 1965, § 26-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 102, 103. 
Sec. 25-13. - Removing or damaging traffic barriers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a city employee, to remove or damage any barriers erected under the direction of the city engineer either closing a street or for the purpose of warning traffic of an obstruction in the street. 
(Code 1965, § 26-13) 
Sec. 25-14. - Duty to stop in event of accident. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to another vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close thereto as possible, and give his name, address and the registration number of vehicle he is driving and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit his license to operate the class of vehicle he is driving. 
(b)  The driver of any vehicle which is involved in an accident resulting in damage to any other vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop his vehicle and then and there either locate the operator or owner of such damaged vehicle and notify such operator or owner of his name and address or shall leave in a conspicuous place in or attached to and plainly visible the vehicle struck, a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement of the circumstances thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 26-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 39, 41; duty of driver in event of accident resulting in death or personal injury, art. 6701d, §§ 38, 40. 
Sec. 25-15. - Application of chapter to person propelling pushcarts, riding animals, etc. 
    Every person propelling any pushcart or riding any animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions which, by their very nature, can have no application. 
(Code 1965, § 26-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 25. 
Sec. 25-16. - Application of chapter to drivers of government vehicles. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, county or city. It shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted herein or by state statute. 
(Code 1965, § 26-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 24(a). 
Sec. 25-17. - Application of chapter to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles, except that a driver, when operating any such vehicle in an emergency or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, except when otherwise directed by a police officer, may: 
(1)  Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(b)  The exemption granted above shall apply only when the driver of the vehicle sounds a siren, bell, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and the vehicle displays a lighted red lamp visible from the front as a warning to others. 
(Code 1965, § 26-18) 
State Law reference- Exemption of authorized emergency vehicles from certain traffic regulations, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 24. 
Sec. 25-18. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
(a)  The chief of police by and with the approval of the traffic safety coordinator is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulations shall remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days. 
(b)  The traffic safety coordinator may test traffic-control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Code 1965, § 26-20) 
Sec. 25-19. - Truck routes. 
(a)  The following streets, avenues and highways are hereby designated as truck routes within the corporate limits of the city: 
(1)  U.S. Highway 69 from city limits to city limits. 
(2)  U.S. Highway 75 from city limits to city limits. 
(3)  U.S. Highway 75-A from city limits to city limits. 
(4)  All of Farm-to-Market Road 120 within the city limits. 
(5)  Morton Street between Tone Avenue and Austin Avenue. 
(6)  Crockett Avenue from its intersection with Farm to Market Road 120 to its intersection with Bells Drive and continuing along Bells Drive to its intersection with U.S. Highway 69. 
(7)  Crawford Street from Austin Avenue to Armstrong Avenue. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle with a gross vehicular weight rating of over eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds, or having an eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds' gross cargo weight rating in the case of a truck-trailer or tractor-trailer unit, on any city street other than one identified as a truck route in paragraph (a) above; provided, however: 
(1)  That if the point of origin or destination, for commercial purposes only, for any such truck shall be off such truck route, then such truck may proceed by the shortest route to the nearest truck route; or 
(2)  This subsection shall not apply to recreational vehicles as to use and travel upon the public streets, but shall apply to recreational vehicles as to standing or parking. 
(Code 1965, § 26-59) 
Sec. 25-20. - Trucks, etc., restricted to portion of U.S. Highway 75 designated for thru-traffic. 
(a)  The operator of a truck, truck-trailer or semitruck-trailer entering the corporate limits of the city as thru-traffic on U.S. Highway 75 shall remain on the signed portion of U.S. Highway 75 at all times while within the corporate limits of the city. For the purposes of this section, truck, truck-trailer, or semitruck-trailer shall mean any vehicle having a rating of one-and-one-half-ton load weight rating or more by the manufacturer's classification or the equivalency thereof. For the purpose of this section, thru-traffic shall mean traffic originating outside the corporate limits of the city and having a destination outside the corporate limits of the city, with no legitimate need to depart the thru-street route. 
(b)  The director of public works be and is hereby instructed to mark and sign such routes for the thru-traffic as herein designated or cause the same to be done, by or in cooperation with the Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation, in a manner substantially complying with the following at the north and south entrances of U.S. Highway 75 into the city as follows: 
North U.S. 75 South U.S. 75 Thru trucks stay on U.S. 75 Thru trucks stay on U.S. 75 City ordinance City ordinance  
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in any manner so as to violate the terms and provisions of this section. 
(Code 1965, § 26-60) 
Sec. 25-21. - Police initiated tow. 
(a)  Definition. 
(1)  Police initiated tow: includes vehicles incapacitated as a result of an accident or involved in a crime - and the owner cannot or will not secure the services of his/her own towing service. These tows also include: 
a.  Vehicles towed because they are incapacitated or abandoned on a public street, and the owners are unwilling to call a towing company or are absent; 
b.  Vehicles towed after drivers are arrested; 
c.  Vehicles impounded because they are evidence of a crime; or 
d.  Vehicles impounded because the driver is unlicensed or uninsured. 
(b)  The police chief or designee, shall be in charge of the administration and enforcement of the city's police initiated towing and police impounds. The police chief shall have the authority to promulgate reasonable policies and procedures so as to carry out the duties of the police department as it relates to towing services. The police chief shall set forth these policies and procedures in writing. Such duties may include, but are not limited to, providing and reviewing applications for tow service, inspecting tow trucks, inspecting records, inspecting vehicle storage facilities used by contractors for compliance and investigating complaints regarding such towing services. 
(c)  When a police officer stops a vehicle for an alleged violation of a city ordinance or state traffic law or other law applicable to the operation of a vehicle on the roadway and the vehicle's owner or operator fails to show evidence of financial responsibility as required under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 601 as amended, the officer is authorized to impound the vehicle using the tow service selected by the police chief's policies and procedures. The registered owner is responsible to the tow company for all towing and storage fees that may be assessed. 
(Ord. No. 4830, § 1, 8-1-16) 
Secs. 25-22-25-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 25-41. - Duty to drive on right side of street. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall drive on the right side of the street, except when overtaking and passing a vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules established in this article, and except when the right half of the street is closed to traffic by the proper authorities, and except upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon or upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic. 
(Code 1965, § 26-30) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 52. 
Sec. 25-42. - Passing vehicle proceeding in opposite direction. 
    Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right and, upon streets having width for not more than one (1) line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main-traveled portion of the street, as nearly as possible. 
(Code 1965, § 26-34) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 53. 
Sec. 25-43. - Turning movements generally. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)  Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  The approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. 
(3)  The approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the center line of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection. 
(4)  Where both streets or roadways are one-way, both the approach for a left turn and the left turn shall be made as close as practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(5)  On Austin Avenue, between U.S. Highway 69 and Johnson Street, left turns shall be made, where not prohibited elsewhere in this Code, only from the center lane provided for that purpose. 
(6)  On Morton Street between the intersection with Bush Lane westerly to U.S. Highway 75 left turns shall be made where not prohibited only from the center lane provided for that purpose. 
(7)  There is hereby established in the 2700 block of Sunset Street, a prohibition of left turns on each and every day in which the Denison Independent School district is in class; such prohibition to be effective at such location and on such days between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., and it is hereby declared to be unlawful and a violation of this section to negotiate such a turn during the times and days herein proscribed. 
(b)  In the 100 Block of North Houston and the 100 Block of South Houston, the 100 Block of North Burnett, the 100 Block of South Burnett, the 100 Block of North Fannin, the 100 Block of South Fannin, the 100 Block of North Mirick, the 100 Block of South Mirick, the 100 Block of North Barrett Avenue, the 100 Block of South Barrett Avenue, and on Main Street and Chestnut Street, between the east curbline of Houston Avenue and the west curbline of Armstrong Avenue, and on Woodard Street, between the east curbline of Houston Avenue and the west curbline of Barrett Avenue, no driver of any vehicle shall turn across a double yellow line in the center of the aforementioned streets and avenues for the purpose of parking such vehicle or for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, merchandise, or other cargo; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed so as to prohibit the driver of any vehicle from crossing a double yellow line for the purpose of entering an off-street parking lot, alleyway or private drive which may intersect with or be adjacent to the aforementioned streets and avenues. 
(c)  No driver of any vehicle shall make a U-turn within the city except at dead-end streets, culs-de-sac, and at intersections not controlled by traffic signal lights or not marked by two (2) or more stop signs. 
(Code 1965, § 26-35; Ord. No. 3451, § 1, 3-21-94; Ord. No. 4539, § 1, 11-16-09) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 65; authority of city to regulate turns at intersections, art. 6701d, § 27(a)(8). 
Sec. 25-44. - Stopping and turning signals-Generally. 
(a)  When any other traffic may be affected by such movement, no person shall turn any vehicle without giving a signal of his intention to turn right or left. Such signal shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred (100) feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
(b)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
(c)  A stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given by means of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or mechanical signal device of a type approved by the state department of public safety; provided however, that when the body of a vehicle or the body and load of a vehicle projects twenty-four (24) inches or more to the left of the center of the steering wheel, or under any condition when a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of the vehicle, the vehicle must be equipped with and the signals must be given by such turn-indicating lamp or device. 
(Code 1965, § 26-37) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 68, 69. 
Sec. 25-45. - Same-Manner of giving with hand and arm. 
    All signals required by section 25-44, when given by hand and arm, shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(2)  Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward. 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward. 
(Code 1965, § 26-38) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 70. 
Sec. 25-46. - Right-of-way at intersections-Generally. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different street or highway. When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection which is not controlled by a traffic sign or device from different streets at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(b)  When two (2) vehicles approach one another on the same street going in opposite directions and the driver of one (1) of the vehicles desires to turn off such street, the vehicle which continues on the street in the original direction has the right-of-way over the turning vehicle. In the event both drivers desire to turn off, then the vehicle turning to the right has the right-of-way over the vehicle turning to the left. 
(Code 1965, § 26-39) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 71, 72. 
Sec. 25-47. - Same-When turning left. 
    The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this article, may make such left turn, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn. 
(Code 1965, § 26-40) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 72. 
Sec. 25-48. - Same-Yield right-of-way signs. 
    The director of public works, as authorized from time to time by the city council, may install and maintain yield right-of-way signs at intersections. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield right-of-way sign shall, in obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, or shall stop if necessary, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian crossing the roadway on which he is driving and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another street so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(Code 1965, § 26-41) 
Sec. 25-49. - Limitations on backing. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not back a vehicle from a parking stall to the opposite side of any street and shall not back a vehicle unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1965, § 26-42) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to designate one-way streets and require traffic thereon to move in one specific direction, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(4). 
Sec. 25-50. - One-way streets and alleys. 
(a)  Whenever any ordinance of the city council designates any one-way street or alley, the director of public works shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(b)  Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys which are designated as one-way streets or alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction where signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1965, § 26-43) 
Sec. 25-51. - Driving on divided streets. 
    Whenever any street or highway in the city has been divided into two (2) roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through an opening therein or at a crossover or intersection. 
(Code 1965, § 26-44) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 62. 
Sec. 25-52. - Procedure upon approach of authorized emergency vehicle. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp exhibiting red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle, and when the driver of such vehicle is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1965, § 26-45) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 75. 
Sec. 25-53. - Obstructing traffic generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, drive or propel a vehicle in such manner as to block or obstruct the traffic on any street or alley of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 26-47) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 104(a). 
Sec. 25-54. - Obstructing intersection or crosswalk. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1965, § 26-48) 
Sec. 25-55. - Following too closely. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and conditions of the street. 
(Code 1965, § 26-49) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 61(a). 
Sec. 25-56. - Following fire apparatus or driving near scene of fire. 
    No driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred (500) feet, nor shall such driver drive into or park such vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has stopped to answer a fire alarm. 
(Code 1965, § 26-50) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 100. 
Sec. 25-57. - Driving over fire hose. 
    No driver of any vehicle shall drive over an unprotected hose of the fire department when such hose has been laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1965, § 26-51) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 101. 
Sec. 25-58. - Funeral processions. 
    Every funeral procession shall be marked with appropriate pennants or other device or method, such as burning headlights in daytime, sufficient to show the nature of such procession and any person who, as the driver of any vehicle, shall cross through or interrupt any funeral procession shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 26-52) 
Sec. 25-59. - Driving on sidewalks. 
    Any driver of any vehicle who shall drive such vehicle upon any sidewalk or sidewalk area of any street within the city, except on a driveway, public or private, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 26-53) 
Sec. 25-60. - Driving through safety zones. 
    No driver of any vehicle shall, at any time, drive through or within a safety zone. 
(Code 1965, § 26-54) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 85. 
Sec. 25-61. - Passing around rotary traffic island. 
    The driver of a vehicle passing around any rotary traffic island within the city shall drive only to the right of such island. 
(Code 1965, § 26-55) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 59(c). 
Sec. 25-62. - Exhibition of acceleration prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any driver of any motor vehicle to wilfully cause such vehicle to dig out or to cause any such vehicle to make unnecessary noise by reason of operating such vehicle in such manner as to cause the wheels thereof to spin or slide on the roadway of any street when starting such vehicle or while making any turning movement. 
(Code 1965, § 26-57; Ord. No. 4701, § 18(c), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 18(c) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, changed the title of § 25-62 from "Digging out prohibited" to "Exhibition of acceleration prohibited." 
Sec. 25-63. - Alternative motor-driven vehicles. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
    Neighborhood electric vehicle and low-speed vehicle are synonymous and mean: 
(1)  A vehicle subject to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 500 (49 C.F.R. Section 571.500); and 
(2)  A vehicle registered by the State of Texas; and 
(3)  A vehicle for which the owner or operator has complied with V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 601, Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility. 
    Motor assisted scooter. 
(1)  Means a self-propelled device with: 
a.  At least two (2) wheels in contact with the ground during operation; 
b.  A braking system capable of stopping the device under typical operating conditions; 
c.  A gas or electric motor not exceeding forty (40) cubic centimeters; 
d.  A deck designed to allow a person to stand or sit while operating the device; and 
e.  The ability to be propelled by human power alone; and 
(2)  Does not include a pocket bike or mini-motorbike. 
    Pocket bike or mini-motorbike means a self-propelled vehicle that is equipped with an electric motor or internal combustion engine having a piston displacement of less than fifty (50) cubic centimeters, is designed to propel itself with not more than two (2) wheels in contact with the ground, has a seat or saddle for the use of the operator, is not designed for use on a highway, and is ineligible for a certificate of title under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 501. The term does not include: 
(1)  A moped or motorcycle; 
(2)  An electric bicycle or motor-driven cycle, as defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.201; 
(3)  A motorized mobility device, as defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.009; 
(4)  An electric personal assistive mobility device, as defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 551.201; or 
(5)  A neighborhood electric vehicle. 
(b)  (1)  In addition to the streets and highways listed in subsection (b)(2) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a neighborhood electric vehicle or a motor assisted scooter on a street for which the posted speed limit is equal to or greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour. A neighborhood electric vehicle may cross a road or street at an intersection where the road or street has a posted speed limit equal to or greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a neighborhood electric vehicle or a motor assisted scooter on any of the following streets within the corporate limits; to-wit: 
a.  North and South Avenues: 
Armstrong. 
Crockett. 
Juanita. 
Lillis Lane. 
Maurice. 
Mirick. 
Park. 
b.  East and West Streets: 
Coffin, from Spur 503 to Woodlawn Blvd. 
Crawford. 
Crawford Street Road. 
c.  State Highways: 
F.M. 120. 
Spur 503. 
State Highways 84 and 91. 
U.S. Highway 75. 
U.S. Highway 69. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a neighborhood electric vehicle upon any street within the corporate limits unless such person shall be the holder of a valid Texas Driver's License issued by the state department of public safety. 
(c)  This section may not be construed to authorize the operation of a pocket bike or mini-motorbike on any: 
(1)  Highway, road, or street; 
(2)  Path set aside for the exclusive operation of bicycles; or 
(3)  Sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 4481, § 1, 10-6-08) 
Sec. 25-64. - Use of hand-held mobile telephones prohibited in school zones. 
(a)  For purposes of this section the following definitions apply: 
(1)  Engaging in a call shall mean talking into, dialing, answering or listening on a hand-held mobile telephone, but shall not include holding a mobile telephone to activate or deactivate such telephone. 
(2)  Hands-free mobile telephone shall mean a mobile telephone that has an internal feature or function, or that is equipped with an attachment or addition, whether or not permanently part of such mobile telephone, by which a user engages in a call without the use of either hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person), whether or not the use of either hand (or prosthetic device) is necessary to activate, deactivate or initiate a function of such telephone. 
(3)  Hand-held mobile telephone shall mean a mobile telephone with which a user engages in a call using at least one (1) hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person). 
(4)  Mobile telephone shall mean the device used by subscribers and other users of wireless telephone service to access such service and shall include personal digital assistants. 
(5)  Personal digital assistant shall mean a device operated using a wireless telecommunications service that provides for data communication other than by voice. 
(6)  Wireless telephone service shall mean two-way real-time voice telecommunications service that is interconnected to a public switched telephone network and commonly referred to as cellular service or personal communication service. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided below, it shall be unlawful for a person to drive or operate a motor vehicle in a school zone, as designated by any lawful authority, on official school days, during the hours when school zones are in effect, and when school zone signs and signs prohibiting hand-held mobile telephone use are posted in place, while using a hand-held or hands-free mobile telephone to engage in a call or to create, send or read messages. 
(c)  An operator of a motor vehicle who holds a mobile telephone to, or in the immediate proximity of his or her ear while such vehicle is in motion is presumed to be engaging in a call within the meaning of this section. Immediate proximity shall mean that distance as permits the operator of a mobile telephone to hear telecommunications transmitted over such mobile telephone, but shall not require physical contact with such operator's ear. 
(d)  Subsection (b) shall not apply to: 
(1)  The use of a mobile telephone for the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an emergency situation, an emergency response operator; a hospital, a physician's office; 
(2)  Any law enforcement, public safety or police officers, emergency services officials, first aid, emergency medical technicians and personnel, or any fire safety officials in the performance of duties arising out of and in the course of their employment as such; or 
(3)  The use of a hands-free mobile telephone when being used in a hands-free manner. 
(Ord. No. 4499, § 1, 2-16-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4499, § 1, adopted Feb. 16, 2009, set out provisions intended for use as § 25-63. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as § 25-64, at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 25-65-25-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 25-81. - Conformity with manual and specifications of state highway department; uniformity. 
    All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state highway department. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices. 
(Code 1965, § 26-70) 
Sec. 25-82. - General powers and duties of director of public works relative to devices. 
    The director of public works shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this chapter to make effective the provisions of this chapter, and may place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. It shall be the duty of the director of public works to supervise the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices. 
(Code 1965, § 26-71) 
Sec. 25-83. - Designation of crosswalks, safety zones; marking traffic lanes. 
    The director of public works is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at any intersection where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(3)  To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city. 
(Code 1965, § 26-72) 
Sec. 25-84. - Obedience to devices. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(Code 1965, § 26-73) 
Sec. 25-85. - Necessity of signs. 
    No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(Code 1965, § 26-74) 
Sec. 25-86. - Installation of traffic lights. 
    The director of public works, as authorized by the city council from time to time, shall designate intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by electric traffic-control signals or lights and shall cause such signals or lights to be installed and maintained at such intersections. 
(Code 1965, § 26-75) 
Sec. 25-87. - Ratification of existing devices. 
    All traffic-control signs, signals, devices, and markings placed or erected prior to the adoption of this Code and in use for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be official traffic-control devices, provided such traffic-control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or state law. 
(Code 1965, § 26-79) 
Sec. 25-88. - Unauthorized signs, signals, etc. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any road, street or highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad signal or sign, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway or street any traffic signal or sign bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection, upon private property adjacent to streets or highways, of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signals. 
(b)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the city is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 36. 
Sec. 25-89. - Altering, injuring, etc., devices. 
    No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon or any other part thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 26-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 37. 
Secs. 25-90-25-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference- Speed of vehicles in cities and authority of cities to alter prima facie speed limits established by state law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 166, 169. 

Sec. 25-106. - Maximum limits generally. 
(a)  No person shall operate or drive any vehicle on any street within the city at a greater speed than thirty (30) miles per hour, unless signs are erected designating another speed in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no person shall drive a vehicle on a street at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(c)  The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of (b) above, drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or street or highway conditions. 
(Code 1965, § 26-92) 
Sec. 25-107. - Maximum limits on specific streets. 
    The city council may alter the maximum speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour, as established by section 25-106, on any street or portion thereof within the city in accord with the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, section 169. Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established for a particular street or portion thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of such limit. 
(Code 1965, § 26-93) 
Sec. 25-107.1. - School zone speed limits. 
(a)  On the following described portions of city streets, the prima facie maximum speed limit is established at twenty (20) miles per hour, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on each and every day in which the Denison public schools are in session and holding classes: 
Crawford Street 
Westbound traffic, from 278 feet east of the east curb line of Tone Avenue westerly to 130 feet east of the east curb line of Eddy Avenue. 
Westbound traffic, from 135 feet east of the east curb line of Jenny Lane westerly to Crawford Street's intersection with Lillis Lane. 
Eastbound traffic, from 130 feet east of the east curb line of Eddy Avenue easterly to 278 feet east of the east curb line of Tone Avenue. 
Eastbound traffic, from Crawford Street's intersection with Lillis Lane easterly to 135 feet east of the east curb line of Jenny Lane. 
Lillis Lane 
Northbound and southbound traffic, from 280 feet south of the south curb line of Crawford Street Lane northerly to the north curb line of Elk Street. 
South Hyde Park Avenue 
Northbound and southbound traffic. The 1600, 1700 and 1800 blocks, inclusive. 
West Morgan Street 
Eastbound and westbound traffic on Morgan Street from its intersection with Rusk Avenue to its intersection with Fannin Avenue. 
Eastbound and westbound traffic, the 1000 and 1100 blocks. 
South Fifth Avenue 
Northbound and southbound traffic, the 900 and 1000 blocks. 
North Burnett Avenue 
Northbound and southbound traffic, the 700 through 900 blocks, inclusive. 
North Rusk Avenue 
Northbound and south bound traffic, the 800 block. 
South Perry Avenue 
Northbound and southbound traffic, the 400 through 600 blocks, inclusive. 
Jenny Lane 
Northbound and southbound traffic, the 200 and 300 blocks. 
Elk Street 
Eastbound and westbound traffic, the 2700, 2800 and 2900 blocks. 
Sunset Street 
Eastbound and westbound traffic, the 2600, 2700 and 2800 blocks. 
South Scullin Avenue 
Northbound and southbound traffic, the 1900 through 2300 blocks, inclusive. 
East 
Eastbound and westbound traffic, the 400 and 500 block. 
Martin Luther King Street 
Eastbound and westbound traffic, the 300 and 200 blocks, inclusive. 
East Texas Street 
Eastbound and westbound traffic, the 500 block. 
South Sixth 
Northbound and southbound traffic, 900 and 1000 block. 
Tone Avenue 
Northbound and southbound traffic, 400 through 600 blocks, inclusive. 
West Florence Street 
Eastbound and westbound traffic, the 700, 800 and 900 blocks. 
South Mirick Avenue 
Northbound and southbound traffic, from its intersection with Brock Street to its intersection with Coffin Street. 
Brock Street 
Eastbound and westbound traffic, from its intersection with Mirick Avenue to its intersection with Scullin Avenue. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of the prima facie speed limit as herein established on the days, times and portion of streets herein specified and identified. Upon conviction of violation, punishment shall be by fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3795, §§ 1, 3, 4-20-98; Ord. No. 4217, § 1, 4-5-04; Ord. No. 4262, § 1, 12-13-04; Ord. No. 4430, § 1, 11-19-07; Ord. No. 4500, § 1, 2, 2-16-09; Ord. No. 4701, § 18(d), 6-17-13; Ord. No. 4838, § 2, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 25-107.2. - Additional school zone speed limits. 
(a)  The prima facie maximum speed limit is established at twenty (20) miles-per-hour and it shall be unlawful to exceed such speed, during the hours of 7:30 a.m. until 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. until 3:30 p.m. on each and every day in which the Denison public and private schools are in session and holding classes, on the following described portions of city streets; to-wit: 
West Woodard Street 
East and westbound traffic in the 400 Block, including its intersections with Fannin Avenue and Burnet Avenue. 
North Fannin Avenue 
North and southbound traffic in the 200 Block, including its intersections with Woodard Street and Gandy Street. 
West Gandy Street 
East and westbound traffic in the 400 Block, including its intersections with Fannin Avenue and Burnet Avenue. 
North Burnet Avenue 
North and southbound traffic in the 200 Block, including its intersections with Woodard Street and Gandy Street. 
(Ord. No. 4686, § 2, 4-15-13) 
Sec. 25-107.3. - Speed limits on certain highways. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle upon a public road, street or highway in the City of Denison, Texas, at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and circumstances then existing. Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speeds for compliance with the above requirement, the limits hereinafter set out shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of the limits as hereinafter set out for the streets and highways and portions thereof to which they apply shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent: 
Farm-to-Market (FM) Highway 120 from the west city limit of Denison in a easterly direction for an approximate distance of 2.254 miles a speed limit of sixty (60) miles per hour at all times; thence in a easterly direction for an approximate distance of 0.600 miles a speed limit of fifty (50) miles per hour at all times; thence in a easterly direction for a distance of 2.090 miles a speed limit of forty (40) miles per hour at all times; thence in an easterly direction for an approximate distance of 0.374 miles a speed limit of 35 (thirty-five) miles per hour at all times; thence in an easterly direction for an approximate distance of 0.504 miles a speed limit of 45 (forty-five) miles per hour at all times to the east city limit of Denison as evidenced by the attached plan is hereby approved and made a part thereof. 
FM Highway 131 , from approximate highway mile point 0.623 the northern city limit of Denison to mile point 2.200 the southern city limit of Denison in southerly direction a distance of approximately 1.577 miles, a speed limit of fifty-five (55) miles per hour at all times; as evidenced by the plan attached to Ord. No. 4521 is hereby approved and made a part thereof. 
On U.S. 75 frontage roads from their beginning at approximate mile point 10.672 on the northbound frontage road and mile point 10.680 on the southbound frontage road to approximate mile point 6.444 in southerly direction a distance of approximately 4.321 miles on the northbound frontage road and approximately 4.313 miles on the southbound frontage road, a speed limit of 55 (fifty-five) miles per hour at all times; thence southerly on both the northbound and southbound frontage roads from the approximate mile point 6.634 to the intersection of FM 120, for a distance of approximately 0.526 miles, a speed limit of 55 (fifty-five) miles per hour at all times as evidenced by the attached plan is hereby approved and made a part thereof. 
    The violation of any provision of this section shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day a violation of this section continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 3841, §§ 1, 2, 4, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 4068, § 1, 9-4-01; Ord. No. 4188, §§ 1, 3, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 4515, § 1, 5-18-09; Ord. No. 4521, § 1, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 4686, § 1, 4-15-13; Ord. No. 4833, § 2, 9-6-16) 
Sec. 25-108. - Maximum limit in certain alleys. 
(a)  The maximum legal speed limit in those alleys situated between Main Street and Chestnut Street from Houston Avenue on the East to Barrett Avenue on the West, and between Main Street and Woodward Street from Barrett Avenue on the West to Houston Avenue on the East, is hereby fixed as fifteen (15) miles per hour. When signs are in place giving notice of such limit, no person shall drive a vehicle in any such alley at a speed in excess of such limit. 
(b)  The maximum legal speed limit in those alleys situated immediately East and West of Frances Avenue and Flowers Drive on the South of Hi Meadow Drive on the North, is hereby fixed as fifteen (15) miles per hour. When signs are in place giving notice of such limit, no person shall drive a vehicle in any such alley at a speed in excess of such limit. 
(Code 1965, § 26-94) 
Sec. 25-109. - Racing prohibited. 
    Any person who shall race or engage in a contest for speed between motor vehicles of any kind upon any public street or alley within the city shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The fact that the actual speed attained by any vehicle engaged in racing or a contest for speed is less than the prima facie legal speed limit shall be no defense to a complaint of racing or engaging in a contest for speed in violation of this section. 
(Code 1965, § 26-95) 
Sec. 25-110. - Minimum limits. 
    No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(Code 1965, § 26-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 170(a). 
Sec. 25-111. - Exemptions from article. 
    The provisions of this article and other ordinances of the city regulating the speed of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles of the fire department when responding to a call, nor to police patrols, nor to physicians or ambulances when actually engaged in responding to emergency calls; provided however, that this section shall not authorize any ambulance driver to exceed the maximum legal speed limit by more than ten (10) miles per hour. 
(Code 1965, § 26-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 172. 
Secs. 25-112-25-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate standing and parking of vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(1). 

Sec. 25-131. - Unattended vehicles. 
    No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine and effectively setting the brakes thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the roadway. 
(Code 1965, § 26-108) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 97. 
Sec. 25-132. - Prohibited in certain places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk or sidewalk area. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant, except within an officially marked parking stall. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection or within twenty (20) feet of an intersection when marked by a yellow-colored curb. 
(7)  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings. 
(9)  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. 
(10)  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and, on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance (when properly signposted). 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel. 
(14)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(15)  Within twenty (20) feet of a refuse container furnished by the city to commercial and industrial concerns pursuant to chapter 20. 
(16)  Within ten (10) feet of either side of the driveway of any business or commercial establishment located within a business district. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any prohibited area specified above or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1965, § 26-109) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 95. 
Sec. 25-133. - Prohibited on certain streets. 
    No person shall park a vehicle or permit a vehicle to stand unattended on the following roadways, streets or highways: 
(1)  State Highway 91, on either side of the street in the following locations: 
a.  Armstrong Avenue from Scullin Avenue to Main Street. 
b.  Main Street from Scullin Avenue to Tone Avenue. 
c.  Tone Avenue from Main Street to Washington Avenue. 
(2)  Morton Street between Tone Avenue and Maurice Avenue. 
(3)  Austin Avenue between U.S. Highway 69 East and Washington Street. 
(4)  Scullin Avenue, in its east side of the street from its intersection with Armstrong to its intersection with Crawford Street. 
(5)  Both sides of Armstrong Avenue from Scullin Avenue to a point seven hundred twenty-five (725) feet south of Bullock Street. 
(6)  On the north side of Main Street between Travis Avenue and Crockett Avenue. 
(7)  On the south side of the 300 block of West Gandy Street, beginning one hundred twenty (120) feet west of the west curbline of the intersection of Gandy Street and Rusk Avenue, and extending westward twenty-five (25) feet. 
(8)  East and west sides of S.H. 91 South from Bullock Street to Flowers Drive. 
(9)  On the north side of the 100 block of East Main Street, from a point two hundred seventy (270) feet east of the east curbline of Houston Avenue, eastward to the east right-of-way line of the railroad. 
(10)  In the 500 block of South Burnett Avenue, on both the east and west sides of the street. 
(11)  Tower Lane, along the east curbline from its intersection with Armstrong Avenue to the beginning of its cul-de-sac. 
(12)  Seymore Street, on the north side of the street from the point of its intersection with Woodlawn Avenue to the point of its intersection with Maurice Avenue. 
(13)  That portion of the east curbline of the 2100 block of Mirick Avenue extending twenty-five (25) feet north of the north edge of the driveway of the Denison Girls Club to twenty-five (25) feet south of the south edge of such driveway. 
(14)  Flora Lane, on its south side of the street. 
(15)  Farm to Market Road 120 on either side of the roadway from its intersection with Bush Avenue to its intersection with Spring Valley Drive. 
(16)  Martin Luther King Boulevard on either side of the street in the 800 block; on the north side of the street in the 900 block; and on the south side of the street in the 1000 block. 
(17)  Armstrong Avenue on the west side from its intersection with Main Street to a point one hundred sixty-one (161) feet south of the intersection with Martin Luther King Boulevard. 
(18)  Pool Road beginning at a point one thousand nine hundred twenty (1,920) feet north of FM 691 and continuing in a northerly direction to the end of the present line of dedication; such parking prohibition to be effective on Monday through Friday, from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 1965, § 26-109; Ord. No. 3104, § 1, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 3122, § 1, 2-6-89; Ord. No. 3129, § 1, 2-20-89; Ord. No. 3140, § 2, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 3190, § 1, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 4106, § 1, 5-6-02; Ord. No. 4122, §§ 1-4, 7-15-02; Ord. No. 4487, § 1, 11-17-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 7-18-11; Ord. No. 4624, § 1, 10-17-11; Ord. No. 4701, § 18(e), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 25-134. - Prohibited for certain purposes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit to be parked any vehicle on any street in the city for the purpose of exhibiting such vehicle for sale, or for the purpose of washing such vehicle, or for the purpose of making repairs to such vehicle, except such repairs as may be necessary as emergency repairs. 
(Code 1965, § 26-110) 
Sec. 25-135. - Ten feet of roadway to be left available for traffic. 
    No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of either lane of a roadway for free movement of the vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals of a police officer. 
(Code 1965, § 26-111) 
Sec. 25-136. - Stop intersections. 
    The city council may designate any street intersection as a stop intersection and designate the streets upon which vehicles shall stop before entering such intersection. Whenever any intersection has been so designated, the director of public works shall cause the same to be identified by the erection of stop signs indicating which vehicles approaching the intersection shall stop, and it shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle approaching such a sign to bring such vehicle to a complete stop at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic-control signal. After having so stopped, such driver shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. Such driver, after having so yielded, may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching on the intersecting street shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding into or across the intersection. 
(Code 1965, § 26-112) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to designate stop intersections, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 27(a)(6), 91(a); duty of drivers with respect to stop signs, art. 6701d, §§ 73, 91(c). 
Sec. 25-136.1. - Same-Enumerated. 
    The following intersections are designated as stop intersections: 
    Amsden Circle at its intersection with Vine Boulevard. 
    Belle Avenue at its intersection with Flowers Drive. 
    Belle Avenue at its intersection with Highland Park Drive. 
    Big Cedar Lane at its intersection with Vine Boulevard. 
    Chandler Avenue at its intersection with Munson Street. 
    Chandler Avenue at its intersection with West Bond Street. 
    Cigna driveway at its intersection with U.S. 75 frontage road. 
    Cold Creek Drive at its intersection with Highway FM 131. 
    Crawford Street Road at its intersection with Lillis Lane. 
    Cross Drive at its intersection with [Highway] FM 120. 
    Fannin Avenue at its intersection with Bond Street. 
    Flora Lane at its intersection with Imperial Drive. 
    Gateway Boulevard at its intersection with U.S. Highway East access road. 
    Gateway Boulevard at its intersection with U.S. 75 frontage road. 
    Greenwood Circle at its intersection with Lillis Lane. 
    High Point Drive/Circle at its intersection with Point Lookout Drive. 
    Little Creek Drive at its intersection with South College Blvd. 
    Milton Drive at its intersection with F.M. Road 691. 
    Mirick Avenue at its intersection with Gandy Street. 
    Old Pottsboro Road at its intersection with [Highway] FM 120. 
    Park Ridge at its intersection with South Park Avenue. 
    Perry Avenue at its intersection with West Sears Street. 
    Pinnacle Place at its intersection with Shannon Road. 
    Pool Road at its intersection with [Highway] FM 691. 
    Reba McEntire Lane at its intersection with Memorial Drive. 
    Renaissance Drive at its intersection with Park Avenue. 
    Rivercrest at its intersection with Flora Lane. 
    Scullin Avenue at its intersection with Bond Street. 
    Shane Court at its intersection with Cathey Drive. 
    South Eddy Avenue at its intersection with West Nelson Street. 
    South Fannin Avenue at its intersection with West Monterey Street. 
    South Fifth Avenue at its intersection with East Munson Street. 
    Spur 503 Service Road (east and west) at its intersection with Fannin Road. 
    Square D Road at its intersection with South Fannin Avenue. 
    Texoma Medical Center Drive at its intersection with [Highway] FM 691. 
    Texoma Medical Center Drive (northbound and southbound) at its intersection with Gateway Boulevard. 
    Texoma Medical Center driveway at its intersection with U.S. 75 frontage road. 
    Trail Drive at its intersection with Loy Lake Road. 
    Texas Street at its intersection with Tone Avenue. 
    Village Circle at its intersection with Lillis Lane. 
    Wesley Village Drive at its intersection with Loy Lake Road. 
    West Acheson Street (eastbound) at its intersection with South Maurice Street. 
    West Bond Street at its intersection with North Mirick Avenue. 
    West Munson Street at its intersection with South Fannin Avenue. 
    West Murray Street (eastbound and westbound) at its intersection with South Fairbanks Avenue. 
    West Sunset Drive at its intersection with Hyde Park Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 3747, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 3758.1, § 1, 11-3-97; Ord. No. 3759, § 2, 11-3-97; Ord. No. 3775, § 1, 1-19-98; Ord. No. 3825, § 1, 10-19-98; Ord. No. 4008, § 2, 12-18-00; Ord. No. 4105, § 1, 5-6-02; Ord. No. 4118, § 1, 6-17-02; Ord. No. 4159, §§ 1-3, 3-3-03; Ord. No. 4165, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 4172, § 1(A), (B), 7-21-03; Ord. No. 4194, § 1A-D, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 4263, § 1, 12-13-04; Ord. No. 4281, §§ 1, 2, 5-2-05; Ord. No. 4298, §§ 1(A), 1(B), 7-18-05; Ord. No. 4310, § 1, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 4320, §§ 1(a), 1(b), 9-19-05; Ord. No. 4356, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 4357, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 4358, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 4433, § 1, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 4495, § 1, 2-2-09; Ord. No. 4536, § 1, 11-2-09; Ord. No. 4537, § 1, 11-2-09; Ord. No. 4541, § 1, 1-18-10; Ord. No. 4555, § 1, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 4556, § 1, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 4557, § 1, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 4558, § 1, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 4559, § 1, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 4560, § 1, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 4561, § 1, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 4569, § 1, 8-2-10; Ord. No. 4582, § 1, 12-13-10) 
Editor's note- Per the city's request to list all traffic and speed schedules, § 25-136.1 was added at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 25-137. - Stop on emerging from alley, driveway, parking lot or building and authorized procedure for entering traffic. 
    The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, parking lot or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a street, roadway or highway, sidewalk or onto a sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, yielding the right-of-way to any pedestrian or vehicular traffic as may be necessary to avoid collision. All vehicles shall enter the roadway, street or highway in the approved direction of traffic for the nearest lane of traffic for that roadway, street or highway where traffic-control signs, devices or markings so direct. 
(Code 1965, § 26-113) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 92. 
Sec. 25-138. - Stop at railroad crossing upon approach of train. 
(a)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty (50) feet, but not less than fifteen (15) feet, from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train; 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train; 
(3)  A railroad train approaching within approximately one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard; 
(4)  An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1965, § 26-114) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 86. 
Sec. 25-139. - Designation and marking of parking stalls and areas where parking is prohibited or limited-Generally. 
(a)  The director of public works shall cause parking stalls to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof as may be designated by the city council from time to time and he shall cause spaces in which parking is prohibited to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof as may be designated by the city council from time to time. The director of public works shall also cause time limit parking areas to be maintained and marked off in and on such part or parts of streets as may be designated by the city council from time to time. All such spaces or areas shall be clearly indicated by appropriate signs or by markings on the pavement or curb. 
(b)  In areas designated as time limit parking areas, parking may be limited to any period prescribed by the council, the same to be designated with clearly distinguished markings or signs at both ends of the time limit area and at reasonable intervals between the beginning and ending of such time limit area, indicating the time allowed for parking in such area. 
(c)  Any prohibition of or time limit on parking established under this section shall apply on such days and between such hours as prescribed by the council. 
(Code 1965, § 26-115) 
Sec. 25-140. - Same-Parking lots leased by city restricted to two-hour parking. 
    All parking lots leased by the city are time limit parking areas within the meaning of this article. The use of individual parking stalls within such lots are restricted to two-hour parking at all times. Such lots will be clearly marked and posted as city parking lots. Signs shall be erected designating stalls within such lots as two-hour limit parking. 
(Code 1965, § 26-115.1) 
Sec. 25-141. - Same-Parking spaces for disabled or handicapped persons on public or private property. 
(a)  The owner or operator of any private parking facility is authorized to designate one (1) or more parking stalls or spaces in such private parking facility or lot for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate, specially designated symbols, tags or other devices prescribed from time to time by the state highway department including but not limited to license plates with the letters "DV" appearing as either a prefix or a suffix to the numerals on the plates and the words "DISABLED VET" appearing on such license plates, devices prescribed or designed by the state highway department with the word "DISABLED" printed thereof or with a prominently displayed identification card provided by the state department of highways and public transportation for disabled persons or such other devices, symbols or tabs as may be prescribed from time to time by the state highway department under the authority of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6675a.5e.1. 
(b)  All disabled or handicapped parking stalls or spaces authorized and designated under this section shall be of such size and marked according to prevailing state and federal standards for handicapped parking which stalls or spaces shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet, six (6) inches in width for adequate wheelchair clearance. If the owner or operator of a private parking facility who has previously designated areas for handicapped parking elects not to conform such spaces to the standards herein required, such spaces and the marking thereof shall be eliminated by such owner or operator. The cost and expenses for the striping and marking of disabled or handicapped parking spaces on private property shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of the private parking facility. Such stalls or spaces shall be designated by posting, at the owner's or operator's expense, immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall or space, a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background on a pole at least five (5) feet in height and included on such sign a notice of penalty for parking violations of a fifty dollars ($50.00) to two hundred dollars ($200.00) fine. The city will provide and install the signs required by this section on both public and private property, but the owner or operator of a private parking facility shall pay to the city the actual cost of labor and materials incurred to install the signs on such private property, together with ten (10) percent of the amount as a fee payment for establishing such disabled or handicapped parking on such private parking facility. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section: 
(1)  For the operator of any vehicle not displaying a distinguishing license plate, symbol, tag or other device issued to disabled or handicapped persons pursuant to Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6675a-5e.1, and as set forth in (a) above to stop, stand, park, or leave standing such vehicle in any parking stall or space properly designated for the exclusive use of physically disabled or handicapped persons pursuant to this section. 
(2)  For the operator of any vehicle to cause, allow, permit or suffer such vehicle to be parked in any parking stall or space reserved for the disabled or handicapped pursuant to this section, even if such vehicle has affixed thereto a valid license plate, symbol, tag or other device issued in accordance with state law, and as set forth in (a) above, if such vehicle is not being used by or for the transportation of a disabled or handicapped person at the time such vehicle is parked in a reserved space. 
(3)  For the operator of any vehicle to cause, allow, permit or suffer such vehicle to be parked so that such vehicle blocks an access or curb ramp or any other architectural improvement designed to aid the disabled or handicapped. 
(d)  Such unlawful action as set forth in (c) above shall constitute a misdemeanor offense, which shall, upon conviction, subject the offender to a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). Furthermore, the operator of any vehicle found to be in violation of the provisions of (c) above may be issued a citation and summons to appear in municipal court regarding such violation. Furthermore, any vehicle found to be in violation of the provisions of (c) above may be towed from such disabled or handicapped parking space designated by this section at the expense of the owner or operator of such vehicle, and may be impounded until all towing and storage charges are paid. 
(Code 1965, § 26-115.2; Ord. No. 3131, § 2, 3-7-89) 
Sec. 25-141.1. - Disabled parking space designated. 
    It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to park or stand a motor vehicle in the disabled parking space herein designated unless such motor vehicle is marked as a vehicle eligible to use such restricted parking space, as defined and required by state law. Upon conviction of violation of the terms of this section, punishment shall be by fine in an amount consistent with the ordinances of the City of Denison and the laws of the State of Texas, but in no event in an amount exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
    A disabled parking space is created and established: 
In the 500 block of West Day Street adjacent to Lot 8, Block 1, A.R. Collins 1st Addition, parallel parking at the curb. 
(Ord. No. 3843, §§ 1, 3, 1-19-99) 
Editor's note- Per the city's request to list all traffic and speed schedules, § 25-141.1 was added at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 25-142. - Parking in prohibited areas; overtime parking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain in any space or area in which parking is prohibited as provided in section 25-139 or in a time limit parking area for a longer period of time than that designated by the markings on the street or by signs clearly visible. 
(Code 1965, § 26-116) 
Sec. 25-143. - Parallel and angle parking. 
(a)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this section. On one-way streets, vehicles may be parked on the left side of the street, with the left-hand wheels within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, unless signs prohibit parking. 
(b)  The director of public works, with the approval of the city council, shall determine upon which streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal-aid or state highway within this city unless the state highway engineer has determined that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street or upon any railway tracks. 
(c)  Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(d)  Whenever parking spaces are marked by lines on the pavement, whether for parallel or angle parking, a vehicle must be parked entirely within the lines of the parking space. 
(e)  Angle parking has been approved at the following locations: 
Woodard Street -All spaces on the south side of the 100 block east. 
(Code 1965, § 26-117) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 96. 
Sec. 25-144. - Parking or standing in alleys. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to block the free passage of other vehicles in such alley. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of (a) above, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any alley within the fire limits of the city, except when such vehicle is actually being used for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
(Code 1965, § 26-118) 
Sec. 25-145. - Parking for more than forty-eight hours prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to allow, cause or permit such vehicle to remain standing or parked on any street, alley, avenue or public way within the city for more than forty-eight (48) hours continuously. 
(Code 1965, § 26-119) 
Sec. 25-146. - Parking in time-limited spaces. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, or to permit a vehicle under his control to stand unattended, in the following parking spaces, on the following roadways, streets, or highways, for a period of more than two (2) consecutive hours. This time limitation shall apply between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, inclusive, except for any and all legal holidays. 
Burnett Avenue -All spaces on both sides of the street in the 100 and 200 blocks south and in the 100 block north. 
Chestnut Street -All spaces on both sides of the street in the 200, 300, and 400 blocks west. 
Chestnut Street -All spaces on the south side of the street in the 500 block west. 
Chestnut Street -Two (2) spaces on the north side of the street in the 100 block west, between Houston Avenue and police department parking lot. 
Chestnut Street- Two (2) spaces on the south side of the street in the 100 block west, beginning one hundred eighteen (118) feet west of the southwest corner of Houston and Chestnut for a distance of eighty (80) feet. 
Fannin Avenue -All spaces on the east side of the street in the 200 block south that are north of the alley. 
Gandy Street -All spaces on the south side of the street in the 300 block west from the west curbline of Rusk Avenue to a point two hundred twenty-six (226) feet west of the west curbline of Rusk Avenue. 
Houston Avenue -All spaces on the east side of the 100 block south. 
Houston Avenue -All spaces on the east side of the 100 block north, except the two (2) northernmost angle parking stalls. 
Houston Avenue -All spaces north of the alley on the west side of the 100 block north. 
Houston Avenue -Three (3) spaces on the west side of the street in the 100 block south, between the alley and the Chestnut Street intersection. 
Main Street -All spaces on the north side of the 100 block east, from the east curbline of Houston Avenue to a point two hundred seventy (270) feet east of the east curbline of Houston Avenue. 
Main Street -All spaces on both sides of the street in the 200, 300, 400, 500, and 600 blocks west. 
Main Street -All spaces on the south side of the street in the 700 block west. 
Main Street -All spaces on both sides of the street in the 100 block west except the two (2) spaces designated in (b) below as being limited to fifteen (15) minutes, and except for the easternmost twelve (12) spaces on the north side of the street. 
Mirick Avenue -All spaces on both sides of the street in the 100 block south that are north of the alley, and in the 100 block north that are south of the alley. 
Rusk Avenue -All spaces on both sides of the street in the 100 block south and in the 100 block north. 
Rusk Avenue -All spaces on the west side of the street in the 200 block north. 
Woodard Street -All spaces on the south side of the street in the 100 block west. 
Woodard Street -All spaces on the south side of the 100 block east. 
Woodard Street -All spaces on both sides of the street in the 200 and 300 blocks west. 
Woodard Street -One (1) space on the north side of the street in the 500 block west, at 515 West Woodard, from a point that is one hundred sixty-five (165) feet west of the west curb on Fannin Avenue to a point that is one hundred seventy-six (176) feet west of the west curb of Fannin Avenue. 
Woodard Street -Four (4) spaces on the north side of the street in the 500 block west, at 525 West Woodard, from a point one hundred twenty (120) feet east of the east curb of Mirick Avenue to a point that is one hundred sixty-eight (168) feet east of the east curb of Mirick Avenue. 
Woodard Street -Twelve (12) spaces on the north side of the street in the 400 block west, from the Burnett Avenue Intersection. 
Woodard Street -All spaces on the north side of the street in the 100 block west, and those spaces on the south side of the street form its intersection with Austin Avenue to a point one hundred forty-four (144) feet west of the Houston Street right-of-way line. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful, and an offense, for any person to park a vehicle under his control to stand unattended, in the following parking spaces, on the following streets, roadways, or highways, for a period of more than fifteen (15) consecutive minutes. This time limitation shall apply between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, inclusive, except for any and all legal holidays. 
Main Street -Two (2) spaces on the south side of the street in the 100 block west, in front of City Hall, from a point sixty-four (64) feet west of the west curb of Houston Avenue to a point seventy-five (75) feet west of the west curb of Houston Avenue to a point one hundred sixty-seven (167) feet west of the west curb of Houston Avenue. 
Rusk Avenue -All spaces on the east side of the street, by the post office, in the 200 block north, that are south of the alley. 
(c)  Each period, or portion thereof, in excess of the time limits established by this section shall be considered a separate offense. 
(d)  The city manager is hereby directed to have suitable signs erected, and/or to have suitable curb markings painted, to designate the parking spaces established by this section. 
(e)  Any and all violators of the provisions of this section shall be subjected to a fine of two dollars ($2.00) for each separate offense. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person, in any manner, to attempt to evade the provisions of this section by the movement of his vehicle to another space, by destroying the signs or marks designating the parking spaces, or in any other manner. Any person who attempts to evade the provisions of this section in violation of this subsection shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) or more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Code 1965, § 26-119.1; Ord. No. 3166, § 1, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 3167, § 1, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 3197, § 1, 1-15-90) 
Sec. 25-147. - Parking during specified hours only. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, or to permit a vehicle under his control to stand unattended, in the following locations between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday: 
(1)  On the east side of the 1900 block of South Mirick, from the traffic signal at the intersection of Mirick Avenue and Yellow Jacket Drive, north a distance of nine hundred twenty (920) feet to the intersection of Mirick Avenue with Brock Street; 
(2)  On the west side of the 1900 block of South Mirick, from the traffic signal light at the intersection of Mirick Avenue and Yellow Jacket Drive, north a distance of eight hundred eighty (880) feet from Yellow Jacket Drive to the north entrance to the Denison High School parking lot, plus an additional thirty-three (33) feet north of the signal light. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby directed to have suitable signs erected and/or to have suitable curb markings painted to designate the parking regulations established by this section. 
(c)  Any and all violators of the provisions of this section shall be subjected to a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Code 1965, § 26-119.2; Ord. No. 3179, § 1, 10-2-89) 
Sec. 25-148. - Loading and unloading generally. 
    All freight trucks shall be, and are hereby required, to be loaded and unloaded from the alley entrance, if practicable. Where conditions are such as to make the loading or unloading thereof from an alley impracticable, such trucks shall be parked on the street in accord with all applicable provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 26-120) 
Sec. 25-149. - Permit to back to curb for loading or unloading. 
    The chief of police is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privileges as therein stated and authorized herein, and it shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Code 1965, § 26-121) 
Sec. 25-150. - Loading zones. 
(a)  Loading zones shall be granted only by resolution of the city council on application of the owner or occupant of property abutting the street where such loading zone is requested and then only where the following conditions exist: 
(1)  A store or business having no alley entrance and the loading requirements for such cannot properly be met from the street during times other than usual business hours; and 
(2)  Regularly and frequently used service trucks exceed the number of alley parking places available behind the business. 
(b)  Application for designation of loading zones shall be made in writing and filed with the city secretary for consideration by the city council at a regular meeting. The applicant shall assume responsibility for providing factual information showing that one (1) or more conditions set forth in (a) above exist in support of such application. 
(c)  No loading zone shall be approved for the singular use of one (1) business, although it may be located because of the needs of one (1) store or business falling within the provisions of (a) above, but it shall not be deemed established for the exclusive use of any one (1) store or business. 
(d)  No vehicle shall be parked in a loading zone except for the purpose of loading and unloading and such parking shall be limited to the time reasonably necessary for that purpose; provided however, that bona fide service or delivery vehicles falling within the category mentioned in (a)(2) above shall be permitted to park in a loading zone by its place of business while waiting to make service calls. 
(e)  Vehicles not conspicuously marked to indicate their use as service and delivery vehicles shall be required to have a card approximately six (6) inches by eleven (11) inches in size placed in the right corner of the front windshield while parked in a loading zone indicating the vehicle is a service or delivery vehicle with the firm name placed thereon. 
(f)  Those areas outside of normal vehicle traffic lane, between intersections in the 200, 300, and 400 blocks West Main Street, shall be considered as passenger loading and unloading zones. Vehicles, including taxicabs shall be authorized to use these areas for all passenger loading and unloading providing that the stopped vehicle does not interfere with normal traffic flow and that vehicle does not remain stopped more than is necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(Code 1965, § 26-122; Ord. No. 4701, § 18(f), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 25-151. - Impoundment of standing or parked vehicles. 
    Any vehicle which shall be or remain standing or parked upon any public street, avenue, way, alley or other public place, may be removed by or upon order of the city manager or the chief of police, and placed in storage in a privately operated garage or other place designated by or maintained by the city, under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When any vehicle is found upon a street, avenue, alley, way, or public place and a report has been previously made that such vehicle has been stolen or complaint has been filed and a warrant issued thereon, charging that such vehicle has been stolen or converted in violation of law. 
(2)  When a police officer arrests any person driving or in control of a vehicle for an alleged offense and such officer is or may be required by law to take the one arrested immediately before a magistrate, or if the arrested one is immediately taken before a magistrate, and when the arrested one is the sole occupant or the owner of the vehicle and is immediately placed in custody. 
(3)  When a vehicle is so disabled that its normal operation is impossible or impractical and the persons in charge of the vehicle are incapacitated by reason of physical injury or other causes to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its removal or custody, or cannot be found or are not in the immediate vicinity of such vehicle. 
(Code 1965, § 26-123) 
State Law reference- Removal of illegally parked vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 94. 
Sec. 25-152. - Presumption that owner of vehicle illegally parked same. 
    In any prosecution charging a violation of any ordinance or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such ordinance or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Code 1965, § 26-124) 
Sec. 25-153. - Parkway parking prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle on the parkway of any right-of-way owned by the State of Texas and managed by the state department of transportation situated within the corporate limits. 
    For the purpose of this section, the term "parkway" shall be defined as the portion of the right-of-way situated outside of the area improved for vehicular travel including, but not limited to, the area between the back of the curb and the right-of-way line, or the shoulder of the roadway and the right-of-way line. 
(Ord. No. 3844, § 1, 1-19-99) 
Secs. 25-154-25-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 25-176. - Application of article. 
    Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as provided in this chapter, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this article. 
(Code 1965, § 26-151) 
Sec. 25-177. - Right-of-way in crosswalks. 
(a)  When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk, when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle, which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
(b)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(Code 1965, § 26-152) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 49. 
Sec. 25-178. - Use of crosswalks; crossing between crosswalks; crossing at other than crosswalks. 
(a)  All crossings by any pedestrian at any intersection or street crosswalk which is plainly marked, shall be made within crosswalks of such intersection or street. 
(b)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway, street or highway at any point other than within a plainly marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon such roadway, street or highway approaching such place of crossing and in proximity thereto. It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cause any interference with the movement of any vehicle by reason of such crossing at such place. 
(Code 1965, § 26-153) 
Sec. 25-179. - Roadway to be crossed at right angles; exception. 
    No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk. 
(Code 1965, § 26-154) 
Sec. 25-180. - Walking on roadways. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a street or highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
(Code 1965, § 26-155) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 81. 
Sec. 25-181. - Hitchhikers not to stand in roadway. 
    No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle. 
(Code 1965, § 26-156) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 81. 
Sec. 25-182. - Duty of drivers with regard to pedestrians. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1965, § 26-157) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 79. 
Sec. 25-183. - Solicitations at street intersections. 
(a)  General. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the city's Code of Ordinances and except as permitted by state law, a person eighteen (18) years of age or older may solicit contributions while standing on a traffic median, shoulder, improved shoulder, sidewalk, or the improved portion of the roadway from occupants of any vehicle on a roadway, street or thoroughfare under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  All solicitors must be eighteen (18) years of age or older; 
(2)  No solicitor may block any intersection of streets, or to do any act which impedes traffic at or near an intersection of streets; 
(3)  All solicitors must enter or remain in a roadway, street or thoroughfare only while the controlling traffic signal prohibits vehicular movement; 
(4)  All solicitors must remain within one hundred (100) feet of or from the intersection approved under a permit issued by the city; 
(5)  No person may solicit without the required insurance coverage as outlined in subsection (d) of this section; 
(6)  All solicitors must wear a city-approved florescent orange or yellow vest at all times while soliciting; 
(7)  No person may solicit until: 
a.  A sign approved by the city is posted, no less than five hundred (500) feet from the intersection, in the right parkway for each approaching lane of traffic up to two (2) lanes wide; or 
b.  Two (2) signs approved by the city are posted, no less than five hundred (500) feet from the intersection, in both the left and right-side parkway of approaching lanes of traffic of three (3) or more lanes. 
(8)  No person may solicit until a permit is issued from the city per the terms of this section. 
(b)  Signs and vests. Prior to the issuance of a permit, applicant must obtain approval from the city of all signs and vests to be used by the solicitors. All signs must be removed from each intersection at the end of each day of the permit period. Signs shall not block or impede traffic at or near any intersection. 
(c)  Permits. 
(1)  Each person or organization, whose application meets the requirements of this section, may be issued one (1) permit per calendar year at no charge, for no more than two (2) specified days. Each permit shall allow solicitation only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and one (1) hour before sunset, as determined by the official newspaper or a paper of general circulation in the city. 
(2)  Only one (1) permit will be issued for an intersection on any given day. Permits will be issued on a first come basis to those applicants who submit a completed application form, required certificate of insurance and approval by the city of the signs and vests to be used by the solicitors. 
(3)  The application for a solicitation permit shall state the name, mailing address and telephone number of the person or organization registering to solicit and the location(s) and times the solicitation will take place. 
(4)  Permit applications must be accompanied by a certificate of insurance as outlined in subsection (d) of this section. 
(5)  The city manager or his or her designee shall review the application and issue a permit to a person or organization whose application meets the requirements of this section. 
(d)  Insurance. The certificate of insurance must be signed by an agent authorized to bind coverage and indicate that the applicant has obtained, at his or her sole expense, the following insurance coverage: 
(1)  That is written by an insurance company with an A- or better rating by AM Best and that is admitted or approved to do business in the State of Texas; 
(2)  That is in full force and effect for the duration of the permit period; 
(3)  That provides one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) of liability coverage per occurrence with no deductible; 
(4)  That insures the applicant and all persons who will be soliciting; 
(5)  That names the City of Denison, its officers, agents, employees and elected representatives as an additional insured; 
(6)  That provides that any insurance maintained by the city shall apply in excess of and not contribute with it; 
(7)  That is written on an occurrence basis; and 
(8)  That is otherwise acceptable to and approved by the City of Denison. 
(e)  Restricted hours in Downtown Entertainment District. No person shall engage in the acts set forth in this section at any time within one thousand (1,000) feet (measured to and from the nearest corner of the intersecting street, highway, roadway, measured along the curb, shoulder, improved shoulder) of the intersections within the Downtown Entertainment District as defined in section 21-121 of the Code of Ordinances during the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. 
(f)  Offense. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person: 
a.  To engage in activity described in this section without first obtaining a permit pursuant to the provisions of this section; 
b.  To block any intersection of streets, or to do any act which impedes traffic at or near an intersection of streets; 
c.  To enter or remain in a roadway, street or thoroughfare when the controlling traffic signal allows vehicular movement; or 
d.  To violate any other provision of this section. 
(2)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (f)(1) that the person impeding a roadway, as defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 552.0071(g) is authorized to do so under an authorization issued by the City as required by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 552.0071(a). 
(g)  Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). A culpable mental state is not required, and need not be proved, for an offense under this section. 
(Ord. No. 3377, § 1, 4-19-93; Ord. No. 4928, § 2(2.01), 2-5-18) 
Sec. 25-184. - Aggressive solicitation. 
(a)  Definitions. In this section: 
    Aggressive manner , aggressive behavior or aggressively . As related to soliciting, begging and panhandling means: 
a.  Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited; 
b.  Continuing to solicit from a person after the person has given a negative response to such soliciting; 
c.  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person without that person's consent in the course of soliciting; 
d.  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; 
e.  Soliciting money from anyone who is waiting in line for tickets, for entry to a building or for any other purpose; 
f.  Approaching or following a person for solicitation individually or as part of a group of two (2) or more persons, in a manner and with conduct, words, or gestures intended or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or damage to or loss of property or otherwise to be harassed or intimidated into giving money or other thing of value; or 
g.  Soliciting, begging or panhandling of minors less than sixteen (16) years of age. 
    Automated teller machine. A device, linked to a bank or financial institution's account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including, but not limited to: account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan payments which are made available to banking customers. 
    Bank. A bank, savings bank, savings and loan association, credit union, trust company, or similar financial institution. 
    Check cashing business. An entity in the business of cashing checks, drafts, or money orders for consideration. 
    Parking meter or parking pay station. A location on a street, parking lot or parking garage where persons pay, for parking by either cash or credit, to a person or at a machine or other device designed to accept payment for parking. 
    Private building. Shall be deemed to include, but is not limited to, retail or service establishments, such as restaurants, convenience food stores, laundromats, service stations, hotels, offices, and similar privately-owned establishments open to the public. This term does not include any building owned, leased or operated by the federal or state government, political subdivisions thereof, municipalities, special districts, any public administration board or authority of the state. 
    Public area. An area to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, the common area of a hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility, shop, basement, building entrance or doorway, lobby, hallway, stairway, mezzanine, elevator, foyer, public restroom or sitting room or any other place used in common by the public, tenants, occupants or guests situated in any private building. 
    Public place. A place to which a governmental entity has title to which the public has access, including, but not limited to: any street, highway, sidewalk, walkway, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, or playground. 
    Solicit, ask, beg or panhandle. To request, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication an immediate donation or transfer of money or another thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value, and regardless of whether consideration is offered. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person solicits: 
(1)  In an aggressive manner in a public area or public place; or 
(2)  Within twenty (20) feet of the following areas where the public is considered vulnerable or where solicitation would interfere with the flow of pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic: 
a.  An automated teller machine; 
b.  The entrance or exit of a bank; 
c.  The entrance or exit of a check cashing business; 
d.  An authorized charitable contribution activity; 
e.  A parking meter or parking pay station on a street; 
f.  A public parking garage or parking lot pay station; 
g.  The entrance or exit of a restaurant or the service area of an outdoor eating establishment; 
h.  In a bus, at a bus station or stop, or at a facility operated by a transportation authority for passengers including but not limited to any school bus stop; 
i.  A marked crosswalk; or 
j.  An entrance of a commercial or government building. 
(3)  Within five (5) feet of a curb or edge of a street; 
(4)  Within fifty (50) feet from any land owned by a public or private school and used in whole or in part for providing education services to elementary age children; 
(5)  Within ten (10) feet of a gas station, liquor store, or convenience store property; 
(6)  In a public restroom; or 
(7)  At a public event that is operating by permit issued by the city at city parks as defined in the city's Code of Ordinances; 
(c)  Private property. 
(1)  No person may solicit, ask, beg or panhandle on private property or residential property without permission from the owner or occupant. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
a.  Solicit, ask, beg or panhandle, as those terms are defined in this chapter, in any public room in any private building, without the written permission or consent of the building's owner or managing and authorizing agent. For the purpose of enforcement of this subsection, it is presumed that if the owner, lessee, managing agent or other person in charge of a building prominently displays a sign as provided in subsection (c), then the activities declared unlawful in this section are deemed to be without the permission or consent of the building's owner, lessee, managing agent or other person. 
b.  Solicit, ask, beg or panhandle, as those terms are defined in this chapter, on any private property where the owner, lessee, managing agent or other person in charge of such property displays a sign as provided in subsection (c). 
c.  Conspicuous notice. To invoke the protections afforded under this section, each owner, lessee, managing agent or person in charge of the operation of a private building or private property shall prominently display a sign on the premises, such as the lobby or entrance of the private building or private property, where it may be read by any person going in or out of the building or private developed property stating generally: "NO PANHANDLING PERMITTED SEC. 25-184, CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF DENISON", "NO SOLICITORS" or "NO SOLICITATION." 
(d)  For purposes of subsection (b) in this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point at which an unlawful act is conducted to the nearest portion to the items listed in subsection (b). 
(e)  The solicitation of contributions while standing on a traffic median, shoulder, improved shoulder, sidewalk, or the improved portion of the roadway from occupants of any vehicle on a roadway, street or thoroughfare shall only be permitted in compliance with the terms and conditions set out in section 25-183, "solicitation at street intersections" of the city's Code of Ordinances, provided they are not in an aggressive manner as defined in this section. 
(f)  Any person who engages in any activity specified in subsection (b), maybe subject to prosecution for a Class C misdemeanor and a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). A culpable mental state is not required, and need not be proved, for an offense under this section. 
(Ord. No. 4928, § 2(2.02), 2-5-18) 
Secs. 25-185-25-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RAILROADS 

Sec. 25-201. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 3700, adopted Feb. 17, 1997, repealed § 25-201, which pertained to railroad speed limits and derived from the 1965 Code, § 22-1. 
Sec. 25-202. - Obstructing crossings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any engineer, conductor or other person to, in this city, stop, or cause to be stopped, any railway engine or car across any street, alley, road or highway, so as to obstruct or interfere with the free passage thereon, for a longer time than five (5) minutes at a time. 
(Code 1965, § 22-2) 
Sec. 25-203. - Boarding or alighting from or clinging to moving train. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in this city to jump on or off, or cling to or hang on any railway engine or car, while the same is in motion, such person not being a regular passenger on or employee or official of the railroad company. 
(Code 1965, § 22-3) 
Sec. 25-204. - Maintenance of roadbeds, tracks, culverts, switches and drainage. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every railroad which has a track in the city to keep its roadbeds, culverts, switches and drainage in good repair. 
(b)  Wherever the track of any railroad crosses a street or alley in this city the top of the rail shall be even with the surface of the street or alley for the full width of such street or alley, and the street crossing shall be fixed by the railroad company's agent. The same rule shall be observed where there are switches in the streets. 
(c)  Where gutters or culverts are maintained by a railroad, the same shall be so constructed or covered up as not to interfere with free passage and convenient travel along the street or alley, and so as not to convey water into any street or lot in the city. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the station agent or representative of any railroad having a track in this city to see that the requirements of this article are complied with, and in case of failure to comply, or of any violation of this article, the agent shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1965, § 22-4) 
Chapter 26 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; specific code enforcement authority, § 2-126; public works department, § 2-161 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8; food and food establishments, Ch. 9; housing, Ch. 10; posting advertising matter on utility poles prohibited, § 11-2; public utility rates, § 11-7; HUD-code manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 12; nuisances, Ch. 13; planning and development, Ch. 17; public property, Ch. 18; solid waste, Ch. 20; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; subdivision regulations, Ch. 22; zoning, Ch. 28. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER USE, WASTEWATER AND STORMWATER DISPOSAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 3551, adopted May 15, 1995, repealed the substantive sections of former Art. II, Divs. 1-5, pertaining to sewer use and wastewater disposal, and § 3 of said ordinance enacted a new Art. II in lieu thereof to read as set out herein. The provisions of former Art. II derived from Ord. No. 3187, § 3, adopted Dec. 18, 1989. Prior to amendment by Ord. No. 3187, Art II derived from Code 1965, §§ 27-1-27-6, and Ord. No. 3091, § 1, adopted Aug. 15, 1988.   Subsequently, Ord. No. 4863, § 2(2.01), adopted April 17, 2017, changed the title of art. II from "Sewer Use and Wastewater Disposal" to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference- Plumbing code, § 5-281. 
State Law reference- Disposal of human wastes, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-1, §§ 5, 6, 20. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-26. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
(a)  Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
(1)  Act or "the Act": The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.). 
(2)  Amenable to treatment: A substance that is susceptible to reduction in concentration by the treatment normally provided by the city's receiving wastewater treatment plant to a level that is in compliance with federal and state effluent limitations for discharge to the waters of the state. 
(3)  Approval authority: the director in an NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program and the appropriate regional administrator in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program. 
(4)  (a)  Authorized official of the city: The city manager, who is held responsible for administrative and enforcement procedures by the city council, and the city manager's properly indentified subordinate employees who hold positions of responsibility directly related to wastewater activities of the city, to include, but not to be limited to, the director of public works, city engineer, wastewater treatment superintendent, environmental service officers, and any assistants or others performing similar duties, as the case may be. 
(b)  Authorized representative of industrial (non-domestic) user: An authorized representative of an industrial (non-domestic) user may be: (1) A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the user is a corporation; (2) a general partner or proprietor if the User is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; (3) a duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is designated in writing as being responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge to the public sewage collection and treatment system originates, and the city is notified in writing of the designation. 
(5)  BOD: (Biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
(6)  Building sewer: A privately-owned sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the publicly-owned sanitary sewer. 
(7)  Categorical standards: See National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
(8)  City: The City of Denison, Texas; or the City Council of Denison, Texas; or any authorized person acting in its behalf. 
(9)  COD: (Chemical oxygen demand) is the measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or waste-water, expressed in milligrams per liter, as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter, and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
(10)  Composite sample: A sample of the wastewater discharged to the collection system by a user and composed of a series of not less than three (3) samples taken during the periods when industrial wastes are being discharged. The period of time over which the samples are collected for compositing into a single sample shall not exceed twenty-four (24) hours. The series of samples may be collected on a time-proportional or flow-proportional basis. Additional procedures for composite sampling are described in 40 CFR Part 403 Appendix E. 
(11)  Control authority: POTW representative(s) responsible to the city council for administration and enforcement of an EPA approved pretreatment program. 
(12)  Control point: A point of access to a building sewer before the discharge mixes with other discharges in a public sewer. 
(13)  Cooling water: The water discharged from any use, such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
(14)  Direct discharge: The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Texas. 
(15)  Environmental Protection Agency, or EPA: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
(16)  O&G: Oil and greases, whether emulsified or not, normally expressed as a concentration in milligrams per liter, as determined by standard laboratory tests. O&G is used to define wastes from animal, vegetable, petroleum and mineral-based oil origins. 
(17)  Floatable oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate or stratify by gravity from wastewater in the city's collection system or the receiving treatment facility. 
(18)  Garbage: Animal and vegetable wastes and residue resulting from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and resulting from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
(19)  Grab sample: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream, collected over a period of time not exceeding fifteen (15) minutes. 
(20)  Grease: Fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, petroleum products, oil, and any other material which is extractable by hexane or freon solvent from an acidified sample, and which is not volatilized during evaporation of the solvent. 
(21)  Grease trap: A device by which the grease content of sewage may be cooled and congealed so that it may be skimmed from the surface. 
(22)  Holding tank waste: Any waste from a containment device, such as those commonly used in conjunction with vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
(23)  Indirect discharge: Means the introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act. 
(24)  Industrial user or user: a source of indirect discharge. 
(25)  Industrial waste surcharge: An additional charge made against industrial (non-domestic) users who discharge wastes to the public sewers that are amenable to treatment, but which exceed the concentration levels of normal domestic wastewater. 
(26)  Interference: A discharge by an industrial user which, alone or in conjunction with discharges by other sources, inhibits or disrupts the city's sewage collection and treatment system, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use, or disposal, and which is a cause of violation of any requirement of the city's sewage collection and treatment system NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude of duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the city's sewage collection and treatment system in accordance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent State or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, and the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
(27)  Milligrams Per Liter (mg/L): Essentially equivalent to "parts per million;" a weight-to-volume ratio commonly used to express concentrations of substances in wastewater; milligrams-per-liter are multiplied by the factor 8.34 to convert to pounds per million gallons. 
(28)  Minor industrial user: A non-domestic user whose discharge contains pollutant concentrations greater than normal domestic wastewater, but who does not otherwise qualify as a significant industrial user. 
(29)  National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, (33 USC 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
(30)  National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard: Any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5, to regulate or prohibit discharge of toxic pollutants. 
(31)  National pollution discharge eliminations system (NPDES) permit: A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342) which regulates discharges to "Waters of the State." 
(32)  Natural outlet: Any outlet, including storm sewers and combination storm/sanitary sewer overflows, through which a discharge is routed into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
(33)  New source: Any building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the definition of 40 CFR Part 403.3(k) 
(34)  Normal domestic wastewater: Wastewater, normally discharged into sanitary sewers from households and industrial sanitary conveniences, in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 250 mg/L, of BOD is not more than 250 mg/L, and of O&G is not more than 150 mg/L, and which contains no other prohibited or toxic constituents in concentrations greater than the levels allowed by this Article. 
(35)  Overload: The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading of a treatment facility in excess of its engineered average daily design capacity. 
(36)  pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
(37)  Pass-through: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
(38)  Person: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural, where indicated by the context. 
(39)  Pollutant: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, or industrial, municipal, or agricultural waste discharged into water. 
(40)  Pollution: The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological composition of water. 
(41)  Pretreatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to and in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes; process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by section 403.6(d). Appropriate pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such as equalization tanks or facilities, for protection against surges or slug loadings that might interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW. However, where wastewater from a regulated process is mixed in an equalization facility with unregulated wastewater or with wastewater from another regulated process, the effluent from the equalization facility must meet an adjusted pretreatment limit calculated in accordance with section 403.6(e). 
(42)  Pretreatment requirements: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national categorical pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
(43)  Publicly owned treatment works (POTW): A treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33 USC 1292), which is owned by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this ordinance, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the city's sewage collection and treatment system from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's sewage collection and treatment system. This definition also includes any public sludge disposal sites or public sludge handling or treatment structures or equipment. 
(44)  POTW treatment plant: That portion of the public sewage collection and treatment system designed to provide treatment to wastewater and/or the resulting sludges. 
(45)  Sanitary sewer: A publicly owned pipe or other closed conduit that transports waterborne wastes from the building sewers of residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with quantities of ground, storm, and surface water that are not admitted intentionally. 
(46)  Shall: Is mandatory: May: is permissive. 
(47)  Significant industrial user: All industrial users subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; and any other industrial user that: discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average number dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the control authority as defined in 40 CFR 403.12 (a) on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8 (f)(6). 
(48)  Slugload: Any substance released in a discharge at a rate and/or concentration which causes interference to a POTW. 
(49)  Standard Industrial Classification (SIC): A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget. 
(50)  State: State of Texas, including any duly-authorized agency thereof having jurisdiction over waters of the state, sewage collection or treatment, or municipal sewage sludge disposal. 
(51)  Storm sewer: A publicly-owned pipe, improved watercourse, or other conduit intended to transport the runoff resulting from precipitation, or to transport other drainage from natural groundwater or surface waters, and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally introduced. 
(52)  Storm water: Storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
(53)  Superintendent: The person designated, directly or indirectly, by the city manager to supervise the operation of the publicly-owned sewage collection and treatment works, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative. 
(54)  Total suspended solids (TSS): The total amount of matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by the approved laboratory filtering method described in 40 CFR, Part 136. 
(55)  Toxic pollutant: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Section 307(a), or other Acts, or as specifically identified by the city as being toxic to any wastewater treatment or sludge management processes used by the city. 
(56)  Unpolluted water or waste: Any water or liquid waste containing none of the following: Phenols or other substances to an extent imparting taste and odor in receiving waters; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension colloidal state or solution; noxious or odorous gases; not more than ten thousand (10,000) parts per million, by weight, of dissolved solids, of which not more than twenty-five hundred (2,500) parts per million are chloride; not more than ten (10) parts per million each of suspended solids and BOD, color not exceeding fifty (50) color units, nor a pH value of less than 5.5 nor higher than 10.0; and/or any water or waste approved for discharge into a stream or waterway by the appropriate state authority. 
(57)  Reserved. 
(58)  Wastewater: The waterborne industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, or storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the city's sewage collection and treatment system. This term is generally considered synonymous with "sewage," "sanitary sewage," "sanitary wastes," or "liquid wastes." 
(59)  Wastewater facilities: The structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, transport, and treat domestic, commercial, and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent and resulting sludge. Generally synonymous with "POTW." 
(60)  Wastewater treatment works: An arrangement of devices and structures for treating and disposing of wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant," "water pollution control plant," or "sewage treatment plant." 
(61)  Waters of the state: The water of the ordinary flow, underflow, and tides of every flowing river, natural stream, and lake, and of every bay or arm of the Gulf of Mexico, and the stormwater, floodwater, and rainwater of every river, natural stream, canyon, ravine, depression, and watershed in the state. 
(62)  Wastewater discharge permit: A document granting certain users of the public sewage collection and treatment system permission to contribute wastewater to the system, and establishing conditions regulating the quantity and quality of the wastewater contributed. 
(63)  Work day: When used in conjunction with the determination of a significant industrial user, is any day, or portion thereof, when the user is providing any service, or producing its product or any part of its product line, or otherwise generating nondomestic wastewater that may be discharged to the public sewage collection and treatment system. All other use of this term shall mean any day a non-domestic wastewater discharge occurs. 
(b)  Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD-Biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR-Code of Federal Regulations 
COD-Chemical oxygen demand 
EPA-Environmental Protection Agency 
O&G-Oil and grease 
L-Liter 
NPDES-National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
POTW-Publicly owned treatment works 
SIC-Standard Industrial Classification 
SWDA-Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901, et seq. 
USC-United States Code 
TSS-Total suspended solids 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 4336, § 1, 2-6-06; Ord. No. 4701, § 19(a), 6-17-13) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-27. - Purpose and policy. 
    This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the city. It is the intent of this article to comply with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations promulgated pursuant to the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(a)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(b)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere, or which will otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(c)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; and 
(d)  To provide an incentive for industrial users of the city's wastewater collection and treatment system to pretreat their wastes to domestic strength concentrations, and to discharge those wastes at a uniform, constant rate, thus enabling maximum effective use of the city's facilities. 
(e)  To provide for distribution of the cost of the municipal wastewater system. 
    This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customer's capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
    This article shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's wastewater collection and treatment system. Except as otherwise provided herein, the city manager or his responsible designee shall be responsible for administering, implementing, and enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-28. - Mandatory sewer connections. 
(a)  Every owner of a building or part hereof occupied by people for any purpose, any part of the day or night, anywhere within the city limits, where a public sewer capable of receiving gravity flow from such building exists within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the lot, tract, or acreage upon which the building is situated, shall have the same connected to the sewer. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other private facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage or industrial wastes within the city limits except as allowed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-29. - Septic tank required in absence of sewer connection. 
    If any owner of a building is not required to connect with the sewer system, a suitable on-site treatment system approved by the local regulatory authority must be constructed on the premises. Such construction shall comply with section 5-821 et seq. of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 19(b), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 19(b) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 26-29 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 26-29 derived from Ord. No. 3551, § 3, adopted May 15, 1995. 
Sec. 26-30. - Improper connections to sewer. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building or premises within this city to use, or to permit anyone else to use, any privy or water closet on such premises that is connected with the sewer system of the city, unless the same shall be used in connection with sufficient water flowing into the sewer to keep the pipes connecting such privies or water closets with the sewers free from obstruction. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-31. - Unlawful connections. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any direct or indirect physical connection that will lead to discharge into the public sanitary sewers of any: 
(1)  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, or subsurface drainage; 
(2)  Other unpolluted drainage, including water from draining swimming pools. This does not prohibit the discharge of swimming pool filter backwash water to the sanitary sewers. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-32. - Authority to designate point of connection. 
(a)  In compliance with the Texas Water Code and other statutes, the city may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted waters described in section 26-31 may be discharged. 
(b)  Plans and specifications, sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state, and other pertinent information relating to proposed facilities for handling unpolluted waters, may be required to be submitted for the approval of the city. No construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approvals, when required, are obtained in writing. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Secs. 26-33-26-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 26-46. - Suspension, termination of service for discharging harmful contributions or nonpayment. 
(a)  The city may suspend the water and/or wastewater service to a user, and/or a user's wastewater discharge permit, to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment; or which causes or may cause interference to the city's sewer collection and treatment system, or which causes, or may cause the city to violate any condition of its NPDES or state discharge permits. 
(b)  Any user notified by the city manager or his or her designee of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately (40 CFR Park 403.12 (f)) stop or eliminate its discharge, or that portion deemed to be in violation of this article. In the event of a failure of the user to comply including immediate severance of the sewer connection and/or water supply, to prevent or minimize damage to the city's sewage collection and treatment system, endangerment of any individuals, damage to the environment, or imminent violation of the city's NPDES or state discharge permit. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within five (5) days of the date of occurrence, as detailed under subsection 26-123(d). 
(c)  The city may also terminate water and/or wastewater service and/or disconnect any user from the water and/or wastewater system after delivery of written notice when the user: 
(1)  Has discharged wastewater that violates the terms of its wastewater discharge permit three (3) times in any twelve-month period and has received notice of such violations; or 
(2)  Fails to pay in full monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer service, including industrial wastewater surcharges, sampling costs, and bills for cleanup costs from spills, upsets or accidental discharges, and other allowable fees, forfeitures, or penalties imposed under the terms of this chapter when due; or 
(3)  Has repeated a discharge of prohibited wastewaters to public sewers without a wastewater discharge permit. 
(d)  The city shall restore water and/or wastewater service, and/or reinstate the suspended wastewater discharge permit upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge, and installation of adequate measures to prevent its recurrence. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 4701, § 19(c), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 26-47. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Any discharger may be subject to having its permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this subsection for: 
(1)  Failure to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(2)  Failure to report significant changes in operations, or in wastewater constituents and characteristics, including spills, upsets, and accidental discharges; 
(3)  Refusal of access to its premises for the purposes of inspection or monitoring; 
(4)  Not fulfilling the conditions of its permits or this article, or obeying any final judicial order with respect thereto. 
(5)  The third conviction of any other offense under this article within a twelve-month period (or, in the case of users outside the city limits, the third assessment of an administrative penalty in a twelve-month period); 
(b)  Notification of violation, administrative adjustment. Whenever the city finds that any discharger has engaged in conduct which justifies revocation of a wastewater discharge permit, pursuant to this section, the city shall serve or cause to be served upon such discharger a written notice, either by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, stating that nature of the alleged violation. Within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of the notice, the discharger shall respond in person or in writing to the city, advising of its position with respect to the allegations. Thereafter, the parties shall meet to ascertain the veracity of the allegations and where necessary, establish a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof. 
(c)  The city may order any user who is suspected of any of the violations listed in subsection (a), above, which have not been corrected by means of administrative adjustment, to show cause before the city council why his permit should not be revoked. A written notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city council regarding the violation, and the reasons why the action is to be taken, and directing the user to show cause before the city council why his permit should not be revoked. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (returned receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Service may be made on any agent, or authorized representative of the discharger. The proceedings at the hearing shall be considered by the city which shall then enter appropriate orders with respect to the alleged improper activities of the discharger. 
(d)  The city council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the city to: 
(1)  Issue in the name of the city council notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
(2)  Take the evidence; 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city council for action thereon. 
(e)  At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded electronically. The transcript so recorded will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges as may be promulgated by the city council from time to time. 
(f)  After the city council has reviewed the evidence, it may revoke the user's permit, or it may issue an order to the user responsible for the violation directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate pretreatment or treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed, and that such facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall be properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 4701, § 19(d), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 26-48. - Other local enforcement procedures. 
(a)  An authorized official of the city shall serve upon any user found to be violating any of the provisions of this article or discharge permit conditions a written notice of violation stating the nature of the violation(s), and allowing not more than forty-five (45) days from the date of such notice for correction of the violation or, if correction is deemed by the city as impractical to achieve within the time specified, submittal by the user within twenty (20) days of the date of such notice, of a plan satisfactory to the city for correction of the violation(s). 
(b)  If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements, any permit issued by the city, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action of appropriate legal and/or equitable relief, in a court of competent jurisdiction in any of the following instances: 
(1)  The user has received a notice of violation for violating the same provision of this article or of its discharge permit conditions three times in any twelve-month period; 
(2)  The user has failed, twice within any twelve-month period, to properly notify the city of a pretreatment facility upset, a process spill, or other accidental discharge of prohibited or restricted substances as required by section 26-123, whether or not such discharge caused the city's sewage collection and treatment system to violate the terms of its NPDES or state discharge permits. 
(3)  The user is a significant industrial user, and/or is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards, and meets any of the following federal criteria qualifying him as a "significantly violating major industrial user": 
(A)  Discharging a pollutant to the public sewage collection and treatment system that has caused an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons and/or has presented an endangerment to the environment; or 
(B)  Causing any violation of the city's NPDES or state discharge permit, or impairing the use or disposal of the treatment work's sludge; or 
(C)  Violating either categorical standard or conventional pollutant effluent requirements set forth in this article or in discharge permit conditions in twenty (20) percent or more of the samples taken, either by the city, or as part of a self-reporting requirement, during any twelve-month period; or 
(D)  Not correcting a violation (i.e., returning to compliance) within the time specified in a Notice of Violation; or 
(E)  Failing to accurately report noncompliance with the provisions of this article; and especially with the conditions or provisions of a wastewater discharge permit. 
(F)  Failure to provide written response to any notice of violation within twenty (20) days from the date of said notice. 
(c)  In addition to any legal or administrative action taken by the city, the city shall, at least annually, cause to be published in the largest daily newspaper published in the city a list of all industrial users which, at anytime in the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements. For the purposes of this provision, an industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violation, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except ph. 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the control authority determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR Section 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations that the control authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(d)  The degree and extent of violations of this chapter by an industrial user may be the basis for the exercise of professional judgment of the enforcement staff and the authorized official of the city, and of the prosecutorial discretion of the city's attorney. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 4336, §§ 2, 3, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 26-49. - Other legal action. 
    Chapter 54 of the Local Government Code of the State of Texas reserves unto the cities their common law remedies for the abatement of nuisances, for the recovery of damages incurred, and such other authority as may be necessary to enforce all of its ordinances. If any person discharges wastewater, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater collection and treatment system contrary to the provisions of this article, of federal and state pretreatment requirements, any permit issued by the city, or of any order of the city, the city attorney may commence and pursue an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in any court of competent jurisdiction. Further, the city has and will require as a part of the agreement to extend water and sewer service into unincorporated areas, the contractual obligation of the User to abide by all of the terms and provisions of its water and wastewater ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-50. - Emergency suspension of service and discharge permits. 
    The city may, for good cause shown, suspend wastewater treatment service to the discharger's facility, when it appears to the city that an actual or threatened discharge presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons, substantial danger to the environment, interfere with the operation of the POTW, violates any pretreatment limits imposed by this article or any wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to this article. Any discharger notified of the suspension of the city's wastewater treatment service and/or the discharger's wastewater discharge permit, shall within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the city, cease all discharges. In the event of the failure of discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order within the specified time, the city may commence judicial proceedings to compel the discharger's compliance with such order or may immediately disconnect such discharger's service line from the city water and/or sanitary sewer system. In the case of emergency disconnection of service, the director shall make reasonable attempt to notify the occupant or user of the premises where such illegal discharge is generated before disconnecting the service line, and the party whose service has been disconnected shall have an opportunity for a hearing on the issue of the illegal discharge and the disconnection as soon as possible after such disconnection has taken place. The city may reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater or water service upon proof by the discharge of the cessation of the noncomplying discharge or elimination of conditions creating the threat of imminent or substantial danger as set forth above. The city water and/or wastewater service shall only be reconnected at the discharger's expense. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-51. - Operating upsets. 
    Any discharger which experiences an upset in operations which places the discharger in a temporary state of non-compliance with this Ordinance shall inform the city thereof immediately (40 CFR Part 403.12(f)) of the commencement of the upset. Upset conditions include "bypass" which EPA defines as the "intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an Industrial User's treatment facility" (40 CFR Part 403.17). Reporting of bypass conditions is to be in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.17. Where such information is given orally, the city may at its discretion require a written follow-up report thereof to be filed by the discharger with the city within five (5) working days. The report shall specify: 
(1)  Description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upset's impact on a discharger's compliance status. 
(2)  Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur. 
(3)  All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such an upset or other conditions of noncompliance. 
A documented and verified, bona fide operation upset shall be an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the city against a discharger for any noncompliance with this article which arises out of violations alleged to have occurred during the period of the act of God. Monitoring and analysis by an industrial user to demonstrate continued compliance shall be conducted in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.12(g). For the purposes of this chapter, "acts of God" shall mean war, riot, an extraordinary occurrence by natural cause such as flood, wind, earthquake or other catastrophe that cannot be reasonably foreseen, but does not include occurrences caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 4336, § 4, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 26-52. - Mental state. 
    A culpable mental state is not required to prove an offense under this article. A person is criminally responsible for a violation of this article if: 
(1)  The person commits or assists in the commission of a violation; or 
(2)  The person owns or manages the property or facilities determined to be the source of an illegal discharge. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-53. - Falsifying information. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or to a wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished by the imposition of a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-54. - Penalty for criminal mischief. 
    The city may pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes and ordinances against any person negligently, willfully, or maliciously causing loss by tampering with or destroying public sewers, monitoring devices or treatment facilities. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-55. - Circumstances beyond user's control. 
    If a person can establish that an event that would otherwise be a violation of the pretreatment ordinance or permit issued under this article was caused solely by an act of God, war, riot, or other catastrophe, the event is not a violation of this article or permit. A justifiable basis for the person's nonperformance may arise from national emergency, uncontrolled and unanticipated material charges, civil disorder and power outages in degree or duration beyond the capabilities of required emergency generation capacity, casualty losses and damages. Other conditions that may represent a justifiable basis for nonperformance under this article may be considered when the conditions are found by the city to be of such difficulty to accomplish as to be impractical to pursue at any given time due to any factor which could not have been foreseen or anticipated and which could not have been avoided or lessened in impact by the actions of the user. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 4139, § 1, 10-7-02 ) 
Sec. 26-56. - Civil penalties. 
    Any user who is found to have violated an order of the city council, or who will willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this article, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, may be fined (or, in the case of users outside the city limits, shall pay an administrative penalty) an amount not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation; provided however, the following minimum fines shall be assessed upon a finding of guilty to any charge of violation: 
(1)  First violation, five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(2)  Second violation, seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
(3)  Third and subsequent violation, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
    Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue may be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder. In determining the extent of the penalties herein contemplated, the court or the jury, as the case may be, may take into account the economic benefit realized by the user during the period of violation attributed to the act or acts of noncompliance in determining and assessing the penalties under this section. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 4336, § 5, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 26-57. - Administrative relief. 
    Any user objecting to a decision, edict, or order of an authorized official of the city, other than the city manager, under the authority of this article shall have the right to administrative relief, and may petition, in writing, and within ten (10) working days of receipt of such decision, edict, or order, for a ruling from the city manager. The city manager shall, within ten (10) working days of receiving the petition, review the contentions of both the authorized official of the city and the user. The city manager may at his discretion, request other city or professional opinions prior to rendering his decision. The city manager shall render a written ruling within twenty (20) days of receiving the petition. A user objecting to a decision, edict, order, or ruling of the city manager may appeal any such action directly to the city council. The city council shall conduct a review of the facts and contentions during any regular or special city council meeting, open to the public, to be held no sooner than five (5) days nor later than thirty (30) days from the date of the city manager's ruling. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-58. - Recovery of costs incurred by city. 
    Any discharger violating any of the provision of this article, or who discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the city's wastewater disposal system, shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The city shall bill the discharger for the costs incurred by the city for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-59. - Cost of administering program. 
    The city may make such charges, known as monitoring and pretreatment charges, as are reasonable for services rendered in administering the program outlined in this article. Such charges may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Permitting industrial facilities. 
(2)  Inspection. 
(3)  Sample analysis. 
(4)  Monitoring. 
(5)  Enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-60. - Preservation of records. 
    All dischargers subject to this article shall retain and preserve for no less than three (3) years or for the duration of the permit if it is valid for more than three (3) years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or on behalf of a discharger in connection with its discharge. 
    All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of administration adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the city pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the discharger until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Secs. 26-61-26-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCHARGE PERMITS 

Sec. 26-71. - Required. 
(a)  This division specifically repeals any and all previously issued wastewater discharge permits for significant industrial users issued by the city, and any special agreements or contracts whether written or oral that do no conform to all requirements of this article, to the extent of the conflict. 
(b)  All significant industrial users connected to, or otherwise contributing to, the city's sewage collection and treatment system on the effective date of this article shall apply for a new wastewater discharge permit within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this article. 
(c)  All minor industrial users shall be required to apply for a new wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days of receiving notification from an authorized official of the city that a permit is required. 
(d)  Any significant industrial users proposing to connect to, or otherwise contribute to, the city's sewage collection and treatment system after the effective date of this article shall apply for and obtain a wastewater discharge permit before so connecting or contributing. 
(e)  In cases involving public health or safety, or public convenience and necessity, the city manager or his or her designee may, allow a significant industrial user to connect or contribute to the POTW before processing of the permit application is complete. Allowing such a connection or contribution shall in no way relieve the user from its obligation to obtain a wastewater discharge permit at the earliest possible time, and to comply with all other provisions of this article, beginning at the instant each connection or contribution is made. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to discharge to the public sewage collection and treatment system without possessing either a valid wastewater discharge permit or written permission from an authorized official of the city based on a pending application for a permit. Similarly, no minor industrial user shall discharge to the public system for more than thirty (30) days after being notified of the need for a wastewater discharge permit without either receiving a valid permit, or written permission from the city manager or his or her designee to discharge pending processing of an application. 
(g)  Classification of discharges and permits: 
(1)  All nondomestic users which discharge into the sanitary sewer system of the city shall be grouped according to the following definitions. Group I users are classified as significant and groups II, III and IV are classified as minor. Definitions for categorical significant and minor industrial users are recorded in section 26-26. 
a.  Group I-Major and significant industries. Industries that discharge a significant quantity of regulated pollutants. All categorical industries belong to this group and will be permitted according to applicable national pretreatment standards. 
b.  Group II-Classed industries. Industries, such as printers, photographic developers and other dischargers which can be classed according to the character of their wastewater, and which may discharge regulated pollutants. 
c.  Group III-Commercial facilities and small industrial users. Those facilities which do not discharge a significant amount of regulated pollutants on a regular basis. 
d.  Group IV-Wastewater haulers. The city may promulgate regulations pertaining to the permitting of all transporters of industrial waste desiring to discharge such transported industrial wastes into the city's sewage collection system, or its tributaries, as necessary to adequately protect the POTW and its operations from injurious effects resulting from the acceptance into that system of the transported industrial wastes. 
The industrial waste discharged or deposited into the sanitary sewers by a group III or group IV user shall be subject to periodic inspection and sampling as often as may be deemed necessary by the city. Samples shall be collected in such manner as to be representative of the character and concentration of the waste under operational conditions. The laboratory methods used in the examination of such waste shall be those set forth in 40 CFR Part 136. The determination of the character and concentration of industrial waste shall be made by the city at such times and on such schedules as may be established by the city. Should an owner or occupant discharging industrial waste to the sanitary sewers desire a determination of the quality of such industrial waste be made at some time other than that scheduled by the city, such special determination may be made by the city at the expense of the owner or occupant discharging the waste. 
(2)  All significant industrial users from group I shall submit a wastewater discharge permit application to the director of utilities, the form for which shall be provided by the city. In the case of existing dischargers who have not already complied with this section, such application must be submitted within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this article. 
(3)  Sixty (60) days following the effective date of this article, no significant industrial user (group I) shall be permitted to discharge unless and until it has submitted a completed wastewater discharge permit application in accordance with (2) above. 
(4)  The city will evaluate the completed applications and data furnished by the discharger and may require additional information. The city will determine to which group each applicant will be assigned and if a permit is required. Within sixty (60) days after evaluation of the application, a wastewater discharge permit, if required, shall be issued, subject to the terms and conditions specified herein; and to the regulations of the city. 
(5)  If the application is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing within sixty (60) days of the reasons for such denial. If denial is based on the city's determination that the applicant cannot meet the pretreatment standards specified in this article, it may specify that additional pretreatment operations will be required of applicant. 
(6)  Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will be required to comply with this article, pursuant to (5), above, the discharger shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule by which the Discharger will provide such additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities. 
(i)  The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the discharger to comply with the requirements of this article including, but not limited to dates relating to hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, and all other acts necessary to achieve compliance with this article. 
(ii)  The time increments between milestone dates established shall be the shortest practicable for the completion of the required work. Under no circumstances shall the city permit a time increment for a single step in the compliance schedule to exceed nine (9) months. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for applicable categorical pretreatment standards. 
(iii)  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the discharger shall submit a progress report to the city, including no less than a statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented by that milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reasons for delay, and the steps being taken by the discharger to return the construction to the approved schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the city. 
(7)  Unless exempted by the city, all group I and group II dischargers shall provide monitoring facilities prior to approval of a permit application, to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement at each discharge point. Each monitoring facility shall be located on the discharger's premises; except in the case where such location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the discharger, the city may approve the placement of monitoring facilities in the public street or sidewalk area. All monitoring equipment and facilities shall be maintained in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the Discharger. 
Failure to provide proper monitoring facilities shall be grounds for denial of a permit application. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 4701, § 19(e), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 26-72. - Application. 
(a)  Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the city an application, on forms provided by the city, and accompanied by the proper fee as established elsewhere in this article. New users shall apply at least sixty (60) days prior to the date the connection or contribution is to be made. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and location (if different from the address); 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual; 
(3)  A listing of wastewater constituents and their concentrations and characteristics. This list shall include, but not be limited to, those mentioned in section 26-113 et seq. The analysis shall be determined by a reliable analytical laboratory approved by the city; sampling and analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(c) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended; 
(4)  Times and durations of contributions; 
(5)  Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any; 
(6)  Site plans, and, if required by the city manager or his or her designee, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details, sufficient to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location, and elevation, including a complete, detailed description of any pretreatment facilities, existing or proposed. 
(7)  Description of all activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are, or could be, discharged, either intentionally or accidentally; 
(8)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge that are limited by any city, state or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
(9)  If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance. The completion date on this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
(A)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
(B)  No increment referred to in a. above shall exceed nine (9) months. 
(C)  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the city manager or his or her designee including, as a minimum, whether or not the user complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which the user expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the remaining increments to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the city manager or his or her designee. 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production; 
(11)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(12)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation of plant, proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system, and any periods of discharge or contribution to the public system at times not set forth herein as hours of plant and/or pretreatment system operation; 
(13)  Any other information as may be deemed to the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(14)  Each application shall be certified by the authorized representative of the industrial user as being true and correct as to each statement and representation made in the application. 
(b)  The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. The city may deny a permit if evaluation of available data indicates that the user will not be able to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 4336, § 6, 2-6-06; Ord. No. 4701, § 19(f), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 26-73. - Modification. 
(a)  Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permits of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user who is subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by the preceding section, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within one hundred eighty (180) days of the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. When a user has an existing wastewater discharge permit, he shall submit to the city manager or his or her designee within one hundred eighty (180) days of the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by this section, and must request a new or modified permit. 
(b)  The terms and conditions of any existing permit may be modified by the city during the term of the permit if the limitations or requirements identified in section 26-113 et seq. are modified, or if a change in the user's classification has occurred. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 4701, § 19(g), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 26-74. - Conditions. 
(a)  Holders of wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, including user charges, industrial waste surcharges, and fees established by the city. 
(b)  Permits shall be conditioned by specific requirements set forth by the city, as indicated by conditions or attachments to such permit, regarding any or all of the following: 
(1)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge, including requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of flow measuring, inspection, and sampling facilities and devices (control points); 
(4)  Specifications for self-monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests, and a reporting schedule; 
(5)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
(6)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and for furnishing the city copies thereof; 
(7)  Requirements for notifying the city prior to any introduction of new wastewater constituents and/or any change that the User knows or knew, or had reason to know, might alter the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system, for however brief a time; 
(8)  Requirements to install traps basins, holding tanks and/or pretreatment facilities; 
(9)  In the event a user's application for wastewater discharge permit, previously established or planned operational procedures, or other information available to the city indicates to an authorized official of the city that the user may discharge wastewater of either nondomestic or domestic quality at a rate exceeding one hundred (100) gallons per minute, the user's discharge permit may be issued conditioned upon flow equalization procedures, specified periods of discharge, or other conditions intended to decrease the impact of anticipated peak load discharges from such user. Said flow equalization conditions of a permit may he imposed by an authorized official of the city subject to administrative relief set forth in this article; 
(10)  Requirements that users outside the city limits agree to accept administrative penalties equivalent to the fine structure for violations of the provision of this chapter; 
(11)  Permit duration; 
(12)  Compliance schedules; 
(13)  Limits on permit transfer; 
(14)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city of control the contribution to the POTW of certain industrial users to ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements and this article. Said conditions may include requirements to prevent slugloads as defined in this article; or 
(15)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a city sewer. 
(16)  The full range and extent of civil and criminal penalties that may be assessed against a user for violation of the permit and/or the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 2336, § 7, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 26-75. - Duration. 
    Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year, or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply in writing for permit reissuance a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-76. - Not transferable. 
    Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation. In each such instance, a new permit will be required. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-77. - Enforcement. 
    The failure to meet any of the terms, conditions, reporting requirements, or any other regulation or procedure embodied in a wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to this article shall be individually enforceable as if such terms, conditions, reporting requirements, regulations, or procedures embodied in such permit had been included, verbatim, within this article. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-78. - Pretreatment. 
    When required by conditions of the permit, industrial users shall provide all wastewater pretreatment necessary to comply with this article, and shall achieve compliance with all applicable federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved in writing by the city before construction of the pretreatment facility. The approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibilities of modifying the facility as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to, and be acceptable to, the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-79. - Compliance date report. 
    Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the public sewage collection and treatment system, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city manager or his or her designee a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated processes that are limited by categorical pretreatment standards and requirements, together with the average and maximum daily flow for those process units in the user's facility that are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether or not the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user, and certified by a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 19(h), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 19(h) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 26-79 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 26-79 derived from Ord. No. 3551, § 3, adopted May 15, 1995. 
Sec. 26-80. - Period compliance reports. 
(a)  Any user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge, shall submit a report to the city manager or his or her designee during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the city manager or his or her designee, which indicates the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the effluent that are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which, during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily flow allowed by the user's wastewater discharge permit. In consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., an authorized official of the city may alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. 
(b)  An authorized official of the city may impose mass limitations (pounds per day or similar units) on users who are required to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. In such cases, the report required by (a) above shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by categorical pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the volume of the flow and the nature and concentration (or production and mass where required) of pollutants contained therein that are limited by the applicable categorical pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments thereto, or with any other test procedures approved by EPA. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by EPA. Where 40 CFR, Part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication, "Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants," April, 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by EPA. 
(c)  All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the city, state or EPA upon request. 
(d)  All industrial users are subject to the self-monitoring and resampling provision of 40 CFR 403.12(g) and (h). 
(e)  Industrial users shall submit reports to the POTW in form and substance meeting the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b), (d) and (e) and each such report shall be certified as to the truth and accuracy of each statement and/or representation therein made in a manner satisfying the requirement of 40 CFR 403.12(I). 
(f)  Industrial users shall report potential problems or actual changes in volume, quality or constituents of sewer discharge in an manner satisfying the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(f) and (p). 
(g)  Each significant industrial user shall submit to the POTW baseline monitoring reports in a manner satisfying the requirement of 40 CFR 403.12(b). 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 4336, §§ 8, 9, 2-6-06; Ord. No. 4701, § 19(i), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 26-81. - Confidential information. 
    All information concerning the industrial pretreatment programs will be available to the public, at the office of the city manager or his or her designee, from the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., except for that information requested by the industry to be made confidential that would reveal company or trade secrets. This confidential information must conform to the guidelines specified in 40 CFR 403.14 for confidentiality. The confidential information will be secured in a separate folder and locked in a file cabinet inside the city manager's or his or her designee's office. The file cabinet will only be accessible by the environmental services staff and the city manager or his or her designee. All laboratory analysis and effluent data will not be confidential information. This information shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall still be made available, upon written request, to governmental agencies if such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the user furnishing the report. Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency by the city until and unless a notification is given to the user and the governmental agency requesting the information enters into an agreement to comply with the requirements of 40 CFR Park 2, Subpart B, concerning the confidential information. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 19(j), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 19(j) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 26-81 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 26-81 derived from Ord. No. 3551, § 3, adopted May 15, 1995. 
Secs. 26-82-26-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTION 

Sec. 26-96. - Monitoring facilities to be provided by user. 
(a)  Significant industrial users and minor industrial users, if so required by the city, shall be required to provide and maintain, at their own expense, a control point on each discharge line that connects to the sewage collection and treatment system that will allow inspection, sampling, and, if required, flow measurements of the discharge from the building sewers and/or internal drainage system. The control point should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area, if it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. If required by the city for added fee computation, monitoring a regulated or restricted flow rate, or as a condition of a wastewater discharge permit, the user may also be required to provide, install, and maintain flow measuring equipment acceptable to the city at the control point, whether or not the user would have preferred to pay for sewer service or surcharge fees based on metered water consumption. 
(b)  There shall be ample room in or near such control point to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The control point and measuring equipment, and any privately owned sampling equipment, shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
(c)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the control point, and any sampling or monitoring facilities provided by the user, shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and with all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days of receiving written notification by the city that a control point is required. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-97. - Right of access. 
    The city shall have the right to inspect the premises of any user to ascertain whether the purposes and requirements of this article are being met. Persons owning or occupying any premises where wastewater is created or discharged, or which are crossed by any public sewer, shall allow the city ready access at all reasonable times to those parts of the premises necessary for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination or the performance of any of its duties. The city, state or EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring, and/or metering operations. 
    Where a user has security measures in force that require identification and clearance before entry, the user shall instruct his security personnel that, upon presentation of identification, personnel of the city, the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission, the EPA, or other persons (such as private laboratory personnel) authorized by the city, will be permitted to enter without delay to perform their specific duties. 
    Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire protection. The inspectors, agents or representatives of the city charged within the enforcement of this section shall be deemed to be performing a governmental function for the benefit and health and welfare of the general public and neither the city nor any individual inspector, agent or representative shall be held liable for any loss or damage whether real or asserted, caused or alleged to have been caused as a result of the performance of such governmental function. The failure or refusal of such owners or occupants to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the disconnection of water and/or sewer service to the facility, pursuant to the enforcement and/or termination of service provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-98. - Sampling schedules for monitoring, surcharging and enforcement. 
    The industrial waste discharged or deposited into the sanitary sewers by industrial users shall be subject to periodic inspection and sampling as often as may be deemed necessary by the city. Significant industrial users shall be subject to periodic inspection and sampling at least once annually. Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of the character and concentration of the waste under operation conditions. The laboratory methods used in the examination of such waste shall be those set forth in 40 CFR, Part 136. The determination of the character and concentration of industrial waste shall be made at such times and on such schedules as may be established by the city. Should a discharger desire a determination of the quality of such industrial waste be made at some time other than that scheduled by the city, such special determination may be made by the city at the expense of the owner or occupant discharging the waste. A permittee shall make application to amend its permit thirty (30) days before expiration, or during the term of the permit immediately upon the event of significant change in volume of or the pollutants in the discharge into the sanitary sewer. The city reserves the right to deny an application for permit seeking to amend an existing or expiring permit that increases the volumes and/or pollutant level of the propose discharge. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 4336, § 10, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 26-99. - Sampling and analysis procedures. 
(a)  Examination and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this article, whether for enforcement, routine monitoring, or assessing a surcharge, shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with those set forth in 40 CFR, Part 136; and 
(2)  Determined from samples taken at the control point or other location approved by the city. 
(b)  The city may select, at its own discretion, an independent firm or laboratory to perform sampling and testing on its behalf. The city may select the exact time and frequency of sampling at its sole discretion. 
(c)  Industrial users shall retain the right to request at any time that samples taken from their own discharges be split for the purpose of having independent analysis performed, for either process control or for verification of the city's analyses. Such requests, however, must be made in advance to allow arrangements to be made for sample splitting. In cases where sample splitting is required for verification of the city's analyses, the city shall, at the user's expense, retain a mutually acceptable independent commercial laboratory, and shall split all samples taken from that user with the laboratory retained. Industrial waste surcharge calculations and enforcement action will then be based on the average of the test results from the city's analyses or those of the independent laboratory. The city manager or his or her designee may also arrange, at the city's expense, to split all samples three (3) ways, and have the third fraction analyzed by yet another mutually acceptable independent commercial laboratory. In such cases, industrial waste surcharge calculations and enforcement action will be based on the city's judgment of the agreement between the three (3) independent test results. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 4701, § 19(k), 6-17-13) 
Secs. 26-100-26-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - REGULATION OF DISCHARGE AND SEWER CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 26-111. - All discharges regulated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to discharge any unpolluted water or any wastewater to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, or to the sewage collection and treatment system, except as authorized in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Except as otherwise permitted by this article, all discharges of storm runoff and other unpolluted waters must be made to storm sewers or natural outlets; all discharges of wastewaters must be made to the sewage collection and treatment system. All users discharging wastewater other than normal domestic wastewater shall be classified as either minor or significant industrial users; and, according to Division 3 of this article, may be required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit, as described elsewhere in this article. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-112. - Unlawful to discharge polluted waters in watercourses. 
(a)  Unless otherwise authorized by a valid permit issued by the Texas Water Commission or EPA, no person may deposit or discharge wastewater, industrial waste or other polluted liquids, whether on public or private property, into or adjacent to any natural outlet, watercourse, storm sewer, or other area within the jurisdiction of the city. All such discharges shall be made to the public sanitary sewer system unless so authorized. 
(b)  The city shall verify, prior to the discharge, that wastes authorized to be discharged in (a) above will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, and rules of the federal, state and local governments. To this end, the city may require submittal of plans sealed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas, specifications, and other pertinent information prior to construction of facilities for such treatment. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-113. - Prohibited substances and concentrations of specific substances. 
    No user shall contribute, or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the public sewage collection and treatment system, whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment requirements. A user shall not contribute the following substances to the POTW: 
(1)  Any substance which, by reason of its nature or quantity is, or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the public sewage collection and treatment system or to its operation. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than five (5) percent, nor shall any single reading be over ten (10) percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to acetone, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides, and any other substances which the city, the state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to: Floatable O&G, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides, or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, lime slurries, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass-grinding or polishing wastes. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or greater than 10.0, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the public sewage collection and treatment system. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of a public treatment plant, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. Toxic pollutants, for this subsection, shall include, but not be limited to, those pollutants identified by EPA pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act. 
(5)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, create a public nuisance or hazard to life, or which prevent safe entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)  Any substance which may cause the treatment works' effluents, or any other product of the public sewage collection and treatment system such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse, or which will interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the public sewage collection and treatment system cause the city to be in noncompliance with a sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act, or with any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method(s) being used by the city. 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the city to violate its NPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(8)  Any slugload, which shall mean any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, ammonia (NH 3 ), etc.), released in a single extraordinary discharge episode of such volume or strength as to cause interference to the POTW. 
(9)  Any wastewater with color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes, vegetable tanning solutions, and coffee processing wastes. 
(10)  Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in Interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceed 40 degrees C (104 degrees F) unless the approval authority, upon request of the POTW, approves alternate temperature limits. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Any wastewater which causes any hazard to human health or life not specifically mentioned above. 
(13)  Any wastewater containing any of the following substances, as determined by any individual grab sample tested in accordance with the appropriate procedures in 40 CFR, Part 136 having a result above the minimum detectable limit, is prohibited: 
(1)  Antimony 
(2)  Beryllium 
(3)  Bismuth 
(4)  Fungicides 
(5)  Herbicides 
(6)  Pesticides 
(7)  Rhenium 
(8)  Strontium 
(9)  Tellurium 
(14)  Any wastewater containing concentrations of the following substances greater than the limits indicated below, as determined by sampling and analysis in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.12 and according to the appropriate procedures in 40 CFR Park 136, is prohibited. Sampling shall be representative of a facility's daily operations. The local limits established above shall be determined by the daily average for the permittee's facility. 
Denison Service Area (mg/L) North Texas Regional Airport Service Area (mg/L) (1) Arsenic 0.13 0.03 (2) Cadmium 0.30 0.01 (3) Chromium 2.74 2.1 (4) Copper 1.28 0.19 (5) Cyanide 0.49 0.037 (6) Oil & Grease 150 150 (7) Lead 1.87 0.015 (8) Mercury 0.026 0.005 (9) Nickel 2.91 0.33 (10) Phenols 10.0 10.0 (11) Silver 0.53 0.03 (12) Zinc 2.74 1.75 (13) Aluminum 4.0 4.0 (14) Fluoride n/a 5.0  
(15)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(16)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(17)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(18)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at a point designated by the POTW. The POTW may accept only analyzed waste that conforms to the City of Denison's local limits and all applicable federal and state regulations at the Iron Ore Wastewater Treatment Plant drying beds. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 4336, § 11, 2-6-06; Ord. No. 4359, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 4701, § 19(l), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 26-114. - Authority to require pretreatment. 
    When an authorized official of the city determines that a user is discharging wastewater to the sewage collection and treatment system which contains any of the prohibited substances, or restricted concentrations of substances, listed in section 26-113, the authorized city official shall: (1) advise the user of the impact of the discharge on the system; and (2) develop effluent limitation(s) for such user which will alleviate that impact. The authorized official may require the user(s) to pretreat his wastewater or to utilize outside disposal of such substances so as to make the remaining waste acceptable under the terms and conditions of city, state and federal regulations. The authorized official may also require the user to obtain a wastewater discharge permit, as described elsewhere in this article. 
    The city may impose mass pollutant limitations on industrial users (based on total pounds per day) where the imposition of mass limitations is deemed appropriate. 
    The significant industrial users with average loads of BOD or TSS exceeding fifty (50) pounds per day shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit. The permit will establish a pounds-per-day loading imitation based upon a maximum concentration of five hundred (500) mg/L for BOD and TSS multiplied by the flow from the discharger's plant. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-115. - Authority to approve pretreatment installations. 
    An authorized official of the city may review and approve the design, installation, and operation of any pretreatment facility proposed by a user to meet a pretreatment requirement. Such review and approval shall not, however, release the user from his obligation to comply with the requirements of this article. In particular, the authorized official may require, review, and approve the installation and operation of traps, and of garbage grinders equipped with three-fourths HP or larger motors. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-116. - Requirements for traps. 
    Discharges requiring a trap (or other pretreatment approved by an authorized official of the city) include, but are not limited to, those containing: 
(1)  Floatable oil and grease; 
(2)  Sand and/or gravel; 
(3)  Other floatable or settleable materials, if directed by an authorized official of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-117. - User's duties regarding traps. 
    Any person responsible for a discharge requiring a trap (or other pretreatment) shall, at his own expense, and as required by the city: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the city; 
(2)  Locate the facilities in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; 
(3)  Maintain the facilities in effective operating condition. An authorized official of the city may require copies of contracts if maintenance is performed by a third party. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-118. - General categorical pretreatment standards. 
(a)  Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed by this article, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed by this article. An authorized official of the city shall notify all affected users of the reporting requirements applicable under 40 CFR, section 403.12. 
(b)  No person shall contribute or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, into any sanitary sewer any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to exceed the limitation set forth in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards List of Toxic Pollutants, set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations, 40 CFR, Part 403, Appendix B which List, and all amendments to such list as may be made from time to time, are made a part of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-119. - Modification of federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
    If the city's wastewater treatment system is shown to achieve consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the state or federal agency having jurisdiction for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. Consistent removal shall mean reduction in the amount of pollutant, or alteration of the nature of the pollutant, by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the system's effluent in ninety-five (95) percent of the samples taken, when measured according to the procedures set forth in section 403.7(c)(2) of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403 "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution." The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR, Part 403, section 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the state or federal agency having jurisdiction is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-120. - State requirements. 
    State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-121. - City's right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish, by amendment of this article, more stringent limitations or other requirements on discharges to the sewage collection and treatment system, if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives of this article. Less stringent limitations or other requirements on discharges shall also require amendment of this article, or approval of a specific wastewater discharge permit, by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-122. - Excessive discharge. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of nondomestic water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or with any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 26-123. - Spills, upsets and accidental discharges. 
(a)  Each user shall provide protection from spills, upsets, and accidental discharges of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the user's own expense. If required by an authorized official of the city, detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. All significant industrial users existing prior to the enactment of this article shall complete such a plan by March 1, 1987. Any other significant industrial user who commences discharging to the sewage collection and treatment system after the effective date of this article shall not be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until such discharge prevention procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the significant industrial user from the responsibility to modify his facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. All such plans shall meet the requirements of 40 CFR, 403.8(f)(2)(B). 
(b)  In the case of a spill, upset, or accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify an authorized official of the city of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions taken. 
(c)  In the event of a spill, upset, or accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article, the user causing or allowing such spill, upset, or discharge shall be responsible for paying, in addition to any fines or industrial wastewater surcharges relating to such spill, upset, or discharge, any costs incurred by the city or other governmental agency to: 
(1)  Determine the nature of the materials involved and trace them to their source; 
(2)  Provide necessary labor, equipment, and/or materials to remove or otherwise reduce the effects of the spill, upset, or discharge on the sewage collection and treatment system, the atmosphere, the land overflowed upon, or receiving waters; 
(3)  Pay any fees, forfeitures, or penalties imposed upon the city by the state or EPA as a result of any noncompliance with an NPDES or state discharge permit resulting from the spill, upset, or discharge, including administrative and legal costs associated with the fine. 
(d)  Within five (5) days following a spill, upset, or accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the city manager or his or her designee a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(e)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a spill, upset, or accidental discharge. Users shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer a spill, upset, or accidental discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 4336, § 12, 2-6-06; Ord. No. 4701, § 19(m), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 26-124. - Authority of city to prevent improper discharges into sewers. 
    The city, acting through an authorized official of the city, shall have the power to stop and prevent from discharging into the sewer system, any private sewer or drain through which substances are discharged that are liable to injure the sewers or obstruct the flow of sewage, or interfere with the operation of the disposal plant. 
(Ord. No. 3551, § 3, 5-15-95) 
Secs. 26-125-26-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - STORM DRAIN SYSTEM-ILLICIT DISCHARGE PROHIBITION 

Sec. 26-130. - Purposes. 
    This division sets forth uniform requirements for discharges to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) and enables the City of Denison (city) to comply with all applicable federal and state laws, including, but not limited to, the Clean Water Act, Chapter 26 of the Texas Water Code, Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, and the MS4 Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) General Permit. The purposes and objectives of this article are as follows: 
(a)  To maintain and improve the quality of surface water and groundwater within the city. 
(b)  To prevent the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff from industrial, commercial, residential, and construction sites into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and natural waters within the city. 
(c)  To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of hazardous substances, petroleum products, household hazardous waste, industrial waste, sediment from construction sites, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, and other contaminants into the storm sewers and natural waters of the city. 
(d)  To encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other hazardous consumer products. 
(e)  To facilitate compliance with state and federal standards and permits by owners and operators of industrial and construction sites within the city. 
(f)  To enable the city to comply with all federal and state laws and regulations applicable to stormwater discharges. 
(g)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(h)  To provide enforcement remedies for non-compliance with this article. 
(i)  To provide authority to prevent improper discharges to the municipal stormwater system. 
(Ord. No. 4863, § 2(2.02), 4-17-17) 
Sec. 26-131. - Administration. 
    Except as otherwise provided, the director of public works shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director may be delegated by the director to other city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 4863, § 2(2.02), 4-17-17) 
Sec. 26-132. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
    Unless a provision of this article explicitly provides otherwise, the terms, phrases, and abbreviations used in this division shall have the meanings designated by the TPDES General Permit to Discharge TXR0400000 effective December 13, 2013, as amended, Chapter 402 of the Clean Water Act and Chapter 26 of the Texas Water Code. 
(Ord. No. 4863, § 2(2.02), 4-17-17) 
Sec. 26-133. - General prohibition. 
(a)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to subsection (a) of this section that the discharge was composed entirely of one (1) or more of the following categories of discharges: 
(1)  A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, an NPDES or TPDES permit (other than the NPDES or TPDES permit for discharges from the MS4); 
(2)  A discharge or flow resulting from firefighting by the fire department; 
(3)  A discharge or flow of fire protection water that does not contain oil or hazardous substances or materials that the fire code, as adopted and as amended by the city, requires to be contained and treated prior to discharge, in which case treatment adequate to remove harmful quantities of pollutants must have occurred prior to discharge; 
(4)  Return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff; 
(5)  A discharge or flow from water line flushing, but not including a discharge from water line disinfection by super chlorination or other means unless the discharge contains no harmful quantity of any chemical used in line disinfection; 
(6)  A discharge or flow from lawn watering, or landscape irrigation; 
(7)  A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or natural spring; 
(8)  A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped groundwater or rising groundwater; 
(9)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined as 40 C.F.R. § 35.2005(20)) to the MS4; 
(10)  Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation drain, crawl space footing drain, or sump; 
(11)  A discharge or flow from a potable water source not containing any harmful substance or material from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank or other container; 
(12)  A discharge or flow from air conditioning condensation that is unmixed with water from a cooling tower, emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or any other source of pollutant; 
(13)  A discharge or flow from individual residential car washing; 
(14)  A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland; 
(15)  A discharge or flow from water used in street washing that is not contaminated with any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance; 
(16)  Stormwater runoff from a roof that is not contaminated by any runoff or discharge from an emissions scrubber, filter, or any other source of pollutant; 
(17)  Swimming pool water that contains no harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning; or 
(18)  A discharge of flow from a temporary car wash sponsored by a civic group, school, religious, or nonprofit organization. 
(c)  Persons wishing to discharge water other than that listed under subsection (b) of this section and not listed as a specific prohibition under section 26-134, must file a written request to the director five (5) days prior to the date of discharge that details the source of the discharge and the volume of the discharge. Written authorization must be obtained from the director prior to discharge. 
(d)  No affirmative defense is available under subsection (b) of this section if the discharge or flow in question has been determined by the director to be a source of a pollutant or, pollutants to the waters of the United States or to the MS4, written notice of that determination has been provided to the discharger, and the discharge has occurred more than fifteen (15) days beyond the notice. The correctness of the director's determination that a discharge is a source of a pollutant or pollutants may be reviewed in an administrative proceeding by appeal to the city manager. The correctness of the city manager's determination may be appealed for a determination by the city council, and the decision of city council may be appealed by filing a petition in a court of competent jurisdiction within ten (10) days after the date of city council's decision stating that the decision of the city council is illegal in whole or in part and specifying the grounds of the illegality. 
(Ord. No. 4863, § 2(2.02), 4-17-17) 
Sec. 26-134. - Specific prohibitions and requirements. 
(a)  The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not inclusive of all the discharges prohibited by this article. 
(b)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that is prohibited by the Clean Water Act, the Texas Water Code, or the Texas Administrative Code, or that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city's NPDES permit or TPDES permit, or any state-issued discharge permit for discharges from its MS4. 
(c)  No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose, or otherwise introduce or cause, allow, or permit to be introduced any of the following substances into the MS4: 
(1)  Any used motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid; 
(2)  Any industrial waste; 
(3)  Any hazardous waste, including hazardous household waste; 
(4)  Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit trap waste; 
(5)  Any garbage, rubbish, or yard waste; 
(6)  Any wastewater from a commercial carwash facility; from any vehicle washing, cleaning, or maintenance at any new or used automobile or other vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop, or maintenance facility; or from any washing, cleaning, or maintenance of any business or commercial or public service vehicle, including a truck, bus or heavy equipment, by a business or public entity that operates more than two (2) such vehicles; 
(7)  Any wastewater from washing, cleaning, de-icing, or other maintenance of aircraft; 
(8)  Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the washing or other cleaning of a building exterior that contains any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, or any other harmful cleaning substance; 
(9)  Any wastewater from commercial floor, rug, or carpet cleaning; 
(10)  Any wastewater from the wash-down or other cleaning of pavement that contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance; or any wastewater from the wash-down or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill, leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of the released material have been previously removed; 
(11)  Any effluent from a cooling tower condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions filter or the blowdown from a boiler; 
(12)  Any commercial runoff or wash-down water from any animal pen, kennel or fowl or livestock containment area; 
(13)  Any filter backwash from a swimming pool or fountain; 
(14)  Any swimming pool water containing any harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid, or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning; 
(15)  Any discharge from water line disinfection by super chlorination or other means if the total residual chlorine it contains any harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in line disinfection; 
(16)  Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous substances or materials that the fire code in this Code requires to be contained and treated prior to discharge, unless treatment adequate to remove pollutants occurs prior to discharge (this prohibition does not apply to discharges or flow from firefighting by the fire department.); 
(17)  Any water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment; 
(18)  Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle wrecking yard; 
(19)  Any substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the MS4; 
(20)  Any discharge from oil and gas well drilling, derrick washing, fracturing, or other activities relating to gas pipelines, compression stations, or gas well padsites; 
(21)  Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST); any leachate or runoff from soil contaminated by a leaking PST; or any discharge of pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from the remediation of any such PST release unless the discharge: 
a.  Is in compliance with all state and federal standards and requirements; and 
b.  Does not contain a harmful quantity of any pollutant. 
(d)  No person shall introduce or cause be introduced into the MS4 any harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation, or other construction activities in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control measures to the maximum extent practicable. 
(e)  No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic or industrial, to the MS4, or allow such a connection to continue. 
(f)  No person shall cause or allow any pavement wash water from a service station to be discharged into the MS4 unless such wash water has passed through a properly functioning and maintained, grease, oil, and sand interceptor before discharge into the MS4. 
(g)  Regulation of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers. 
(1)  Any sale, distribution, application, labeling, manufacture, transportation, storage, or disposal of a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer must comply fully with all state and federal statutes and regulations including, without limitation, the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) and all federal regulations promulgated pursuant to FIFRA; Chapters 63, 75, and 76 of the Texas Agriculture Code and all state regulations promulgated pursuant to it; and any other state or federal requirement. 
(2)  Any license, permit, registration certification, or evidence of financial responsibility required by state or federal law for sale, distribution, application, manufacturer transportation, storage, or disposal of a pesticide herbicide or fertilizer must be presented to the director or his/her delegate and any city law enforcement officer for examination upon request. 
(3)  No person shall use or cause to be used any pesticide or herbicide contrary to any directions for use on any labeling required by state or federal statute or regulation. 
(4)  No person shall use or cause to be used any pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer in any manner that the person knows or reasonably should know, is likely to cause, or does cause, a harmful quantity of the pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer to enter the MS4 or waters of the United States. 
(5)  No person shall dispose of, discard, store, or transport a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer or a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer container in a manner that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to cause or does cause a harmful quantity of the pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer to enter the MS4 or waters of the United States. 
(h)  Used-oil regulation. 
(1)  No person shall: 
a.  Discharge used oil into the MS4 or a sewer, drainage system, septic tank, surface water, groundwater, or watercourse; 
b.  Knowingly mix or commingle used oil with solid waste that is to be disposed of in a landfill or knowingly directly dispose of used oil on land or in a landfill; 
c.  Apply used oil to a road or land for dust suppression, weed abatement, or other similar use that introduces used oil into the environment. 
(2)  All businesses that change motor oil for the public, municipal waste landfills are encouraged to serve as public used oil collection centers as provided by state statute in Section 371.024 of the Texas Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 4863, § 2(2.02), 4-17-17) 
Sec. 26-135. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Right of entry; inspection and sampling. The director may enter the premises of any person discharging stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or to waters of the United States to determine whether the discharger is complying with all requirements of this article and with any state or federal discharge permit, limitation, or requirement. Dischargers shall allow the director ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, copying, and for performing any additional duties. Dischargers shall make available to the director, upon request, any stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), modifications to them, self-inspection reports, monitoring records, compliance evaluations, notices of intent, and any other records, reports, and other documents related to compliance with this article and with any state or federal discharge permit. 
(1)  Where a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make necessary arrangements with its security system so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing his/her responsibilities. 
(2)  The director may set up on the discharger's property, or require installation of such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the discharger's operations. 
(3)  The director may require any discharger to the MS4 or waters of the United States to conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis, and other monitoring of its stormwater discharges and may specify the frequency and parameters of any required monitoring. 
(4)  The director may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary at the discharger's expense. The discharger shall maintain the facility's sampling and monitoring equipment be at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at its own expense. The discharger shall calibrate all devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the discharger at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the discharger. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to the discharger's premises are a violation of this article. The failure or refusal of such discharger to comply with this section shall be grounds for prohibition of dumping or disposal of materials into the MS4, the disconnection of water and/or sewer service to the facility, pursuant to the enforcement and/or termination of service provisions of this chapter, and revocation or suspension of any authorization or permit issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of the city Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Search warrants. If the director has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article or any state or federal discharge permit, limitation, or requirement, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued under it, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, the director may seek a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Interlocal and interagency agreements. The city may enter into interagency or interlocal agreements or other maintenance agreements, as necessary, to facilitate the implementation and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4863, § 2(2.02), 4-17-17) 
Sec. 26-136. - Acts adversely affecting water quality. 
    It is unlawful for any person to: 
(a)  Maintain grease and sand traps in any automotive center, service station, vehicle maintenance center or vehicle wash operation which is not connected to the sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Wash more than two (2) vehicles per twenty-four-hour period without the waste effluent being trapped and placed in the sanitary sewer. 
(c)  Wash aircraft without the waste effluent being trapped and placed in the sanitary sewer. 
(d)  Dump grass clippings, leaves, brush or any rubbish or debris to the curb, gutter, storm inlet, storm drain or watercourse. 
(e)  Permit crankcase draining, drainage from engine oil filters, vehicle engine wash, or other oils or oily substances, greases, or like material to go to or remain in or on any area that may drain to the storm system or watercourses. 
(f)  Deposit liquid waste, semi-liquid waste, or chemical waste in any area that may drain to the storm system or watercourses or dispose of them at any site other than one approved for that purpose. 
(g)  Permit cooling tower, compressor, or boiler blowdown water that is not clean, untreated water to flow to the storm system or watercourses. 
(h)  Permit water from nurseries which is used to water plants to flow to streets and alleys to the extent that a nuisance may be created by standing water, damage may result to streets or alleys, or the free passage of foot traffic may be affected. 
(i)  Permit waste water resulting from floor cleaning, rug and carpet cleaning, and laundering processes to flow to streets and alleys or into any storm drain or watercourse or to any place other than the sanitary sewer. 
(j)  Permit filter backwash from swimming pools and fountains to drain to any area other than the sanitary sewer or connect the backwash discharge pipe to anything other than the sanitary sewer system. 
(k)  Permit liquid wastes from animal pens used for kennels, animal hospitals, packing houses, poultry processing plants and dairies to flow to any area other than the sanitary sewer. 
(l)  Permit unused materials from ready-mix concrete mortar, and asphalt base delivery trucks to be dumped to any area that may drain to any stream, watercourse storm sewer, or sanitary sewer. 
(m)  Permit any residue to be disposed of or any vehicle to be washed down at any site not approved for that purpose. 
(n)  Permit waste oil storage drums or any other containers which are filled or partially filled with waste oil, solvents, or chemicals to remain in the open or under the eave of a building or structure in such a manner that the storage vessels may overflow as the result of precipitation or leak as a result of corrosion or damage. 
(o)  Permit old motors, transmissions, automobile parts, or any other machinery parts which are coated or partially coated with grease, oil, or solvents to remain uncovered in the open where portions of the coating materials may be washed to the storm sewers or watercourses from precipitation. 
(p)  Permit sewage wastes, whether domestic or industrial, to flow to any area other than a sanitary sewer or approved septic tank. 
(q)  Permit any sanitary sewer pipe to be open. It is an affirmative defense to this subsection that the sewer pipe is open while being actively constructed, cleaned, repaired, or inspected. 
(r)  On any premises he or she manages, owns, leases, or otherwise has control over, fail to complete repair of all malfunctioning sewer systems within seventy-two (72) hours and complete removal of all residue, and complete treatment of affected areas with a suitable disinfectant within twenty-four (24) hours after written notice. Such notice shall be effective upon the earliest of any of the following: 
(1)  Upon personal service; 
(2)  Upon delivery to the person's office during normal working hours; 
(3)  Upon posting such notice on the door to the person's residence or office; or 
(4)  Seventy-two (72) hours after depositing the notice, enclosed in a postpaid, properly addressed wrapper, in a post office or official depository under the care and custody of the United States Postal Service. 
(s)  On any premises a person owns through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, fail to keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 4863, § 2(2.02), 4-17-17) 
Sec. 26-137. - Plan for controlling accidental spills and hazardous substances. 
    The city council adopts by reference as the standard for handling accidental spills and controlling hazardous substances within the city, the State of Texas Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan. 
(Ord. No. 4863, § 2(2.02), 4-17-17) 
Sec. 26-138. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  Any expenses incurred in handling an accidental spill shall be paid by the party responsible for the accident. 
(b)  The director may promulgate rules and regulations that are reasonable and necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. A copy of the rules and regulations, when and if promulgated and certified as to truth and accuracy by the director, shall be filed with the city secretary of the city who shall maintain them as public record available for information. 
(c)  Plan review, inspection, and enforcement fees to administer the provisions of this article are hereby established and can be found in the Comprehensive Schedule of Fees attached hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by this reference. 
(Ord. No. 4863, § 2(2.02), 4-17-17) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A, Comprehensive Schedule of Fees, can be found at the end of ch. 22, div. 5. 
Sec. 26-139. - Enforcement, punishment for violations, and other remedies. 
(a)  Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this article or any permit issued under this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation thereof, for each act of violation and for each day of violation. 
(b)  In addition to proceeding under authority of subsections (a) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person, firm, or corporation that remains in violation of this article. 
(c)  The city may disconnect the water service for violation of this article. The city may issue a stop work order for violation of this article. 
(d)  Any person responsible for the depositing or discarding of any material prohibited by this article upon any sidewalk, alley, street, bridge, public passageway, drain, gutter, waterbody, MS4, or other public shall be responsible for any costs associated with the cleaning up or removal and disposal of such materials. Such person shall also be responsible for reimbursing the city for any costs/damages incurred by the city. These costs/damages may include, but are not limited to, manpower, equipment, supplies, analytical costs, disposal costs, consultants, private contractors, street/utility repairs, and repairs to components of the MS4. 
(e)  In the event there is an emergency condition on private property, the director may enter upon such premises and may do such work as necessary, or cause the same to be done, to abate the condition in order that the premises may comply with the requirements of this article. For the purposes of this subsection, "emergency condition" shall be defined as any condition or conditions which are or reasonably could be an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the city or to the environment. Anytime the city or its agents abates a nuisance or violation of this article, the owner of such premises shall be responsible for reimbursing the city for any costs/damages incurred by the city and the city manager is hereby authorized to file claims, lawsuits, and/or liens as necessary to collect such costs. 
(Ord. No. 4863, § 2(2.02), 4-17-17) 
Sec. 26-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SERVICE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Plumbing code, § 5-281. 
State Law reference- Protection of public water supplies, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-1 §§ 10-14. 

Sec. 26-141. - General scope of article. 
    This article regulates the use of the city's potable water system and provides for metering of water used by consumers. 
(Code 1965, § 27-7) 
Sec. 26-142. - Tampering with or injuring property of water system. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without the permission of the city manager or his or her designee, to tamper with, injure, damage or deface any component of the city's water system including valves, meters, meter boxes, lids, hydrants, lines, pump stations, ground storage tanks, elevated storage tanks, stopcock, standpipe, public fountain, or other fixture or appliance belonging to the city's water system. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 19(n), 6-17-13; Ord. No. 4902, § 2(2.01), 9-18-17) 
Editor's note- Section 19(n) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 26-142 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 26-142 derived from the 1965 Code, § 27-8. 
Sec. 26-143. - Unlawful turning on or off of water stopcocks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, not the agent or employee of the water department of the city, to turn on or off any water stopcock which is the property of the water department, or to procure another person not the agent or employee of the water department to turn on or off any such water stopcock. 
(Code 1965, § 27-9) 
Sec. 26-144. - Water wells-Covers generally. 
    Every water well located within the corporate limits of the city must have a permanent cover, securely fastened at all times, and capable of supporting at least two hundred (200) pounds of weight. 
(Code 1965, § 27-10) 
Sec. 26-145. - Same-Filling or covering when abandoned. 
    In the event any water well within the city is abandoned or not used, the same shall be filled to the surface with earth or earth and rock or be securely and permanently covered at all times with a permanent cover capable of supporting at least three hundred (300) pounds. 
(Code 1965, § 27-11) 
Sec. 26-146. - Same-Nuisances. 
    Any open water well in violation of section 26-144 or 26-145 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the owner, occupier, or person in charge of the property on which such well is located shall cause such well to be covered or filled as required by such sections. 
(Code 1965, § 27-12) 
Sec. 26-147. - Water service connections and meters; multiple service from single meter. 
(a)  Separate for each residence or building in new service. For any service hereafter installed each individual resident or building making connection with the city water system shall have a separate meter, and no new connection shall be made by the city unless such individual residence or building is separately metered. Except, that multiple connections to a single meter may be allowed under the terms of section 26-186. Where more than one (1) connection is so allowed, the billing will be provided in (b) below. 
(b)  Multiple use of meter in existing buildings. In existing cases where more than one (1) building is served by a single meter, the entire amount of water consumed and registered through such meter shall be billed to the building nearest the meter and shall include an additional minimum for each and every other building served by such meter, and such procedure shall continue until such buildings are separately metered. 
(c)  One meter in motel and HUD-code manufactured home park. Any number of structures on one (1) plat of ground owned by one (1) person and constituting a bona fide motel or HUD-code manufactured home park shall be entitled to water service from one (1) meter. In all such cases, however, where the owner's or manager's residence, store, or filling station is conducted in connection with such motel or HUD-code manufactured home park, such residence, store and filling station shall be equipped with a separate meter and a separate charge made therefor, unless the residence, store and filling station be situated within a single building, in which case, a single meter shall suffice for such residence, store and filling station and one (1) charge shall be made therefor. Provided, however, that a structure as used herein shall mean a permanent building which is a part of the realty, and specifically shall not include a HUD-code manufactured home in a HUD-code manufactured home park other than an owner's residence. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  One meter for two or more houses presently so connected. In all cases where two (2) or more houses or buildings are now served by one (1) meter, separate charges shall be made for each house and building and no allowance shall be made for a vacancy of either house or building unless the owner shall furnish satisfactory proof to the city council that water service to such house or building has been disconnected; and at the same time by a written application agrees that in the event of a reconnection, the same shall be equipped with a separate meter and a separate charge paid therefor. 
(f)  Cross-connections with other sources. Cross- connection between piping receiving water from water mains and piping receiving water from any other source or storage is positively forbidden, and the city reserves the right when it discovers the existence of any such cross-connections to immediately and without further notice disconnect the service connecting such piping with the city mains. Anyone desiring to use water from some other source in addition to the city connection may do so by using a storage tank and delivering the city water supply into the tank six (6) inches above the overflow line and through a pipe having at least a six-inch air space between its discharge end and the top of the tank. The water from the other source may then be piped into the tank and the service lines taken from the tank in any manner desired. If inflow from the city water main to a swimming pool or other storage of water is below overflow level a cross-connection exists. 
(Code 1965, § 27-13; Ord. No. 3703, § 3, 3-3-97; Ord. No. 4701, § 19(o), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 26-148. - Water conservation plan adopted. 
    The City of Denison, Texas, Water Conservation Plan attached to Ord. No. 4511 as Exhibit "A," as revised, is made a part hereof for all purposes, and the same is hereby adopted as the official policy of the city. 
    Exhibit "A" is not set out herein but is on file for inspection in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 19(p), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 19(p) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 26-148 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 26-148 derived from Ord. No. 3921, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 1999; and Ord. No. 4511, § 1, adopted April 20, 2009. 
Secs. 26-149-26-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXTENSION OF WATER AND SEWER MAINS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 26-166-26-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INSIDE CITY 

Sec. 26-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Developer means the owner, or agent of the owner, subdividing and installing utilities to serve lots or tracts for resale as homes or industrial sites. 
    Lot or tract of land is defined as the same as a building site as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city, and such definition, restrictions and conditions are hereby adopted and made a part of this division as if fully copied herein. 
    Off-site mains means water and/or sewer mains totally outside of a tract of land to be subdivided and developed for resale. 
    On-site mains means water and/or sewer mains totally within or adjacent to a tract of land to be subdivided and developed for resale. 
    Programmed extension means water and/or sewer extensions included in the master plan of the system design for which funds have been specifically provided. 
(Code 1965, § 27-14) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-182. - Purpose of division. 
    The intent and purpose of this division is to provide an equitable charge for water and sanitary sewer connections as a proportionate distribution of the cost of water and sanitary sewer main extensions to serve property in the city on a front-foot basis. 
(Code 1965, § 27-15) 
Sec. 26-183. - Authority to make extensions. 
    The public works department may extend water and sanitary sewer mains in the streets, alleys or easements within the city limits in order to permit connections by persons desiring and seeking water service and sanitary sewer service. 
(Code 1965, § 27-16) 
Secs. 26-184-26-190. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 19(q) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed §§ 26-184-26-190, which pertained to front-foot charge generally, charges where service requested for portion of tract, extension for individual owners, extension for property to be subdivided or platted for development-generally, same-methods of construction, payment of fees for connections to extend mains, installment payment of charges, and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 27-17-27-23. 
Sec. 26-191. - City not obligated to make extensions. 
    In no event shall the city be obligated to provide extensions of service from its funds, but the city manager or his or her designee may make such extensions from budgeted funds that are determined to be practical additions to the system. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 19(r), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 19(r) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 26-191 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 26-191 derived from the 1965 Code, § 27-24. 
Secs. 26-192, 26-193. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 19(q) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed §§ 26-192 and 26-193, which pertained to exemptions from front-foot charges, and refunds, and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 27-25, 27-26. 
Sec. 26-194. - Disposition of charges. 
    Any and all sums of money collected as a service connection fee or charge as set out in section 26-236 or as an extension or front foot charge shall be credited to the water and sewer fund of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 27-27) 
Sec. 26-195. - No vested rights under division. 
    No person shall acquire any vested rights under the terms and provisions of this division. 
(Code 1965, § 27-28) 
Secs. 26-196-26-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OUTSIDE CITY SERVICE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4701, §§ 19(s), (t), adopted June 17, 2013, repealed the former div. 3, §§ 26-211-26-217, and enacted a new div. 3 as set out herein. The former div. 3, entitled "Outside City" derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 27-29-27-35. 

Sec. 26-211. - Powers and duties of the city manager or his or her designee. 
    The city manager or his or her designee shall supervise all installations, connections and extensions to both the water and sewer lines of the city outside the city limits. The city manager or his or her designee shall determine whether existing mains in place and outside the city are sufficiently sized and of a condition to allow additional customers without the impairment of the quality of service to existing customers on the main line. If the decision is that additional service may be established on the line in question without impairing quality of service, the city manager or his or her designee may authorize the additional connection if the property to be served is adjacent and contiguous to the corporate limits and petitions the city to be annexed. If such property is not adjacent and contiguous to the city, the city manager or his or her designee may allow the additional connection. No connection to the water or sewer system of the city shall be made or allowed if the city manager or his or her designee finds that quality of service will be impaired below acceptable levels of service. All costs associated with connecting to the system shall be borne by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 4701, §§ 19(s), (t), 6-17-13) 
Secs. 26-212-26-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER AND SEWER USE FEES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 26-236. - Tap connection fees-Established. 
    To provide for payment of a portion of the cost and to provide for a uniform and equitable charge for connecting to the water and sewer mains of the city, the city council shall enact from time to time such fees and charges. All applicable fees and charges shall be kept of record in the office of the city manager or his or her designee and shall be available for public inspection in such offices during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 19(u), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 19(u) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 26-236 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 26-236 derived from the 1965 Code, § 27-36; Ord. No. 4324, § 2, adopted Nov. 7, 2005; and Ord. No. 4459, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 5, 2008. 
Sec. 26-237. - Same-Payment. 
    All tap connection fees established by section 26-236 must be paid to the city before any water or sewer connection is made. 
(Code 1965, § 27-37; Ord. No. 4459, §§ 1, 2, 5-5-08) 
Sec. 26-238. - Water service charge-Imposed. 
(a)  The rates or charges for services furnished by the city shall be established from time to time by ordinance of the city council. All applicable fees and charges shall be kept on record in the office of the city clerk and in the water department and shall be available for public inspection in such offices during normal business hours. 
(b)  Each water customer shall be allowed one (1) reread of their water meter during any twelve-month cycle free of charge. If further rereadings are requested during the twelve-month cycle the customer shall be charged as follows: 
(1)  $25.00, if the first reading is confirmed. 
(2)  No charge if it is determined that the first reading was in error. 
(c)  Applicable charges for rereading water meters shall be added to the customer's bill the month following the rereading. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 19(v), 6-17-13; Ord. No. 4744, § 1, 5-19-14) 
Sec. 26-239. - Same-Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in section 27-238, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    HUD-code manufactured home shall mean the same as trailer, with or without capacity to be towed or moved, located on a temporary, semi-permanent or permanent installation. 
    Single meter shall mean one (1) water meter service to two (2) or more apartments or HUD-code manufactured homes. 
    With meter shall mean with single water meter installed for exclusive use of one (1) apartment or HUD-code manufactured home. 
(Code 1965, § 27-39; Ord. No. 3707, § 3, 3-3-97; Ord. No. 4459, §§ 1, 2, 5-5-08) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-240. - Charge for connect and disconnect of service. 
    A charge which shall be set from time to time by the city council shall be made to customers who request that water be turned off or on during the normal business days prior to 3:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday. A charge which shall be set from time to time by the city council shall be made to customers who request that water be turned on or off after 3:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday and on weekends. Such fees shall also apply to the disconnection and reconnection occurring due to nonpayment of utility services. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 19(w), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 19(w) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 26-240 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 26-240 derived from the 1965 Code, § 27-40; Ord. No. 4135, § 1, adopted Sept. 16, 2002; and Ord. No. 4459, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 5, 2008. 
Sec. 26-241. - Same-Collection. 
    The amounts set out in section 26-240 shall be a charge against the owner, occupant or lessee of the premises served by said water meter and the amount so fixed shall be collected through the water department, as water charges are collected and failure to pay such charges shall subject the customer to the same penalty as prescribed for failure to pay water or sewer charges. 
(Code 1965, § 27-41; Ord. No. 4459, §§ 1, 2, 5-5-08) 
Sec. 26-242. - Sanitary sewer service charges. 
    The monthly rates or charges for service to be furnished by the sanitary sewer system shall be established from time to time by ordinance of the city council. All applicable fees and charges shall be kept on record in the office of the city manager or his or her designee and shall be available for public inspection in such offices during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 19(x), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 19(x) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 26-238 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 
Sec. 26-243. - Monthly billing; payment; delinquent charge; disconnection for nonpayment. 
(a)  Consumers shall be billed at the rates and charges provided in this article once each month. All statements for residential users shall be due and payable on the next due date appearing on the face of such statement, which date shall be twenty-five (25) days following the date of the statement. All statements for apartment complex and commercial/industrial users shall be due and payable on the next due date appearing on the face of such statement, which date shall be twenty-five (25) days following the date of the statement. Any statement not paid by the next due date as herein provided shall incur a late payment penalty of ten (10) percent of the net due date amount and shall appear on the statement as the gross amount due. 
(b)  In the event any user or customer of such service does not pay the statement by the next due date, the utility office manager shall notify the user or customer by U.S. mail that nonpayment is cause for discontinuation of water/sewer service and such notice shall state that payment must be made within ten (10) days of the date of the notice to avoid disconnecting services. Failure to pay the correct amount due on or before the date specified in the notice provided in this subsection shall be cause for disconnecting water service to the user or customer. 
(c)  In instances where the customer has experienced two (2) or more terminations of service for nonpayment of bills within the preceding twelve-month period, a refundable security deposit shall be required in order to gain restoration of service following the second termination of service for nonpayment. This refundable deposit shall be in addition to payment of any outstanding balance and/or reconnection fees. The security deposit amount shall be an additional fifty dollars ($50.00) for residential customers and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for commercial customers. Upon discontinuance of service, the security deposit amount will be applied against the final billing. Any funds remaining after the bill is paid will be refunded to the party from whom they were received. 
(d)  From and after June 1, 2008, [for] existing delinquent accounts and accounts going delinquent thereafter, arrangements for satisfying the delinquency and continuing service may be negotiated between the user/customer and the city in a manner consistent with the provisions of this chapter. Such negotiated arrangements shall be in writing and signed by the person responsible for the payment of the water/sewer service account. In no event shall any account be continued beyond sixty (60) days following the date of the negotiated agreement. 
(e)  In instances where damage to the city's water system has occurred due to tampering with, injuring, damaging or defacing any component of the city's water system including but not limited to valves, meters, meter boxes, lids, hydrants, lines, pump stations, ground storage tanks, elevated storage tanks, stopcock, standpipe, public fountain, or other fixture or appliance belonging to the city's water system, customers shall be billed the rates, fees and/or charges established from time to time by ordinance of the city council. Said rates, fees and/or charges shall be added to the customer's water bill; and, in cases where the service is terminated for nonpayment, the fee shall be paid before service is restored. All applicable fees and charges shall be kept on record in the office of the city manager or his or her designee and shall be available for public inspection in such offices during normal business hours. Payment of these charges for the damage is payable as set out in this section. 
(Code 1965, § 27-43; Ord. No. 3141, § 2, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 4135, § 2, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 4459, §§ 1, 2, 5-5-08; Ord. No. 4902, § 2(2.02), 9-18-17) 
Sec. 26-244. - Charges for checks not honored by financial institutions. 
    There shall be a handling fee in an amount determined by the city council for any check issued for payment of water and/or sewer service not honored for payment by that financial institution on which the check was drawn. This handling fee shall be added to the customer's water bill; and, in cases where the service is terminated for nonpayment, the fee shall be paid before service is restored. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 19(y), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 19(y) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 26-244 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 26-244 derived from the 1965 Code, § 27-44; Ord. No. 4135, § 3, adopted Sept. 16, 2002; and Ord. No. 4459, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 5, 2008. 
Sec. 26-245. - Fee required prior to commencement of service. 
    There is hereby established a fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) which shall be paid prior to commencement of water service by the city. This connection fee shall not be refunded and shall represent the cost of establishing utility services and of setting up accounting and billing records for a customer. Applicants for water service shall be required to provide acceptable proof of identity. Each such customer shall be charged a security deposit in addition to all other fees set forth, as follows: 
(1)  Single-family residential customers ..... $50.00 
(2)  All other customers ..... 100.00 
Under no circumstances shall water service be provided to any person or firm with a previously unpaid account on the records. 
(Code 1965, § 27-45; Ord. No. 4459, §§ 1, 2, 5-5-08) 
Sec. 26-246. - Transfer fee. 
    A fee shall be established in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00) for the transfer of service from one (1) residence or business to another location within the city's service area. Such fee includes the turning off the old service and the connecting of the new service. 
(Code 1965, § 27-46; Ord. No. 4459, §§ 1, 2, 5-5-08) 
Sec. 26-247. - Free service not allowed; exception. 
    No free service shall be allowed except as authorized by the city council by proper resolution. 
(Code 1965, § 27-47) 
Sec. 26-248. - Fees related to the environmental services and monitoring program-Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The purposes of sections 26-248 through 26-250 are to: 
(1)  Provide for the recovery of the costs of implementing and operating the city's pollution abatement and monitoring program from nondomestic users of the city's sewage collection and treatment system; and 
(2)  Establish an industrial waste surcharge that will provide a financial incentive for nondomestic users of the city's sewage collection and treatment system to install meaningful pretreatment facilities. 
(b)  To accomplish these purposes, the city council may adopt, from time to time, by amendment to this section, fees which may include: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's environmental services monitoring program; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction plans and specifications, and for inspecting construction of facilities; 
(4)  Fees for permit applications; 
(5)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(6)  Fees for consistent removal (by the city) of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards (industrial cost recovery charges); or 
(7)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this chapter. 
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this section, and are separate from, and in addition to, all other fees chargeable by the city, such as sanitary sewer service charges and water service charges, connection fees (tap charges), and front-foot charges. 
(Code 1965, § 27-48(1.2); Ord. No. 4701, § 19(z), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 19(z) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, changed the title of § 26-248 from "Fees related to the pollution abatement and monitoring program-Purpose and scope" to "Fees related to the environmental services and monitoring program-Purpose and scope." 
Sec. 26-249. - Same-Industrial waste surcharge. 
    In addition to the rates and charges provided by section 26-242 above, charges to customers in the monitored group classes shall be established from time to time by ordinance of the city council. All applicable fees and charges shell be kept on record in the office of the city manager or his or her designee and shall be available for public inspection in such offices during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 19(aa), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 19(aa) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 26-249 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 26-249 derived from the 1965 Code, § 27-48(1.2); Ord. No. 3216, § 2, adopted April 16, 1990; Ord. No. 3188, §§ 1, 3, adopted Dec. 18, 1989; Ord. No. 4324, § 2, adopted Nov. 7, 2005; and Ord. No. 4325, § 1, adopted Nov. 7, 2005. 
Sec. 26-250. - Same-Fee schedule. 
    Wastewater discharge permit fees shall be established from time to time by ordinance of the city council. All applicable fees and charges shall be kept on record in the office of the city manager or his or her designee and shall be available for public inspection in such offices during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 4701, § 19(bb), 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Section 19(bb) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed § 26-250 and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. Former § 26-250 derived from the 1965 Code, § 27-48(1.3); Ord. No. 3188, § 2, adopted Dec. 18, 1989; and Ord. No. 4324, § 2, adopted Nov. 7, 2005. 
Secs. 26-251-26-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Section 19(cc) of Ord. No. 4701, adopted June 17, 2013, repealed art. VI, §§ 26-276-26-283, which pertained to bulk water sales and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 27-109-27-116.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 4753, § 1, adopted Sept. 2, 2014, enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 26-276. - Declaration of policy, purpose and intent, and public involvement. 
(a)  The City of Denison adopts the following regulations and restriction on the delivery and consumption of water during periods of drought conditions, known as the drought contingency plan ("the plan"). The plan will conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilitates, with particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection. The purpose of these regulations is to protect the public health, welfare and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortages or other water emergency conditions. 
(b)  As required by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) rules in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 288, Subchapter B, Rule 288.20, as amended, this article addresses various situations including the following: 
 Provisions to inform the public and provide opportunity for public input; 
 Provisions for continuing public education and information; 
 Coordination with regional water planning group; 
 Criteria for initiation and termination of drought stages; 
 Initiation of drought response stages; 
 Drought and emergency response stages; 
 Specific, quantified targets for water use reductions; 
 Water supply and demand management measures for each stage; 
 Procedures for initiation and termination of drought stages; 
 Procedures for granting variances; 
 Procedures for enforcement of mandatory restrictions; 
 Consultation with wholesale supplier; 
 Notification of implementation of mandatory measures; 
 Review and update of plan. 
(c)  Prior to adoption of this plan, a public meeting will be held to receive comments. Provisions shall include actively informing the public and providing opportunity for public input in the preparation of the plan. The draft plan shall be made available for the City of Denison website and by providing a copy of the draft plan to any person requesting a copy. Wholesale water users will be given an additional opportunity to provide input into the development of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 4753, § 1, 9-2-14) 
Sec. 26-277. - Authorization of responsible official. 
    The director of public works is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of the plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare of the community. The director shall have the authority to initiate or terminate stages of the plan as stated in this article. The director shall review and propose updates, if necessary, to the city council at least every five (5) years, or as required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 4753, § 1, 9-2-14) 
Sec. 26-278. - Definitions. 
    The words and terms used in this article shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(a)  The provision of the plan shall apply to all persons, users, and property utilizing water provided by the City of Denison. The terms "person" and "user" as used in the DECP includes individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations and all other legal entities. 
(b)  Aesthetic use: Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and water gardens. 
(c)  Commercial and institutional water use: Water use which is integral to the operations of commercial, non-profit, and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants, and office buildings. 
(d)  Conservation: Those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses. 
(e)  Contamination: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a health hazard or impair the usefulness of the water such that the water system cannot be used. 
(f)  Customer or user: Any person, company, organization or municipality using water supplied by the City of Denison. 
(g)  Director: The City of Denison Public Works Director or designee. 
(h)  Drought: A long period of abnormally low precipitation that adversely affects growing or living conditions. 
(i)  Even number address: Street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8 and locations without addresses. 
(j)  Industrial water users: The use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms having greater usability and value. 
(k)  Institutional water users: Public, educational, charitable, or other organizations devoted to a particular cause or program including all levels of government agencies, schools, colleges, and healthcare facilities such as nursing homes and hospitals. 
(l)  Landscape irrigation use: Water use for irrigation and maintenance of landscaped area, whether publicly or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, rights-of-way, and medians. 
(m)  Non-essential water use: Water use that is neither essential nor required for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare, including: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscaped areas, including parks, athletic fields, and golf courses, except as otherwise provided under this plan; 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motor bike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle at any noncommercial establishment not designed for such purposes; 
(3)  Use of water to wash any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other impervious surfaces; 
(4)  Use of water to was buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(5)  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; 
(6)  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or Jacuzzi-type pools; 
(7)  Use of water in fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes; except where necessary to support nonplant aquatic life; 
(8)  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s). 
(n)  Maintenance failures: Any failure or curtailment of delivery from raw water suppliers because of water quantity or quality problems due to water supply system structural failure, or any of a number of natural or man-made situations. 
(o)  Odd numbered address: Street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
(p)  Production capability: The volume/amount a public water supplier is able to produce utilizing the current water resources and infrastructure. 
(q)  Reservoir: The City of Denison raw water holding facilities, including, Lake Texoma and Lake Randell. 
(r)  Watering schedule: Permissible days for outdoor water use based upon odd (O) and even (E) numbered addresses on the days shown in the following table. 
Sun Mon Tue Wed Thurs Fri Sat O X X X NONE E X X X NONE  
(s)  Water supply: The amount of water that is available to meet the immediate unrestricted customer demands based on the available water resources and infrastructure. 
(t)  Wholesale water user: Potable water provided to a person, political subdivision or municipality who is not the ultimate user of the water. 
(Ord. No. 4753, § 1, 9-2-14) 
Sec. 26-279. - Education; coordination with regional water planning group. 
(a)  Education: 
(1)  Continuing public education and information shall be accomplished by making the plan available to the public through the City of Denison website and notifying local organizations, schools and civic groups that city staff members are available to make presentations about the plan. 
(2)  When the plan is activated or the drought stage changes, the city shall notify local media of the issues, the drought response stage, and the specific actions required of the public to comply with the plan. Other means of notice may also include publication on the City of Denison website and billing inserts or mail outs, as appropriate. 
(b)  Coordination with regional water planning group: The City of Denison is located within the Region C water planning area. The city shall notify to the chair of the Region C Water Planning Group (RCWPG) with this plan for their information and comment. The plan will be reviewed by RCWPG to assure conformity and consistency with the regional water plan. 
(Ord. No. 4753, § 1, 9-2-14) 
Sec. 26-280. - Drought stages; triggering criteria; response; termination. 
(a)  Initiation of drought response stages. The director shall monitor water supply and demand conditions and shall have the authority to initiate or terminate stages of this plan. Initiation and termination of the states is not required to be in sequential order if the director determines it is in the best interest of the public. Public notification of the initiation or termination of drought response stages shall be by means of public service announcements on TV, radio and are newspapers or publications, and on the City of Denison website. 
    The director shall make notification to wholesale water users upon initiation or termination of drought response stages. Contact between the director and wholesale water users shall be maintained throughout drought conditions. Notification shall include reminder that water will be distributed to all customers pro rata, in accordance with V.T.C.A. Water Code, § 11.039. 
    The director shall notify TCEQ within five (5) business days upon implementing any mandatory provisions of this plan, as prescribed in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 288, Subchapter B (288.20 (b)), as amended. 
    For other trigger conditions, the director may decide not to order the implementation of a drought response stage or water emergency even though one (1) or more of the trigger criteria for the stage are met. Factors that could influence such a decision include, but are not limited to, the time of the year, weather conditions, the anticipation of replenished water supplies, or the anticipation that additional facilities will become available to meet needs. 
(b)  Termination of drought response stages. The director may order the termination of a drought response stage or water emergency when the conditions for termination are met or at his/her discretion. The following actions will be taken when a drought stage is terminated: 
(1)  The public will be notified through local media. 
(2)  Wholesale customers will be notified by telephone with a follow-up letter or fax. 
(3)  When any mandatory provisions of the drought contingency plan that have been activated are terminated, the City of Denison will notify the executive director of the TCEQ within five (5) business days. 
    The director may decide not to order the termination of a drought response stage or water emergency even though the conditions for termination of the stage are met. Factors that could influence such a decision include, but are not limited to, the time of the year, weather conditions, or the anticipation of potential changed conditions that warrant the continuation of the drought stage. 
(c)  Drought and emergency response stages. 
(1)  Stage 1, Mild: 
i.  Triggering and termination conditions. 
1.  Demand exceeds eleven (11) MGD of the amount that can be delivered to customers for seven (7) consecutive days. 
2.  Water demand for all or part of the delivery system approaches delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate. 
3.  Supply source becomes contaminated. 
4.  Water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of major water system components. 
5.  Water demand is approaching the limit of the permitted supply. 
6.  Stage 1 can be terminated when the circumstances that caused the initiation of Stage 1 no longer prevail. 
ii.  Goal for use reductions and actions available. 
1.  The goal for water use reduction under Stage 1, Mild is a zero-percent reduction of the use that would have occurred in the absence of drought contingency measures. The purpose of actions under Stage 1, Mild is to raise public awareness of potential drought problems. The director can order the implementation of any of the actions listed below, as deemed necessary: 
a.  Request voluntary reductions in water use by the public and by wholesale customers. 
b.  Increase public education efforts on ways to reduce water use. 
c.  Review the problems that caused the initiation of Stage 1. 
d.  Notify major water users and work with them to achieve voluntary water use reductions. 
e.  Intensify efforts on leak detection and repair. 
f.  Reduce non-essential city government water use, including street cleaning, vehicle washing, and operation of ornamental fountains. 
g.  Reduce city government water use for landscape irrigation. 
h.  Ask the public to follow voluntary landscape watering schedules. 
i.  Notify wholesale customers of actions being taken in the City of Denison and request implementation of similar procedures. 
(2)  Stage 2, Moderate: 
i.  Triggering and termination conditions. 
1.  Demand exceeds twelve (12) MGD of the amount that can be delivered to customers for three (3) consecutive days. 
2.  Water demand for all or part of the delivery system equals delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate. 
3.  Supply source becomes contaminated. 
4.  Water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of major water system components. 
5.  Water demand is approaching the limit of the permitted supply. 
6.  Stage 2 can terminate when the circumstances that caused the initiation of Stage 2 no longer prevail. Stage 1 becomes operative on termination of Stage 2. 
ii.  Goal for use reduction and actions available. 
1.  The goal for water use reduction under Stage 2, Moderate is a two (2) percent reduction of the use that would have occurred in the absence of drought contingency measures. The director can order the implementation of any of the actions listed below, as deemed necessary: 
a.  Continue or initiate any actions available under Stage 1. 
b.  Initiate engineering studies to evaluate alternatives should conditions worsen. 
c.  Further accelerate public education efforts on ways to reduce water use. 
d.  Halt non-essential city government water use, including street cleaning, vehicle washing, and operations of ornamental fountains. 
e.  Encourage the public to wait until the current drought or emergency situation has passed before establishing new landscaping. 
f.  Notify wholesale customers of actions being taken in the City of Denison and request them to implement similar procedures. 
(3)  Stage 3, Severe. 
i.  Triggering and termination conditions. 
1.  Demand exceeds 12.5 MGD of the amount that can be delivered to customers for three (3) consecutive days. 
2.  Water demand for all or part of the delivery system exceeds delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate. 
3.  Supply source becomes contaminated. 
4.  Water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of major water system components. 
5.  Water demand is approaching the limit of the permitted supply. 
6.  Stage 3 can terminate when the circumstances that caused the initiation of Stage 3 no longer prevail. Stage 2 becomes operative on termination of Stage 3. 
ii.  Goal for use reduction and actions available. 
1.  The goal for water use reduction under Stage 3, Severe, is a reduction of five (5) percent of the use that would have occurred in the absence of drought contingency measures. If the circumstances warrant, the mayor or designee can set a goal for greater water use reduction. 
2.  The director can order the implementation of any of the actions listed below, as deemed necessary. Measures described as "requires notification to TCEQ" impose mandatory requirements on retail and wholesale customers. The City of Denison staff must notify TCEQ within five (5) business days if these measures are implemented. 
a.  Continue or initiate any actions available under Stage 1 and 2. 
b.  Implement viable alternative water supply strategies. 
c.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Initiate mandatory water use restrictions as follows: 
i.  Prohibit hosing of paved areas, buildings, or windows. 
ii.  Prohibit operation of ornamental fountains. 
iii.  Prohibit washing or rinsing of vehicles by hose. 
iv.  Prohibit using water in such a manner as to allow runoff or other waste. 
d.  Requires notification to TCEQ. Limit landscape watering at each service address to once every five (5) days based on the last digit of the address. (Exceptions: Foundations, new plantings (first year) of trees and shrubs may be watered for up to two (2) hours on any day by a hand-held hose or a soaker hose. Golf courses may water greens and tee boxes without restrictions. Restrictions do not apply to locations using treated wastewater effluent for irrigation.) 
e.  Requires notification to TCEQ. Prohibit draining and filling of existing pools and filling of new pools. (Pools may add water to replace losses during normal use.) 
f.  Requires notification to TCEQ. Prohibit establishment of new landscaping. 
g.  Discontinue city government water use for landscape irrigation, except as needed to prevent foundation damage, keep golf course greens and tee boxes alive, and preserve new plantings. 
h.  Notify all wholesale customers that a shortage of water resulting from drought necessitates curtailment of delivery and that the city's water production will be divided in accordance with Texas Water Code, Section 11.039. 
(4)  Stage 4-Emergency. 
i.  Triggering and termination conditions. 
1.  Demand exceeds the amount that can be delivered to customers. 
2.  Water demand for all or part of the delivery system seriously exceeds delivery capacity because the delivery capacity is inadequate. 
3.  Supply source becomes contaminated. 
4.  Water supply system unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of major water system components. 
5.  Water demand is approaching the limit of the permitted supply. 
6.  Stage 4 can terminate when the circumstances that caused the initiation of Stage 4 no longer prevail. Stage 3 becomes operative on termination of Stage 4. 
ii.  Goal for use reduction and actions available. 
1.  The goal for water use reduction under Stage 4, Emergency, is a reduction of ten (10) percent of the use that would have occurred in the absence of drought contingency measures. If circumstances warrant, the director can set a goal for greater water use reduction. 
2.  The director can order the implementation of any of the actions listed below, as deemed necessary. Measures described as "requires notification to TCEQ" impose mandatory requirements on retail and wholesale customers. The City of Denison staff must notify TCEQ within five (5) business days if these measures are implemented. 
3.  Continue or initiate any actions available under Stages 1, 2 and 3. 
4.  Implement viable alternative water supply strategies. 
5.  Requires notification to TCEQ. Prohibit washing of vehicles except as necessary for health, sanitation or safety reasons, including car washes. 
6.  Requires notification to TCEQ. Prohibit commercial and residential landscape watering, except that foundations may be watered for two (2) hours each day with a hand-held hose or soaker hose. 
7.  Requires notification to TCEQ. Prohibit golf course watering except for greens and tee boxes. 
8.  Requires notification of TCEQ. Prohibit any filling of private pools. Commercial and public pools may refill to replace losses during normal use. 
9.  Requires notification of TCEQ. Require all commercial water users to reduce water use by a percentage established by the mayor and his/her designee. 
10.  Notify wholesale customers of actions being taken by the City of Denison and require them to implement similar procedures. 
(Ord. No. 4753, § 1, 9-2-14) 
Sec. 26-281. - Wholesale water contract provisions. 
    Each wholesale water contract entered into, renewed, or extended after the adoption of this article shall contain provisions for curtailing water supplies and rationing of water. 
(Ord. No. 4753, § 1, 9-2-14) 
Sec. 26-282. - Variances. 
(a)  The director may grant temporary variances for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this plan if one (1) or more of the following conditions is met: 
(1)  Failure to grant such a variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting health, sanitation, or fire safety for the public or the person requesting the variance. 
(2)  Compliance with this plan cannot be accomplished due to technical or other limitations. 
(3)  Alternative methods that achieve the same level of reduction in water use can be implemented. 
(b)  Variances shall be granted or denied at the discretion of the director. All petitions for variances should be in writing and should include the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the petitioner(s). 
(2)  Purpose of water use. 
(3)  Specific provisions from which relief is requested. 
(4)  Detailed statement of the adverse effect of the provision from which relief is requested. 
(5)  Description of relief requested. 
(6)  Period of time for which the variance is sought. 
(7)  Alternative measures that will be taken to reduce water use. 
(8)  Other pertinent information. 
(c)  The director or designee shall review and make a decision to grant, deny, or modify a petition for variance no later than seven (7) business days after the petition is determined to be complete per subsection (b) required information. The director's decision must be sent to the petitioner in writing, certified mail, return receipt requested. The director's decision to deny a variance may be appealed to the city manager or designee whose decision shall be final. An appeal to the city manager requires filing a letter with the city secretary, no later than three (3) business days after receipt of the notice of denial and shall explain specifically why or how the director's denial is an abuse of discretion under the circumstances then existing in the community. The city manager shall review the original petition and all relevant documents pertaining to the petition and the director's denial, and thereupon issue a final decision within seven (7) business days after receipt of the appeal letter. 
(d)  Each variance granted shall include a timetable for compliance and shall expire six (6) months after it is granted. 
(e)  Application for a variance, pendency or same, or appeal of same shall not be grounds for noncompliance with this article. 
(f)  A granted variance shall not be retroactive or otherwise justify a violation of this article that occurred prior to the granting of the variance, unless such violation is found to have been essential to protect human health or human life safety conditions. 
(Ord. No. 4753, § 1, 9-2-14) 
Sec. 26-283. - Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
(a)  It is an offense for a person(s) to use or allow the use of water from the City of Denison public water system in a manner or at a time that is contrary to the provisions of this article. This article applies to and shall be enforceable against a property owner, manager, tenant, lessee, and any other person in control of the use of water at an address. 
(b)  This article may be enforced by citation issued by any peace officer or a building safety inspector of the City of Denison. This article may also be enforced by the director or designee by submitting to the municipal court prosecutor for review a sworn complaint against the property owner, manager, tenant lessee or any other person in control of the use of water at an address where a violation occurs. This section authorizes each official described in this section to enforce this article. The city attorney or designee is authorized to enforce this article by civil injunction or other civil action. 
(c)  Each violation of a required act or a prohibited prescribed in this article by a water use, is a separate offense. 
(d)  A violation of this article is punishable upon conviction in accordance with the Denison Municipal Code section 1-12. Provided however, a violation of Stage 3 and Stage 4 is deemed and hereby declared to be an offense against public health or safety for purposes of punishment. 
(e)  In addition of criminal and civil enforcement provided in subsections (a) through (d) of this section, the director shall also have the following enforcement authority: 
(1)  On the first violation, customers will be given a written warning that they have violated the mandatory water use restriction. 
(2)  After two (2) violations have occurred, the City of Denison may install a flow restrictor in the line to limit the amount of water that may pass through the meter in a twenty-four-hour period. 
(3)  After three (3) violations have occurred, the City of Denison may cut off water service to the customer. 
(Ord. No. 4753, § 1, 9-2-14) 
Secs. 26-284-26-289. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS 

Sec. 26-290. - Wireless telecommunications. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, telecommunication antennas, when such are permitted by federal law and the laws of the State of Texas, shall be regulated and governed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 3774, § 1, 1-19-98) 
Sec. 26-291. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows: 
(a)  Telecommunications tower means a structure more than ten (10) feet tall, built primarily to support one or more telecommunications antennas. 
(b)  Telecommunications means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
(c)  Telecommunications service means the offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used. 
(d)  Antenna means any structure or device used to collect or radiate electromagnetic waves, including both directional antennas, such as panels, and dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as whips, but not including satellite earth stations. 
(e)  Telecommunications antenna means an antenna used to provide a telecommunications service. 
(f)  Antenna array means a structure attached to a telecommunications tower that supports a telecommunications antenna. 
(g)  Whip antenna means an omni-directional dipole antenna of cylindrical shape which is no more than six (6) inches in diameter. 
(h)  Non-whip antenna means an antenna which is not a whip antenna such as dish antennas, panel antennas, etc. 
(i)  EIA-222 means Electronics Industries Association Standard 222, "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Support Structures." 
(Ord. No. 3774, § 1, 1-19-98) 
Sec. 26-292. - Telecommunications towers. 
(a)  Telecommunications towers shall be permitted and located only in accordance with section 28-94 of this Code after the applicant has complied with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  A site plan shall be submitted by the applicant to the planning and zoning administrator which shall satisfy all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Tower height, including antenna array, may not exceed one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
(2)  Telecommunication towers must be a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) feet from a residential structure. 
(3)  Telecommunications towers shall be separated from other towers regulated by this section a minimum distance as set out in Table 1 below. 
Table 1. Required Tower Separation 
Existing Towers 
Proposed Towers Towers 76 feet to 
120 feet in height Towers 75 feet or 
less in height Towers 76 feet to 
120 feet in height 2,500 feet 1,500 feet Towers 75 feet or 
less in height 1,500 feet 1,250 feet  
(4)  All guys and guy anchors are located within the buildable area of the lot and not within the front, rear, or sideyard setbacks and no closer than five (5) feet to any property line. 
(5)  The base of the tower is enclosed by security fencing. 
(6)  Equipment buildings must be similar in color and character to the main or adjoining building or structure or blend with the landscaping and other surroundings immediately adjacent to it and be screened by a chain link or wrought iron fence with evergreen hedge, a blind fence, or a masonry wall. 
(7)  The tower is erected and operated in compliance with current Federal Communications Commission and Federal Aviation Administration rules and regulations and other applicable federal and state standards. 
(8)  A telecommunications tower must be: 
a.  Used by two (2) or more wireless communications providers; or 
b.  Designed and built so as to be capable of use by two (2) or more wireless communications providers including providers such as cellular or PCS providers using antenna arrays of nine (9) to twelve (12) antennas each within fifteen (15) vertical feet of each other with no more than three (3) degrees of twist and sway at the top elevation and the owner of the tower on which it is located must certify to the city that the antenna is available for use by another wireless telecommunications provider on a reasonable and nondiscriminatory basis and at a cost not exceeding the market value for the use of the facilities provided space is available at the time of the request. If the property on which the tower is proposed to be located is to be leased, the portions of the actual or proposed lease that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this paragraph shall be submitted with the site plan and zoning application, if applicable. 
(9)  No lettering, symbols, images, or trademarks large enough to be legible to occupants of vehicular traffic on any adjacent roadway shall be placed on or affixed to any part of a telecommunications tower, antenna array or antenna, other than as required by FCC regulations regarding tower registration or other applicable law. 
(10)  The need for the requested site and the nature of any existing sites shall be documented and the manner in which the rezoning and/or location of the tower will promote the City of Denison's telecommunications policies shall be demonstrated. 
(11)  Telecommunications towers should be constructed to minimize potential safety hazards. Telecommunications towers shall be constructed so as to meet or exceed the most recent EIA-222 standards and prior to issuance of a building permit the building official shall be provided with an engineer's certification that the tower's design meets or exceeds those standards. All towers shall be located in such a manner that if the structure should fall along its longest dimension, it will remain within property boundaries and avoid residential structures, public streets, utility lines and other telecommunications towers. 
(12)  Telecommunications towers and equipment buildings shall be located to minimize their number, height and obtrusiveness to minimize visual impacts on the surrounding area and in accordance with the following policies: 
a.  Ensure that the height of towers and monopoles has the least visual impact and is no greater than required to achieve service area requirements and potential collocation, when visually appropriate. 
b.  Demonstrate that the selected site for a new monopole and tower provides the least visual impact on residential areas and the public rights-of-way. Analyze the potential impacts from other vantage points in the area to illustrate that the selected site provides the best opportunity to minimize the visual impact of the proposed facility. 
c.  Site telecommunication facilities to minimize being visually solitary or prominent when viewed from residential areas and the public rights-of-way. The facility should be obscured by vegetation, treecover, topographic features, and buildings or other structures to the maximum extent feasible. 
d.  Place telecommunication facilities to ensure that historically significant landscapes are protected. The views of and vistas from architecturally and/or historically significant structures should not be impaired or diminished by the placement of telecommunication facilities. 
e.  The commission may recommend a variance and the council may grant a variance to a requirement for telecommunications towers when it is determined that such a variance better accomplishes the polices set out in this subsection than would a strict application of the requirement. Such variance shall be no greater than necessary to accomplish those policies. 
(13)  No signals or lights or illumination shall be permitted on a tower unless required by the Federal Communications Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, or the city. 
(14)  If any additions, changes, or modifications are to be made to the tower, the chief building official shall have the authority to require proof, through the submission of engineering and structural data, that the addition, change, or modification conforms to structural wind load and all other requirements of the current building code adopted by the city. 
(15)  The applicant shall fully and accurately complete a questionnaire supplied them by the planning and zoning administrator designed to gather information to assist in making a decision regarding any rezoning application. In order to assist the staff and the council in evaluating visual impact, the applicant shall submit color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the tower with a photo-realistic representation of the proposed tower as it would appear viewed from the closest residential property or from 1/4 mile, whichever distance is less. 
(16)  The tower complies with all ordinances of the city not in conflict with this section. 
(c)  Any telecommunications tower in place at the time of adoption of these standards which can be extended upward to accommodate additional antennae may be so extended without fully complying with the siting requirements of this article or of chapter 28 of this Code so long as the total height limitation of this article is not exceeded and by complying with permitting requirements of this article. 
(d)  In addition to the usual application fee for a request for a change in zoning, if applicable, under chapter 28 of this Code, the applicant shall reimburse the city for the reasonable, actual cost to the city for the services of an engineer should one be required to review the application and provide engineering expertise. 
(Ord. No. 3774, § 1, 1-19-98; Ord. No. 4300, § 1, 7-18-05; Ord. No. 4701, § 19(dd), 6-17-13) 
Sec. 26-293. - Antennas mounted on existing structures. 
(a)  Antennas mounted on buildings. 
(1)  Roof-mounted telecommunications antennas are allowed on nonresidential buildings and structures pursuant to the provisions of section 28-94 of this Code, provided a non-whip antenna does not exceed the height of the building by more than ten (10) feet and is screened from view from any adjacent public roadway and provided a whip antenna does not exceed the height of the building by more than fifteen (15) and is located no closer than fifteen (15) feet to the perimeter of the building. Prior to installation of a roof-mounted antenna, the department of building inspections shall be provided with an engineer's certification that the roof will support the proposed antenna and associated roof-mounted equipment. Roof-mounted antennas and associated equipment may be screened with enclosures or facades having an appearance that blends with the building on which they are located or by locating them so that they are not visible from an adjacent public roadway. 
(2)  Building-mounted telecommunications antennas of the non-whip type are allowed on non-residential buildings and structures pursuant to the provisions of section 28-94 of this Code, provided the antenna is mounted flush with the exterior of the building so that it projects no more than thirty (30) inches from the surface of the building to which it is attached; and the antenna's appearance is such as to blend with the surrounding surface of the building. 
(3)  Associated equipment shall be placed either within the same building or in a separate building which matches the existing building in character and building materials or blends with the landscaping and other surroundings immediately adjacent to the separate building housing the equipment. Associated equipment for roof-mounted antennas may be located on the roof of the building if it is screened from view from any adjacent public roadway. 
(b)  Telecommunications antennas are allowed without further zoning or existing utility, lighting, telecommunications towers and sign structures, provided that the antenna does not exceed the height of the structure by more than ten (10) feet if a non-whip type or fifteen (15) feet if whip type. Existing structures may be rebuilt if necessary to support the load of the new antenna without further zoning if the rebuilt structure is substantially similar in appearance to the existing structure it replaces. The owner of the structure may be permitted to rebuild the structure at a height greater than the original structure by demonstrating to the city's satisfaction that the additional height accommodates and promotes the purposes and objectives of this article. 
(c)  Telecommunications antennas located on existing structures in excess of eighty (80) feet in height are not subject to the five thousand (5,000) foot separation requirement. 
(d)  When an application for a building permit to locate a telecommunications antenna on an existing building or other structure is made, the chief building official shall be provided with color photo simulations showing the site of the existing structure with a photo-realistic representation of the proposed antenna and the existing structure or any proposed reconstruction of the structure as it would appear viewed from the closest residential property or from 1/4 mile, whichever distance is less. The applicant shall also submit photographs of the same views showing the current appearance of the site without the proposed antenna. 
(e)  Telecommunications antennas shall not be constructed or used within the city without all approvals and permits first having been secured. The chief building official shall approve or reject the site plan within thirty (30) days of the zoning application being approved by the city council, if applicable, or of the date of submittal of the site plan by applicant, whichever last occurs. In the event the site plan as originally submitted is incomplete, the thirty (30) day review period does not commence until the chief building official determines the site plan, as amended, to be administratively complete. 
(f)  Within thirty (30) days of the enactment of this article and during each January thereafter providers of personal wireless services, as that term is defined by federal law, operating in the city shall provide the city with their respective master antenna plan, including detailed maps, showing the precise locations and characteristics of all telecommunications antennas and towers serving any portion of the city and indicating coverage areas for current and future telecommunications antennas and towers and shall provide the city with any updates to the above documents. Updating documents shall be provided to the city within three (3) months of their creation. 
(g)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution for violation of a provision of this section that compliance with the provision would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services as defined by federal law. In addition, any entity that desires to erect or utilize telecommunications facilities that would be prohibited by the ordinances or regulations of the city dealing with zoning and land use may apply for such use under this article and section 28-94 and the council shall, upon a showing that strict application of the regulation would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless service as defined by federal law, vary the subject regulation, consistent with the spirit and intent of this section, to the extent necessary to prevent the prohibition. 
(Ord. No. 3774, § 1, 1-19-98) 
Secs. 26-294-26-799. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND PREVENTION 

Sec. 26-800. - Cross-connection standards. 
    Every source of contamination or possible contamination from any contaminant which originates from or is located at a residential or commercial establishment, which is connected to any public water supply or which provides water to the public shall be equipped with the protection required under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-801. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. If a word or term used in this article is not contained in the following list, its definition, or other technical terms used, shall have the meanings or definitions listed in the most recent adopted edition of the City of Denison Plumbing Code and/or the Manual of Cross-Connection Control published by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California: 
    Air gap shall mean a physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply piping and/or appurtenance and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel, plumbing fixture or other device. An "approved air-gap separation" shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, plumbing fixture or other device in no case less than one inch. 
    Atmospheric vacuum breaker backflow prevention device or atmospheric vacuum breaker or AVB shall mean a device used to prevent backsiphonage in non-health hazard conditions. This device cannot be tested and cannot prevent backpressure backflow. 
    Auxiliary supply shall mean any water source or system, other than the public water system, that may be available in the building or on the property, including ground water or surface waters used for industrial, irrigation or any other purpose. 
    Backflow prevention assembly or assembly shall mean an assembly to counteract back pressure or prevent backsiphonage. 
    Backflow shall mean the flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases, or substances into the water system of the city's water. 
    Backpressure shall mean any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by any means) above the supply pressure at the point of consideration which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow and the introduction of fluids, mixtures or substances from any source other than the intended source. 
    Backsiphonage shall mean the flow of water or other liquids, mixture or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by a sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
    Boresight or boresight to daylight shall mean providing adequate drainage for backflow prevention assemblies installed in vaults through the use of an unobstructed drainpipe. 
    City or the city shall mean the City of Denison through the city manager or any representative, inspector or employee designated by the city manager. 
    Commercial establishment shall mean property or location which is used primarily for manufacture, production, storage, wholesaling or retailing of services which is or may be placed in the flow of commerce or any property or location which is used primarily for the provision of any service. 
    Commission shall mean the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
    Contamination shall mean the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a health hazard or impair the usefulness of the water. 
    Cross-connection shall mean any connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, through which it is possible for any nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted and contaminated water, or other substances, to enter into any part of such potable water system under any condition or set of conditions. 
    Cross-connection control device shall mean any nationally approved or recognized device placed upon any connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, which is designed to prevent nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted and contaminated water, or other substances, from entering into any part of such potable water system under any condition or set of conditions. 
    Customer service inspection shall mean an inspection designed to inspect and detect any actual or potential cross-connection hazards and/or exceedance of the lead action level in solder or flux, pipe or pipe fittings. 
    Double check detector backflow prevention assembly or double check detector or DCDA shall mean an assembly composed of a line-size approved double check assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow. 
    Double check valve backflow prevention assembly or double check assembly or double check or DC shall mean an assembly which consists of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. 
    Fireline tester shall mean a tester who is employed by a state approved fireline contractor and is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on firelines only. 
    General tester shall mean a tester who is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on any domestic, commercial, industrial or irrigation service except firelines. 
    Health hazard shall mean a cross-connection, potential contamination hazard, or other situation involving any substance that can cause death, illness, spread of disease, or has a high probability of causing such effects if introduced into the potable drinking water supply. 
    Human consumption shall mean uses by humans in which water can be ingested into or absorbed by the human body. Examples of these uses include, but are not limited to drinking, cooking, brushing teeth, bathing, washing hands, washing dishes, and preparing foods. 
    Mobile unit shall mean any operation, which may have the potential to introduce contaminants into a potable water system from a mobile source. These include, but are not limited to, carpet-cleaning vehicles, water-hauling vehicles, street-cleaning vehicles, liquid-waste vehicles, power-wash operations and pest-control vehicles. 
    Nonhealth hazard shall mean a cross-connection, potential contamination hazard, or other situation involving any substance that generally will not be a health hazard, but will constitute a nuisance, or be aesthetically objectionable, if introduced into the public water supply. 
    Non-residential use shall mean water used by any person other than a residential customer of the water supply and includes, but not limited to, all uses not specifically included in "residential uses" as defined in the city zoning ordinance, as it currently exists or may be amended. 
    Person shall mean any individual, partnership, association, corporation, firm, club, trustee, receiver, body politic and corporate, and any other such entity. 
    Point-of-use isolation shall mean the appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer's water system at the point at which the actual or potential cross-connection exists. 
    Potable water supply shall mean any water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use. 
    Potential contamination hazard A condition which, by its location, piping or configuration, has a reasonable probability of being used incorrectly, through carelessness, ignorance, or negligence, to create or cause to be created a backflow condition by which contamination can be introduced into the water supply. Examples of potential contamination hazards are: 
(1)  Bypass arrangements; 
(2)  Jumper connections; 
(3)  Removable sections or spools; and 
(4)  Swivel or changeover assemblies. 
    Premises shall mean any piece of property to which water is provided, including but not limited to, all improvements, mobile structures, and structures located on it. 
    Premises isolation shall mean the appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water system and the water user. 
    Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assembly or pressure vacuum breaker or PVB shall mean an assembly which provides protection against backsiphonage, but does not provide adequate protection against backpressure backflow. The assembly is a combination of a single check valve with an AVB and can be used with downstream resilient seated shutoff valves. In addition, the assembly has suction and discharge gate valves and resilient seated test cocks which allow the full testing of the assembly. 
    Public water system or system shall mean any public or privately owned water system, which supplies water for public domestic use. The system will include all services, reservoirs, facilities, and any equipment use in the process of producing, treating, storing, or conveying water for public consumption. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure principle assembly or RP assembly or RP shall mean an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically-operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located resilient seated test cocks and a tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valve the end of the assembly. 
    Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure detector or RPDA shall mean an assembly composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principle assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow. 
    Representative of the water system shall mean a person designated by the City of Denison to perform cross-connection control duties that shall include, but are not limited to, cross-connection inspections and water use surveys. 
    Residential use shall mean water used by any residential customer of the water supply and includes, but not limited to, single family dwellings, duplexes, multiplex, housing and apartments where the individual units are each on a separate meter; or, in cases where two or more units are served by one meter, the units are full-time dwellings. 
    Service connection shall mean the point of delivery which the water purveyor loses control of the water. 
    Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker or SVB shall mean an assembly containing an independently operating, internally loaded check valve and independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. This assembly is to be equipped with a properly located resilient seated test cock and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly. 
    Tester shall mean a person that is a certified backflow prevention assembly technician approved by and registered with the city and the TCEQ. 
    Thermal expansion shall mean heated water that does not have the space to expand. 
    TCEQ shall mean the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
    Used water shall mean water supplied by a public water system to a water user's system after it has passed through the service connection. 
    Water use survey shall mean a survey conducted or caused to be conducted by the local authority designed to identify any possible sources of contamination to the potable water supply. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-802. - Right-of-way encroachment. 
    No person shall install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly upon or within any city right-of-way except as provided in this section. 
(1)  A backflow prevention assembly required by the city may be installed upon or within any city right-of-way only if: (i) the city determines, in its sole discretion, that there is no other feasible location for installing the assembly; (ii) installing the assembly in the right-of-way will not interfere with traffic or utilities; and (iii) a permit is obtained from the city. The city retains the right to approve the location, height, depth, enclosure, and other requisites of the assembly prior to its installation. 
(2)  All permits and inspections required by the City Code to perform work in the right-of-way shall be obtained. 
(3)  The assembly shall be installed in accordance with chapter 5 and installed below or flush with the surrounding grade, except when, in the city's sole discretion, it is not practicable to install it in this manner. Any assembly or portion of an assembly, which extends aboveground, shall be located no closer than eighteen (18) inches to the face of the curb. 
(4)  The city shall not be liable for any damage done to and/or caused by an assembly installed in a right-of-way. 
(5)  For purposes of public safety, a property owner shall, at the request of the city and at the owner's expense, relocate a backflow prevention assembly which encroaches upon any city right-of-way when such relocation is necessary for street and/or utility construction and/or repairs. 
(6)  A person commits an offense of this article if he/she fails to relocate a backflow prevention assembly located in or upon any city right-of-way after receiving a written order from the city requiring the same. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-803. - Multiple connections. 
    Any premises requiring multiple service connections for adequacy of supply and/or fire protection shall also contain a backflow assembly on each of the additional service lines to the premises. The type of assembly will be determined by the degree of hazard that could occur in the event of an interconnection between any of the buildings on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-804. - Protection required; installation. 
(a)  The backflow prevention assembly protection which is required under this article shall be any of the duly nationally recognized and authorized backflow prevention assemblies listed for a particular use by TCEQ, or as determined by the city. Each backflow prevention assembly must be approved and a permit issued by the city prior to installation. Failure to obtain such approval prior to installation of the backflow prevention assembly may result in the backflow prevention assembly failing to meet final approval by the city. The city shall determine the type and location of backflow assembly to be installed within the area served by the city. The assembly will be required in each of the following circumstances, but is in no way limited to the following circumstances: 
(1)  The nature and extent of any activity on the premises, or the materials used in connection with any activity on the premises, or materials stored on the premises, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply. 
(2)  Premises having any one or more cross-connections and the cross-connection(s) are protected by an atmospheric vacuum breaker device (AVB). 
(3)  Internal cross-connections are present that are not correctable. 
(4)  Intricate plumbing arrangements that are present which make it impractical to ascertain whether cross-connections exist. 
(5)  There is unduly restricted entry so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to assure that cross-connections do not exist. 
(6)  Installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed, in the city's sole discretion, to be necessary to accomplish the purpose of these regulations. 
(7)  An appropriate cross-connection survey report form has not been filed with the city upon request of the city. 
(8)  A fire suppression system that is connected to the city's water system. 
(9)  All new construction, if deemed necessary by the city during the customer service inspection. The type of assembly required will be determined by the degree of hazard. 
(10)  When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end use of such building is not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly may be installed at the service connection that supplies water for public domestic use. 
(11)  Any used water return system. 
(12)  In the event a point-of-use assembly has not had the testing or repair done as required by this article, a premises isolation assembly will be required. 
(13)  If it is determined by the city that additions or alterations have been made to the plumbing system without obtaining proper permits, premises isolation may, in the city's sole discretion, be required. 
(14)  All multistory buildings or any building with a booster pump or elevated storage tank. 
(15)  Retrofitting will be required on all high hazard connections and wherever else the city, in its sole discretion, deems necessary to retrofit. 
(b)  All backflow prevention assemblies installed after the effective date of this article shall be installed in a manner designed to facilitate ease of inspection by the city. Any currently installed backflow prevention assemblies, which are located in inaccessible locations or where the tester is subject to physical danger, shall be relocated to approved locations following current national guideline standards. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-805. - Testing of assemblies. 
(a)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be inspected and tested or caused to be inspected and tested at the expense of the property or building owner in each of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Immediately after installations; 
(2)  Whenever the assembly is moved; 
(3)  Any assembly installed to provide protection against health hazards must also be tested and certified to be operating within specifications at least annually; 
(4)  Premises that have been vacated and unoccupied for one year, prior to re-occupancy; 
(5)  Immediately after repairs. 
(b)  Assembly tester, approved by the city. 
(c)  Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article. Persons and occupants of premises which are provided water service by the city, either directly or indirectly, shall allow the city or its representatives access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of, among others, inspection, testing, records examination and/or to facilitate the performance of any of their duties. Where persons or occupants of premises have security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the persons and occupants of the premises shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. All assembly testing shall be performed by a state certified backflow prevention delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(d)  The city is not liable for damage to a backflow prevention assembly, which may occur during testing, inspection and/or examination. 
(e)  A water use survey may be conducted at any establishment located in the city which is served by a public water supply or which provides water to the public. Upon determination that the establishment falls under the provisions of this article and requires a backflow prevention assembly, a notice to abate the condition or to install the proper backflow prevention assembly shall be issued by the city. 
(f)  It is the responsibility of the person, who owns or controls property, to have all assemblies tested in accordance with this article. Assemblies may be required to be tested more frequently if the city, in its sole discretion, deems necessary. 
(g)  All results from assembly testing by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester shall be placed on a form that is supplied by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-806. - Thermal expansion. 
    It is the responsibility of any person, who owns or controls property, to eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion if a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow assembly. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-807. - Pressure loss. 
    Any reduction in water pressure caused by the installation of a backflow assembly shall not be the responsibility of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-808. - Residential service connections. 
    Any person who owns or controls any residential property, which has been determined to have an actual or potential cross-connection, shall eliminate the actual or potential cross-connection or have an approved backflow assembly installed in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-809. - Rental properties. 
    Any person who owns or controls property is responsible for the installation, testing and repair of all backflow assemblies on their property. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-810. - Customer service inspection. 
(a)  Pursuant to TCEQ Water System Regulations, a customer service inspection for cross-connection control shall be completed by the city prior to providing continuous water service in each of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Water service to a newly constructed facility or previously nonexisting premises. 
(2)  After any material improvement to building(s) or premises. 
(3)  Any correction or addition to the plumbing of any facility or premises. 
(4)  The city, in its sole discretion, deems it necessary. 
(b)  Permanent water service shall not be supplied to a new construction facility(s) until after the customer service inspection is completed as provided herein. 
(c)  Temporary water service, which poses a potential cross-connection threat to the potable water supply, shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-811. - Installation guidelines and requirements for backflow prevention assemblies. 
(a)  General: To ensure proper operation and accessibility of all backflow prevention assemblies, the following national guideline requirements shall apply to the installation of these assemblies: 
(1)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the current TCEQ Rule and these regulations. The assembly installer must obtain the required plumbing permits and have the installation inspected by the city. 
(2)  At facilities which require a backflow prevention assembly to be installed at the point of delivery of the water supply, such installation of the assembly must be before any branch in the line and on private property located just inside the boundary between the city right-of-way and the landowner's property. The city may specify other areas for installation of the assembly. Assemblies that must be installed or are located on city rights-of-way are the responsibilities of the business or entity that the water line is serving. 
(3)  The assembly must be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions. 
(4)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of a type and model approved by the city. 
(5)  All vertical installations of backflow assemblies must have prior written approval by the city. 
(6)  Assemblies that are larger than four (4) inches and installed more than five (5) feet above floor level must have a suitable platform for use by testing or maintenance personnel. 
(7)  Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipefittings are prohibited which could be used for connecting a bypass line. 
(8)  Premises where an uninterrupted water supply is critical should be provided with two (2) assemblies installed in parallel. The assemblies should be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the maximum flow required. 
(9)  Lines should be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the assembly. 
(10)  All facilities that require continuous, uninterrupted water service and are required to have a backflow assembly must make provisions for the parallel installation of assemblies of the same type so that testing, repair and maintenance can be performed. 
(11)  The property owner and/or lessee assume all responsibility for any damage resulting from, among other, installation, operation, and/or maintenance of a backflow assembly. The owner and/or lessee shall be responsible for keeping all backflow prevention assembly vaults reasonably free of silt and debris 
(12)  Upon completion of installation, the city shall be notified and all assemblies must be inspected at the expense of the property owner and/or lessee. All assemblies must be registered with the city and shall provide the date of installation, manufacturer, model, type, size, serial number of the backflow assembly, and initial test report. 
(b)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies (RPs): May be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. The RP is normally used in locations where an air gap is impractical. The RP shall be effective against both backsiphonage and backpressure. 
(1)  RPs shall be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served. Flow characteristics are not standard. Consult manufacturer's specifications for specific performance data. 
(2)  The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and/or maintenance and shall be located in an area where water damage to building or furnishing would not occur from relief valve discharge. The property owner and/or lessee assumes all responsibility for any damage caused by water discharge from an RP assembly. A city approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice of RP assemblies. 
(3)  No part of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be submerged in water or installed in a location subject to flooding. RPs are typically installed above grade in well drained areas, but may be installed below grade (ground level) if a boresight drain to daylight, is provided. The drain shall be of adequate capacity to carry the full rated flow of the assembly and shall be screened on both ends. 
(4)  Enclosures shall be designed for ready access and sized to allow for the minimum clearances established below. Removable protective enclosures are typically installed on the smaller assemblies. Daylight drain ports must be provided to accommodate full pressure discharge from the assembly. 
(5)  Assemblies two (2) inches and smaller shall have at least six (6) inch clearance on both sides and on top of the assembly, and twelve (12) inches below and behind the assembly. All assemblies larger than two (2) inches shall have a minimum of twelve (12) inches on the backside, twenty-four (24) inches on the test cock side, and the relief valve opening shall be at least twelve (12) inches plus nominal size of assembly above the floor or highest possible water level. Headroom of six (6) feet is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of thirty-six (36) inches is required on all vault lids. 
(6)  All RP assemblies must be tested in accordance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner must notify the city upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly. 
(7)  Variances from these specifications will be evaluated by the city on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations must have prior written approval of the city. 
(c)  Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assemblies (RPDA): May be utilized in all installations requiring a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly and detector metering. 
(1)  RPDAs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for reduced pressure principle backflow assemblies (RP). 
(2)  The line-size RP assembly and the bypass RP assembly must each be tested. A separate test report for each assembly must be completed by the certified tester. 
(d)  Double check valve backflow prevention assemblies (DC): May be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be objectionable, but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. 
(1)  DCs must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for premises being served. Consult manufacturer's specifications for specific performance data. 
(2)  Premises where an uninterrupted water supply is critical should be provided with two (2) assemblies installed in parallel. Assemblies should be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the minimum water requirements while the two together will provide the maximum flow required. 
(3)  The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for testing and maintenance. DCs may be installed below grade, providing all test cocks are fitted with brass pipe plugs. All vaults shall be well drained, constructed of suitable materials, and sized to allow for the minimum clearances established below. 
(4)  Assemblies two (2) inches and smaller shall have at least six (6) inch clearance below and on both sides of the assembly, and if located in a vault, the bottom of the assembly shall be not more than twenty-four (24) inches below grade. All assemblies larger than two (2) inches shall have a minimum clearance of twelve (12) inches on the backside, twenty-four (24) inches on the test cock side, and twelve (12) inches below the assembly. Headroom of six (6) feet is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of thirty-six (36) inches is required on all vault lids. "Y" pattern double check valve assemblies shall be installed so that the checks are horizontal and the test cocks face upward. These clearance standards apply to all assemblies installed in vaults, enclosures, and meter boxes. 
(5)  Vertical installations of DCs are allowed only on sizes up to and including four (4) inches that meet the following requirements: 
a.  Internally spring-loaded check valves; 
b.  Flow is upward through assembly; 
c.  Manufacturer states their assembly can be used in a vertical position; 
d.  Approved by chief building official. 
(6)  All DCs must be tested in accordance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner must notify the city upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly. 
(7)  Variances from these specifications will be evaluated by the city on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations must have prior written approval of the city. 
(e)  Double check detector backflow prevention assemblies (DCDA): May be utilized in all installations requiring a double check valve assembly and detector metering. 
(1)  DCDAs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for double check valve assemblies (DCs). 
(2)  The line-size DC assembly and the bypass DC assembly must each be tested. A separate test report for each assembly must be completed by the certified tester. 
(f)  Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (PVB): May be utilized at point-of-use protection only and where a substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. PVBs protect against backsiphonage only and shall not be installed where there is potential for backpressure. 
(1)  Assembly shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches above highest downstream piping. 
(2)  PVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage would occur from water discharge. 
(3)  The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance, with a minimum clearance of twelve (12) inches all around the assembly. 
(4)  All PVBs must be tested in compliance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner must notify the city upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly. 
(5)  Variances from these specifications will be evaluated by the city on a case by case basis. Any deviations must have prior written approval of the city. 
(g)  Spill resistant pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (SVB): May be utilized in all installations requiring a pressure vacuum breaker. SVBs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-812. - Air gap separation. 
    Air gaps provide maximum protection from backflow hazards and should be utilized at all locations where "high" hazardous substances are at risk of entering the potable water system. 
(1)  An air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipeline measured vertically above the top rim of the receiving vessel and in no case less than one (1) inch. If splashing is a problem, tubular screens may be attached or the supply line may be cut at a forty-five degree (45°) angle. The air gap distance is measured from the bottom of the angle. Hoses are not allowed. 
(2)  Air gap separations shall not be altered in any way without prior approval from the city and must be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
(3)  Side walls, ribs or similar obstructions do not affect air gaps when spaced from the inside edge of the spout opening a distance greater than three (3) times the diameter of the effective opening for a single, or a distance greater than four (4) times the effective opening for two (2) intersecting walls. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-813. - Fire suppression systems. 
    All new installations of fire suppression systems which utilize the city's potable water supply shall have installed: an approved reduced pressure detector assemblies (RPDA) when chemical additives are included in the piping or an approved double check detector assemblies (DCDA) when no chemical additives are included in the piping. 
(1)  It is the responsibility of all property owners and persons in charge of any premises to abide by the conditions of this article. In the event of any changes to the plumbing system, it is the responsibility of the property owners to notify the city. All costs associated with this article and the purchase, installation, testing and/or repair of a (RPDA) device or a (DCDA) device is the responsibility of the property owner and persons in charge of any premises. 
(2)  Upon the approved installation of the (RPDA) device or a (DCDA) device, a cross-connection test report completed by a licensed fireline tester must be sent to the attention of the city and include the information required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-814. - Fire hydrant protection. 
    An approved reduced pressure detector assemblies (RPDA) shall be the minimum protection for fire hydrant water meters which are being used for a temporary water supply during any construction or other uses which would pose a potential hazard to the public water supply. The director of public works may authorize the use of other backflow assemblies for this use. 
(1)  Temporary fire hydrant meters are normally issued by the public works department. However, the director of public works may authorize the use of a fire hydrant meter that is not city issued. It is the responsibility of all persons engaging in the use and rental of a fire hydrant water meter to abide by the conditions of this article. All fire hydrant water meter rentals shall meet the current requirements as provided for by the city. 
(2)  Only city approved and authorized fire hydrant water meters with approved backflow prevention assemblies are allowed to be used within the city limits. 
(3)  All non-approved fire hydrant meters which are found to be in use in the city will be confiscated and enforcement action taken against the responsible party, as allowed for in the enforcement section of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-815. - Responsibilities of property owner/person in charge of premises. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of all property owners and/or persons in charge of any premises to abide by the conditions of this article and to comply with the following: 
(1)  Payment of all costs associated with this article and the purchase, installation, testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies. 
(2)  Install and maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in accordance with this article and acceptable industry practice. 
(3)  All backflow prevention assemblies on each premises much be tested at least annually. Such testing must be conducted by a certified cross-connection tester who is registered with the city. Results of the test must be sent to the person or firm designated by the city, upon the form provided by the city, immediately after the test is complete. 
(4)  Maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in proper working order at all times, including repair as required. 
(5)  Maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in a manner, which allows them to be tested by a method that has been approved by the city. 
(6)  All records related to backflow prevention assembly installation, testing and repair shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three (3) years from the date of any given record. 
(b)  Certified backflow prevention assembly tester shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Annually register with the city and pay the required fee per the Master Fee Schedule of the City of Denison. 
(2)  Maintain testing equipment in proper working condition/calibration. Test gages must be calibrated at least once each year. 
(3)  Maintain the design and/or operation characteristics of an assembly. 
(4)  Ensure that devices are tested according to accepted industry practice and TCEQ regulations. 
(5)  Enter required testing data, including without limitation, test gauge serial numbers, on cross-connection test forms obtained from the city. 
(6)  Report test results to the city within thirty (30) days of testing. 
(7)  Provide a copy of the completed test report to the property owners and/or persons in charge of any premises. 
(8)  Maintain testing and/or repair records for a minimum of three (3) years from the date of any given record. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-816. - Backflow prevention assembly tester certification-Registration required. 
    Only approved TCEQ licensed backflow prevention assembly testers can test backflow prevention assemblies in the city. Testers must register annually with the city, provide proof of TCEQ certification, and provide proof that testing equipment is able to maintain a calibration of plus or minus 0.2 psid accuracy and pay an annual, non-refundable, tester registration fee as required in the City of Denison Master Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-817. - Fees. 
    There shall be an annual non-refundable registration fee as required by the City of Denison Master Fee Schedule. This fee may appear on the monthly city water/sewer bill and relates solely to the matters covered in this article and are separate from other fees chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-818. - Compliance for lawn irrigation. 
    A permit must be obtained from the city, for all lawn irrigation system installations. Such permit shall be issued by the city's building inspection department. Installation requirements must comply with the current city plumbing code and/or guidelines for the appropriate device found in this article. Interconnection of the potable water supply with an alternate water source is prohibited unless appropriate backflow protection is installed. Double check assemblies may be utilized; however, high hazard backflow protection devices must be installed if any mechanical injection stations are used with the irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-819. - Mobile units. 
    The connection of a mobile unit to any potable water system is prohibited unless such connection is protected by an air gap or an approved backflow prevention assembly. Prior approval and annual device testing of any backflow prevention assembly must be received from the city before connecting to any potable water system. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-820. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the chief building official, or his/her designee. 
(b)  The city shall inspect and initially test, or cause to be tested, all backflow prevention assemblies installed pursuant to the requirements of this article. For new facilities, permanent water service shall not be provided until all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested, approved and are operational. Except in cases where the testing of backflow prevention assemblies must be delayed until the installation of internal production or auxiliary equipment, the regulatory authority shall not approve a certificate of occupancy until all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested, approved and are operational. The city shall not be liable for damage caused to any backflow prevention assembly as a result of the inspection, testing and/or examination. 
(c)  Violations: 
(1)  A person commits an offense if there is failure to maintain backflow prevention assemblies in compliance with this article. 
(2)  A person commits an offense if there is failure to comply with a repair order issued by the city. 
(3)  A person commits an offense if backflow from premises owned, operated or managed by the person enters the public water supply system. 
(4)  A person commits an offense if there is a failure to pay any fees required by this article. 
(5)  A person commits an offense by violating any section of this article. 
(6)  A person commits an offense if discontinued or disconnected water service to premises under this article is reinstated, except as directed in writing by the city. 
(7)  A person in charge of any facility commits an offense by allowing an unregistered tester to perform testing work on their property. 
(8)  A person commits an offense by testing backflow prevention assembly within the city without being registered with the city. 
(9)  A person commits an offense by testing backflow prevention assembly within the city without being certified by the TCEQ. 
(d)  Penalty: 
(1)  The water service may be discontinued for any premises and/or property where: 
a.  The property owner or occupant fails to test an installed backflow prevention assembly. 
b.  The backflow prevention assembly does not pass the test, and the property owner or occupant fails to make the necessary repairs to the device within the time period specified by the city, but in no case more than ten (10) days after the test indicates that the backflow prevention assembly is not working properly. 
c.  The city discovers that a cross-connection exists on the property that represents an immediate health hazard if the water service remains connected. 
d.  The city discovers that a cross-connection exists on the property and the property owner or occupant fails to install the proper backflow prevention device within the time period specified by the city. 
(2)  A certified tester's registration may be reviewed and revoked by the city if it is determined that the tester: 
a.  Has falsely, incompletely, or inaccurately reported assembly reports; 
b.  Has used inaccurate gauges; 
c.  Has used improper testing procedures; or 
d.  Has created a threat to public health or the environment. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Sec. 26-821. - Third-party administration. 
    The City of Denison reserves the right to assign administration of the provisions of this article to a third-party administrator. The third-party administrator is authorized to charge and collect only fees specified and approved by contract with the City of Denison. 
(Ord. No. 4665, § 2, 10-15-12) 
Chapter 27 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Miscellaneous offenses, Ch. 11; traffic, Ch. 25. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 27-1-27-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4857, § 1, adopted Feb. 6, 2017, repealed art. II in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 27-26-27-45, 27-61-27-80, 27-96-27-102, 27-116-27-136, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 25-1, 25-2, 25-4-25-6, 25-8-25-16, 25-27-25-31, 25-33-25-38, 25-49-25-57, 25-68-25-70, 25-72-25-75, 25-86-25-88, 25-90-25-98, 25-109-25-114; and Ord. No. 4354, § 1, adopted June 5, 2006. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 27-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cruise or cruising shall mean the movement of unoccupied taxicabs over the public streets of the city in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire. Unoccupied taxicabs proceeding to answer a telephone call for taxicab service from an intended passenger and taxicabs returning by the most direct route, after having discharged a passenger, to the garage where such taxicab is housed, or to the unoccupied stand nearest to the place of discharge of the passenger, shall not be considered to be cruising. 
    Driver or chauffeur shall mean and include every person in actual charge of the operation of a taxicab, whether as owner or as agent, servant or employee of the owner. 
    Driver's license shall mean the right granted by the city to an individual to drive a vehicle as a taxicab. 
    License shall mean a privilege or grant extended by the city to operate a taxicab business in the city. 
    Owner shall mean any person who has, directly or indirectly, the control, direction, maintenance or the benefit of the collection of revenue derived from the operation of taxicabs on or over the streets or public ways of the city, whether as owner or otherwise, except driver as herein defined. 
    Permit shall mean the privilege extended by the city to a licensed taxicab business to operate a specified vehicle in accordance with this article. 
    Taxicab shall mean every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle used for the transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the city, and not over a defined or fixed route, and irrespective of whether or not the operations extend beyond the city limits, at rates for distance traveled or waiting time, or for both, or at rates per hour, per day, per week or per month, if such vehicle is routed under the direction of the passenger hiring the same. The term taxicab does not include rental cars or buses, and does not include vehicles operated exclusively under any special franchise and carrying passengers to and from any municipal airport of the city and any point within the city over a fixed or defined route, except that the provisions of this article relating to drivers and the city driver's license shall apply to all vehicles operated under special franchise as well as other vehicles included herein, when the driver is furnished. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-27. - Supervision. 
    Supervision of taxicabs operated in the city shall be made by and under the jurisdiction of the city secretary, or designee. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-28. - To be operated by licensee or his employee. 
    No taxicab for which a permit has been granted under this article shall be operated by anyone except the business licensee or an employee of such licensee. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-29. - Names of drivers to be furnished to city secretary. 
    The owner of any taxicab business licensed to carry on such business in the city shall report monthly to the city secretary the names and current mailing addresses of all drivers employed in such business and shall immediately notify the city secretary of any change in the name or mailing address within ten (10) days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-30. - Designation and use of taxicab stands. 
(a)  The city council may, if it deems advisable, set apart such sections of the public streets to be designated as taxicab stands as may be necessary for the establishment of parking spaces for taxicabs, and it shall be unlawful for private vehicles to park in such taxicab stands which shall be on file in the city secretary's office. 
(b)  The driver of a taxicab using a public taxicab stand shall remain seated in his vehicle at all times while such vehicle is at such stand; provided, however, such driver may leave his vehicle when actually necessary to assist passengers to enter or leave the same, or in case of any accident, necessity or emergency beyond the control of such driver. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-31. - Identification of vehicles. 
(a)  Every taxicab shall have painted on the door thereof the name of the owner or the assumed name under which the owner operates, together with the company's telephone number and the cab permit number. The permit number of the cab and the telephone number of the owner shall also be painted upon the rear of the taxicab. All lettering must be kept legible at all times. The color scheme, lettering and legibility shall, however, be subject to the approval of city secretary at all times. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any taxicab or to permit any taxicab owned by him to be driven, unless it meets the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-32. - Periodic inspection of vehicles. 
    After the initial inspection of a taxicab under the provisions of section 27-97, the city secretary, or designee, may have such inspection repeated throughout the year. In event of a failure of the vehicle to meet the requirements of the inspection during the permit year, the city secretary shall immediately place such vehicle on a suspension list and it may not be used until it has been brought into such condition of repair as will meet the requirements of the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-33. - Use of most direct route required. 
    Any taxicab driver employed to carry passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passenger safely and expeditiously to his destination. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-34. - Passenger limitations. 
    No taxicab shall be operated if it contains more persons than the manufacturer's rated seating capacity of such vehicle. While driving a taxicab, a driver on duty may carry only a person who is a paying passenger, unless the passenger is an employee of the business that employs or contracts with the driver, or is a governmental inspector acting in an official capacity. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-35. - Soliciting business prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver or operator, in any passenger or bus depot or upon any passenger depot or bus platform or upon any sidewalk or street in front of any depot of any railway or bus station within the city, to solicit or cry out for passengers for any hotel or other place or to solicit or call to or request any person to become a passenger for or to any hotel, railroad depot, bus line, travel bureau or any other place within or without the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver or operator or any other person to speak or to call out in a loud manner, with natural voice, loudspeaker or otherwise, "taxicab," "automobile for hire," "hack," "carriage," "bus," "baggage" or "hotel" or in any other manner attempt to solicit passengers at any passenger depot of any railroad or bus line or upon any sidewalk, or in or near the street in front of any passenger depot of any railway company or bus line within the city, or elsewhere in the city. 
(c)  When any taxicab is at any railroad depot or bus station within the city, it shall be unlawful for the driver or person in charge thereof to leave the same and enter the depot or bus station, or go upon the sidewalk or private property of any railway company or bus line, for the purpose of soliciting the transportation of any passenger arriving on trains or buses. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-36. - Cruising prohibited. 
    No driver of a taxicab shall cruise in search of passengers at any time and, whenever a taxicab is unoccupied, the driver shall proceed at once, by the most direct route, to the garage where the vehicle is housed or to the nearest taxicab stand. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-37. - Transporting persons for prostitution; transporting criminals; etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab knowingly to transport any passenger to the abode of a commercialized prostitute with whom he has previously made arrangements for meeting with his passenger, or to knowingly transport any known criminal, narcotic peddler, or bootlegger in the commission of a crime or the infraction of the law in any manner, or act in any manner as a pimp for prostitutes or as a contact man for an unlawful establishment of any character. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-38. - Transportation or delivery of intoxicating liquor. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab to carry, deliver or transport in such taxicab any intoxicating liquor within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any taxicab to permit such vehicle to be used in violation of this section. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to a bona fide passenger riding in a taxicab and carrying liquor for his own use. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-39. - Records and driver's daily manifest. 
    Every owner or operator of a taxicab business shall keep accurate records relating to the taxicab business, which must include the driver's daily manifest. Every owner or operator shall give access to any and all records kept to the city secretary, chief of police or any member of the police force, and every refusal to give such records or furnish information kept regarding such matters shall be a violation. 
    Each owner shall provide its drivers with forms for maintaining a daily manifest. The form must include appropriate spaces for recording the following information, if applicable: 
(a)  Vehicle number, driver's name, date, hours of operation, paid miles, trips, extras, and meter number; 
(b)  Time, place, origin and destination; 
(c)  Number of passengers and amount of fare and other charges. 
    Each driver shall complete a manifest on a separate form for each tour of duty. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Secs. 27-40-27-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS LICENSE 

Sec. 27-55. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any taxicab business within the city unless a license therefor granted by the city secretary is in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-56. - Application generally. 
    To obtain a business license for a taxicab business, a person shall submit an application to the city secretary and pay the appropriate fee in the manner prescribed by this section. The application must identify the person who will own, control, or operate the proposed taxicab business. An applicant shall file with the city secretary a written, verified application statement, to be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee, containing the following: 
(a)  The form of business of the applicant and, if the business is a corporation or association, a copy of the documents establishing the business and the name and address of the business; 
(b)  The name, address, and verified signature of the applicant; 
(c)  A description of any past business experience of the applicant, particularly in providing passenger transportation services, and identification and description of any revocation or suspension of any type of permit relating to the transportation services held by the applicant or business before the date of filing the application; 
(d)  The number of taxicabs and a description of the vehicles the applicant proposes to use in the operation of the taxicab business, and the location of the facility to be used in the operation; 
(e)  Proof of insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Texas as required by this article; 
(f)  Documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to be used in connection with the operation of the proposed taxicab business, if applicable; 
(g)  A phone number from which the proposed taxicab business may be contacted; 
(h)  Such additional information as the applicant desires to include and aid in the determination of whether the requested business license should be granted; 
(i)  Such additional information as the city secretary considers necessary to assist or promote the implementation or enforcement of this article or the protection of the public safety. 
    An applicant shall notify the city secretary in writing of any change of address or change in ownership or management of a taxicab business not less than ten (10) days prior to the change. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-57. - Issuance or denial of a business license. 
    The city secretary shall issue a business license to a qualified applicant within seven (7) business days of the receipt of the completed application. The term of the business license shall follow the City of Denison's fiscal year (October 1 through September 30 of the subsequent year). 
    The city secretary may deny the application for business license if the applicant: 
(a)  Is not qualified under section 27-58; 
(b)  Makes a false statement of a material fact in his or her application for a business license; 
(c)  Does not have adequate insurance coverage as required in section 27-62; 
(d)  Within the preceding twelve (12) months, been convicted, placed on probation or deferred adjudication, for a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude or involving a violation of the alcoholic beverage laws or of section 27-77 of this article; 
(e)  Is not current on ad valorem taxes, if applicable; or 
(f)  Has not paid the appropriate fee for the business license. 
    If the city secretary determines that a business license should be denied, the city secretary shall notify the applicant in writing that his or her application is denied and include in the notice the reason for denial and statement informing the applicant of his or her right of appeal in accordance with section 27-80 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-58. - Qualifications for a business license. 
    To qualify for a business license, an applicant must: 
(a)  Be at least nineteen (19) years of age, if an individual; 
(b)  Be currently authorized to work full-time in the United States; 
(c)  Be able to sufficiently communication with the general public; and 
(d)  Maintain sufficient insurance as outline in section 27-62. 
    It is the responsibility of the applicant, to the extent possible, to secure and provide to the city secretary the documentation/information required to determine their suitability under this section. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-59. - Transfer prohibited. 
    A business license may not be transferred to another unless the owner files a written application for the transfer in a manner and containing the information prescribed by the city secretary, and the transfer application is approved by the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-60. - Expiration and renewal. 
    Except as provided in subsection (a) or (b) below, a business license shall be renewed each year subsequent to the initial permit if the owner provides the city secretary with the annual permit fee by September 1 of that year. 
    A business license will not be renewed if: 
(a)  The holder is not in compliance with permit or applicable provisions of this article, department regulations, or other law; or 
(b)  The holder does not qualify for a business license under section 27-58. 
    A holder may file an appeal of the denial of a renewal in accordance with section 27-80. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-61. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Upon the conviction or placement on probation or deferred adjudication of any owner, silent or otherwise, of a taxicab business for a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude or involving a violation of the alcoholic beverage laws or of section 27-77 of this Code, the license to operate such taxicab business shall be automatically revoked. 
(b)  The city secretary, on his or her own motion or upon complaint against an owner of a taxicab filed by any person with the city charging violation of any of the terms of this article or any ordinance of the city or law of the state regulating motor vehicles, may, after giving five (5) days' notice of the ground of such complaint to the license holder against whom complaint is made, hear evidence with reference to such complaint. After such hearing, the city secretary may revoke or suspend the license of such owner for good cause shown, regardless of whether the licensee has been charged or convicted in a court of such charge. After the city secretary has heard the complaint for the revocation or suspension of the license of any owner of a taxicab, he or she shall make the findings and declare the same and either the owner of such taxicab or the complainant shall have the right to appeal in accordance with section 27-80. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to whose business license is suspended to operate a taxicab inside the city during the period of suspension. 
(d)  The city secretary may revoke a business permit if the city secretary determines that the owner: 
(1)  Operated a taxicab inside the city during a period in which his or her business permit was suspended; 
(2)  Made a false statement of a material fact in his application for a business license or renewal; or 
(3)  Engaged in conduct that constitutes a ground for suspension and received either a suspension in excess of three (3) days or a conviction for violation of this chapter more than once within a twelve-month period preceding the occurrence of the conduct. 
(e)  A person whose business permit is revoked shall not apply for another business permit before the expiration of twelve (12) months from the date the city secretary revokes the permit or, in the case of an appeal, the date the city council affirms the revocation. 
(f)  After receipt of notice of revocation, the owner shall, on the date specified in then notice, discontinue operating a taxicab business inside the city and shall surrender his or her business permit to the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-62. - Insurance. 
(a)  An owner shall procure and keep in full force and effect liability insurance written by an insurance company that: 
(1)  Is approved by the State of Texas and the insurance underwriter is authorized to do business in the State of Texas; 
(2)  Is acceptable to the city; 
(3)  Is rated A- or better, with a financial size of Class VI or higher, by A.M. Best or has an equivalent rating from another insurance rating service approved by the city, unless the insurance company is reinsured for the full insurance required under this section by another insurance company that meets all of the rating requirements of this paragraph and all other requirements of subsections (1), (2) and (4) of subsection (a) and provides a right of direct action against the reinsurer by any person entitled to claimed insurance benefits against the primary insurance company in the event the primary insurance company does not pay any valid claim; 
(4)  Does not violate operational control prohibition described in subsection (i) of this section; and 
(5)  Includes the operations of the taxicab business and all current drivers. 
(b)  The insurance must be issued in the standard form approved by the Texas Department of Insurance and all provisions of the policy must be acceptable to the city. The insured provisions of the policy must name the city and its officers and employees as additional insurers and the overage provisions must provide coverage for any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of a taxicab business by the owner. 
(c)  The amount of insurance required by this section must be: 
(1)  The minimum amounts prescribed by the State of Texas if for a taxicab that is a motor vehicle; or 
(2)  A commercial general liability policy in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence, two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) general aggregate or its equivalent in umbrella or excess liability coverage for a taxicab that is not a motor vehicle. 
(d)  If a vehicle is removed from service, the owner shall maintain the insurance coverage required by this section for the vehicle until the city secretary receives satisfactory proof that all evidence of operation as a taxicab has been removed from the vehicle. 
(e)  Insurance required under this section must include: 
(1)  A cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the city secretary in writing not fewer than ten (10) days before canceling or making a material change to the insurance policy; 
(2)  A provision to cover all vehicles used under the holder's operating authority; and 
(3)  A provision requiring the owner's insurance company to pay every claim on a first dollar basis. 
(f)  Insurance required by this section may be obtained from an assigned risk pool if all of the policies and coverage are managed by one (1) agent, and one (1) certificate of insurance issued to the city. 
(g)  A business license will not be granted or renewed unless the applicant or holder furnishes the city secretary with such proof of insurance as the city secretary considers necessary to determine whether the applicant or holder is adequately insured under this section. 
(h)  If the insurance of an owner lapses or is canceled and new insurance is not obtained, the city secretary shall immediately suspend the operating authority until the holder provides evidence that insurance coverage required by this section has been obtained. 
(i)  No person with any director or indirect ownership interest in the owner's taxicab business may have any operational control, direct or indirect, in any insurance company that provides insurance required by this section to the taxicab business. For purposes of this subsection, "operational control" means holding any management position with the insurance company (including, but not limited to, the chief executive officer, the president, any vice-president, or any person in a decision-making position with respect to insurance claims) or having the right to control the actions or decision of any person in such a management position in the insurance company. 
(j)  The City of Denison's Finance Department shall verify that sufficient insurance coverage, as described above, is maintained by the owner while the owner has a business license. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-63. - Persons protected. 
    Public liability insurance, cash and securities required by this division shall be for the protection of the passengers of the taxicabs covered thereby and for the public, but shall not cover personal injuries sustained by the servants, agents or employees of the person filing or depositing the same. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-64. - Insurance policies to provide for continuing liability. 
    All policies of public liability insurance filed pursuant to this division shall contain a provision for a continuing liability thereon up to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Secs. 27-65-27-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER'S PERMIT 

Sec. 27-75. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any taxicab upon or over any street within the corporate limits of the city without having first obtained a chauffeur's license from the state, if applicable, and a driver's permit from the city secretary. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to permit any taxicab owned by him to be driven by any person who does not have such a chauffeur's license, if applicable, and permit. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-76. - Application. 
    To obtain a driver's permit as required by this division, the applicant shall make written application therefor to the city secretary, which application shall be made upon a form provided therefor by the city secretary. The individual must file with the city secretary's office the following items: 
(1)  A nonrefundable application fee, 
(2)  A completed written application on a form provided for that purpose, and 
(3)  A certified copy of the individual's complete driving history record for the last three (3) years from the state of issuance that is no more than thirty (30) days old from the date of submittal to the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-77. - Qualifications of applicant. 
    To qualify for a driver's permit, an application must: 
(1)  Have a valid state driver's license; 
(2)  Have a valid contract with or be currently employed by the owner. 
(3)  Not have been convicted of more than three (3) moving traffic violations arising out of separate transaction, or involved in more than two (2) motor vehicle accidents in which it could be reasonably determined that the applicant was at fault, within any twelve-month period during the preceding thirty-six (36) months; and 
(4)  Not have been convicted of, discharged by probation or deferred adjudication for, or have charges pending for driving while intoxicated (DWI) or driving under the influence (DUI): 
a.  Within the preceding twelve (12) months; or 
b.  More than one (1) time within the preceding ten (10) years; 
(5)  Not have been convicted, placed on probation or deferred adjudication or have charges pending for a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Criminal homicide as described by V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 19; 
2.  Kidnapping as described by V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 20; 
3.  A sexual offense as described by V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 21; 
4.  An assaultive offense as described by V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 22, other than a Class C misdemeanor; 
5.  Robbery as described by V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 29; 
6.  Burglary as described by V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 30, but only if the offense was committed against a person whom the applicant came in contact while engaged in a passenger transportation service; 
7.  Theft as described by V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 31, but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant came in contact while engaged in a passenger transportation service; 
8.  Fraud as described by V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 32, but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant came in contact while engaged in a passenger transportation service; 
9.  Tampering with a governmental record as described by V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 37, but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant came in contact while engaged in a passenger transportation service; 
10.  Public indecency (prostitution or obscenity) as described by V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 43; 
11.  The transfer, carrying, or possession of a weapon in violation of V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Chapter 46, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony. 
12.  A violation of V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 483, Dangerous Drugs that is punishable as a felony; 
13.  A violation of V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 481 of the Controlled Substances Act that is punishable as a felony; or 
14.  Criminal attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in subsection (5)(a)1-13: and 
b.  For which: 
1.  If the applicant was convicted for a misdemeanor offense, less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date; 
2.  If the applicant was placed on probation or deferred adjudication for a misdemeanor offense, less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of successful completion of probation or deferred adjudication; 
3.  If the applicant was convicted for a felony offense, less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction or the date of release from parole, whichever is the later date; 
4.  If the applicant was placed on probation or deferred adjudication for a felony offense, less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of successful completion of probation or deferred adjudication; 
5.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if, within any twenty-four-month period, the applicant has two (2) or more convictions or any misdemeanor offense or combination of misdemeanor offenses; or 
6.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the successful completion of probation or deferred adjudication for the last offense, whichever is the later date, if, within any twenty-four-month period, the applicant has been placed on probation or deferred adjudication two (2) or more times for any misdemeanor offense or combination of misdemeanor offenses. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-78. - Investigation of applicant. 
    The city secretary shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the character, experience and qualifications of an applicant for a license under this division. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-79. - Issuance or refusal generally. 
    Upon receipt of a complete application, the city secretary shall issue a driver's permit to a qualified applicant within ten (10) days of the receipt of the completed application. The term of the driver's permit shall follow the City of Denison's fiscal year (October 1 through September 30 of the subsequent year). 
    The city secretary shall deny the application for a driver's permit if the applicant: 
(a)  Is not qualified under section 27-77; or 
(b)  Makes a false statement of material fact in his or her application for a driver's permit. 
    If the application is denied, the city secretary shall notify the applicant in writing and include the reason for denial and a statement informing the applicant of his or her right of appeal in accordance with section 27-80 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-80. - Appeal from issuance or refusal. 
    A driver may appeal the following decisions of the city secretary if he or she requests an appeal in writing and delivers it to the city manager's office not more than fourteen (14) days after receiving notice: 
(1)  A denial of an application for a business or driver's permit; 
(2)  A suspension or revocation of a business or driver's permit; 
(3)  A denial of renewal of business or driver's permit. 
    The city council or designee shall hear all appeals made under this subsection within thirty (30) days of the date of the request for an appeal is received in the city manager's office. The city council or designee shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and make argument in his or her behalf. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing under this section and the city council or designee shall make its decision within seven (7) business days after the close of the hearing on the basis of preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The city council or designee may affirm, modify, or reverse all or part of the action of the city secretary being appealed. The decision of the city council or designee is final. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-81. - Identification card-Issuance; size; contents. 
    After an applicant has complied with all requirements of the provisions of this division and a license has been ordered issued to him, he shall be issued, at the time of actual issuance of the license in question, an identification card, which shall contain a full-view photograph of the face of the licensee, along with his complete description. Such card shall also contain the following statement: 
"TO THE PASSENGER OF THIS CAB: If the description of the driver of this cab does not conform to the photograph hereon, you will leave the cab and notify the department of police immediately, giving the number of the cab and the operating name of the concern." 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-82. - Same-Posting in vehicle. 
    The identification card referred to in section 27-81 shall be posted in full view of the passenger in the passenger compartment of the taxicab which the licensee is operating. A driver shall allow the city secretary or a peace officer to examine the driver's permit upon request. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-83. - Not transferable. 
    No license issued under this division shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-84. - Expiration and renewal. 
    Except as provided in subsection (2)a. below, a driver's permit shall be renewed each year subsequent to the initial term if the driver provides the city secretary with the following by September 1 of each year: 
(1)  A nonrefundable permit fee by September 1 of each subsequent year; and 
(2)  A certified copy of the driver's complete driving history for the last three (3) years from the state of issuance that is no more than thirty (30) days old from the date of submittal to the city secretary. 
a.  A driver's permit will not be renewed if: 
1.  The driver is not in compliance with the permit or applicable provisions of this Code, department regulations or other law; or 
2.  The driver does not qualify for driver's permit under section 27-77 or is otherwise not qualified, willing or able to continue to drive a taxicab in accordance with the permit and applicable provisions of this Code, department regulations or other law. 
b.  If the individual's state driver's license is expired, suspended, or revoked, his or her driver's permit automatically becomes void. A driver shall immediately notify the city secretary and the holder for whom he or she drives within three (3) days of an expired license, suspension or revocation of his or her state driver's license and shall immediately surrender his or her driver's permit to the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-85. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  If the city secretary determines that an individual has failed to comply with this chapter, the city secretary may suspend the driver's permit for a definite period of time not to exceed sixty (60) days, except as provided in subsection (b) below. 
(b)  If at any time the city secretary determines that an individual is not qualified under section 27-77 or is under indictment or has charges pending for any offense described in section 27-77, the city secretary shall suspend the driver's permit until such time as the city secretary determines that the individual is qualified or that the charges against the individual have been fully adjudicated. 
(c)  An individual whose driver's permit is suspended shall not drive a taxicab inside the city during the period of suspension. 
(d)  The city secretary may revoke a driver's permit if the city secretary determines that the driver: 
(1)  Operated a taxicab inside the city during a period when the driver's permit was suspended; 
(2)  Made a false statement of a material fact in an application for driver's permit; or 
(3)  Engaged in conduct that constitutes a ground for suspension and received a suspension in excess of three (3) days or a conviction for a violation of this chapter more than once in a twelve-month period preceding the occurrence of the conduct; or 
(4)  Failed to comply with a condition of the driver's permit; or 
(5)  Was convicted of a felony offense listed in section 27-77 while holding a driver's permit. 
(e)  A person whose driver's permit is revoked shall not: 
(1)  Apply for another driver's permit before the expiration of twelve (12) months from the date the city secretary revokes the driver's permit or, in the case of the appeal, the date the city council or designee affirms the revocation; or 
(2)  Drive a taxicab inside the city. 
(f)  The city secretary shall notify the driver and the owner in writing of a suspension or revocation under this section and include in the notice the reason for the suspension or revocation; the date the suspension or revocation begins; the duration of the suspension and a statement informing the driver of his or her right of appeal under section 27-80. The period of suspension or revocation begins on the date specified by the city secretary or, in the case of an appeal, on the date the suspension is affirmed by the city council or designee. 
(g)  After receipt of notice of suspension, revocation or denial of permit renewal, the driver shall, on the date specified in the notice, surrender his or her driver's permit to the city secretary and discontinue driving a taxicab inside the city. 
(h)  Notwithstanding subsection (c) or (g), if the driver appeals the suspension or revocation under this section, the driver may continue to drive a vehicle for hire pending the appeal unless the driver's permit was suspended pursuant to subsection (b) or revoked pursuant to subsection (d) [or] (e) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-86. - Temporary permit. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this division, the city secretary, in his or her discretion, may issue a temporary driver's permit to drive a taxicab for a period not to exceed two (2) weeks, while the required investigation is being made. In the event such investigation is completed prior to the expiration of such two (2) weeks and is unfavorable, according to the requirements of this division, such temporary driver's permit shall immediately terminate and be no longer valid. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Secs. 27-87-27-96. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 27-97. - Vehicle requirements and inspections. 
(a)  The city secretary may by regulation establish requirements for size, condition and accessories of a vehicle for hire used by an owner or driver. 
(b)  The fleet manager, or designee, shall inspect each taxicab for compliance with this article and notify the city secretary of such findings. In addition to the annual mandatory inspection, the following inspection may occur: pre-service inspection and random inspections. 
(c)  An owner or driver shall make a taxicab available for inspection when ordered by the city secretary. If, upon inspection, the city secretary determines that a taxicab is not in compliance with this article or regulations of the city secretary, the city secretary shall order the taxicab to be brought into compliance within a reasonable period of time and require it to be re-inspected. 
(d)  If an owner or driver fails to make a taxicab available for inspection or if the city secretary determines that a taxicab is not in compliance with this article or regulations of the city secretary, the city secretary may order the taxicab removed from service until it is made available for inspection and brought into compliance. 
(e)  If the city secretary determines that inspection of the mechanical condition or safety equipment of a taxicab by an expert mechanic or technician is necessary, the owner or driver shall pay the cost of the inspection. 
(f)  Before any taxicab will be approved for service, the city secretary shall be provided with a copy of the registration for the vehicle with the state, if application, or a bill of sale if the vehicle is new and has not yet been registered, showing the name of the individual or owner of the vehicle. The owner shown on the registration, if applicable, or bill of sale provided to the city secretary shall notify the city secretary of any change in ownership of the vehicle for hire within ten (10) business days. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-98. - Required equipment. 
    Unless otherwise specified in the operating authority under which a taxicab is operated, and in addition to other equipment required by this chapter, a holder, owner, or driver shall provide and maintain in good operating condition the following equipment for each taxicab: 
(1)  Seat belts for each passenger, the number of which is determined by the designed seating capacity of the taxicab; 
(2)  Heater and air conditioner; 
(3)  Chemical-type fire extinguisher, of at least one-quart capacity, conveniently located in the same compartment of the taxicab as the driver so that it is readily accessible for immediate use; 
(4)  Equipment to indicate when a taxicab is operating for hire and when it is not for hire; 
(5)  Top light or an interior taxicab light that indicates the taxicab is for-hire or not-for-hire or other comparable device approved by the city secretary; 
(6)  Two-way communication device, which may include a cellular phone; 
(7)  Map of the city; 
(8)  Taxicab display receptacle; 
(9)  Taximeter; and 
(10)  Credit card processing device. 
    No equipment listed above may be placed on a vehicle to be operated as a taxicab unless the equipment is owned by the holder. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-99. - Vehicle color scheme and distinctive markings. 
(a)  A holder shall develop the design of a color scheme and distinctive markings for taxicabs operating under its authority, and shall submit the design to the city secretary for approval to insure that the design is readily distinguishable from the design used by other holders. 
(b)  After a design is approved by the city secretary, the holder shall submit to the city secretary a color photograph of a completely equipped taxicab using the approved design. 
(c)  The holder shall use only the approved design, as depicted in the submitted photograph, for taxicabs operated under its authority unless written approval of a change is obtained from the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-100. - Required vehicle identification. 
    A holder shall cause each taxicab operating under its authority to be provided with the following uniform vehicle identification: 
(1)  The name of the holder's company printed in letters not less than three (3) inches high with one-half-inch stroke; and 
(2)  The taxicab number assigned to each vehicle by the city secretary in numbers and letters not less than three (3) inches high with one-half-inch stroke and so that it is clearly visible from the front, rear, and both sides of the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-101. - Taxicab display placard. 
(a)  Every taxicab must have a display placard approved by the city secretary securely affixed to a conspicuous place in the taxicab. A display receptacle shall be at least four (4) inches by five (5) inches in area, constructed of a rigid material, and designed to accommodate the following information in accordance with the required dimensions: 
(1)  Name of the company; 
(2)  Fare rates or if there is no fixed rate, then state whether gratuities or donations are accepted; and 
(3)  The statement "For complaints or concerns contact the City of Denison City Secretary Office at (903) 465-2720". 
(b)  A holder, owner, or driver of a taxicab commits an offense if he operates or allows operation of a taxicab that is equipped: 
(1)  Without the required display placard; 
(2)  With a display placard that does not contain required information; or 
(3)  With a display placard that contains insufficient or incorrect information. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-102. - Taxicab decals. 
(a)  The holder, owner, or driver of a taxicab shall obtain a decal, indicating the taxicab's authority to operate, from the city secretary, or designee, each year, or other period to be determined by the city secretary. A decal must be attached to the lower right corner of the front windshield of the taxicab in a manner approved by the city secretary. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Operates a taxicab with an expired decal or with no decal affixed to it; 
(2)  Attaches a decal to a vehicle not authorized to operate as a taxicab; 
(3)  Forges, alters or counterfeits a taxicab decal required by this section; 
(4)  Possesses a forged, altered, or counterfeited taxicab decal required by this section; or 
(5)  Displays more than one (1) taxicab decal issued by the city on a vehicle at the same time. 
(c)  A taxicab decal assigned to one (1) person is not transferable to another without consent of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-103. - Not-for-hire status of taxicabs. 
(a)  Each taxicab is presumed to be on duty and ready to serve the general public for hire. If a driver is not for hire and does not intend to provide taxicab service, the driver shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The driver shall place a sign, to be provided by the holder, in the taxicab indicating the words "NOT FOR HIRE" printed in letters not less than three (3) inches in height with a stroke of not less than three-eighths-inch. The letters shall be on a backing of sufficient thickness to not easily bend. 
(2)  When a driver is not for hire, the driver shall display the sign in an upright position in the front window on the right side of the taxicab so as to be easily seen and read from outside of the taxicab. 
(b)  A driver who is not for hire shall not park or stand a taxicab on a taxicab stand or on a public street or public property within five hundred (500) feet of a taxicab stand unless it is parked at a metered parking space. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-104. - Removal of equipment. 
    Whenever a vehicle is removed from service or is no longer authorized to operate as a taxicab, the holder, owner, or driver shall remove from the vehicle all taxicab signs, markings, and equipment that would distinguish the vehicle as a taxicab, including, but not limited to, radios, top lights, meters and decals. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Secs. 27-105-27-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RATES 

Sec. 27-115. - Rates generally. 
    An owner or driver of a taxicab shall provide its rate structure to the city secretary's office and only charge rates of fare using that rate structure. An owner may update his or her rate structure once every six (6) months by submitting a new rate structure in writing to the city secretary's office during normal business hours. The new rate structure becomes effective seven (7) days after received by the city secretary. A driver shall only charge a fee as computed by a taximeter or as calculated using the rate structure that is on file with the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-116. - Rates to be posted. 
    There shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the inside of each taxicab and on the back of the front seat a card showing the rates charged by the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-117. - Receipt for payment. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab, upon receiving full payment of a fare, to refuse to give a receipt upon the request of any passenger making such payment. The receipt must include the following: 
(a)  The name of the holder under whose authority the taxicab is operated and contact information; 
(b)  The taxicab number; 
(c)  The total amount of fare paid; 
(d)  The date and time of payment; and 
(e)  The driver's name. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-118. - Refusal of service at specified rate. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any taxicab to refuse to convey a passenger at the rate specified on the rate card displayed in the taxicab, or to demand or receive an amount in excess of the rates displayed on such card. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-119. - Refusal to pay. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any taxicab after having hired the same, and any person who shall hire any taxicab with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-120. - Charging unauthorized fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for any driver or owner of a taxicab to charge, collect or demand fares different from the rate structure on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-121. - Taximeter specifications. 
    A taximeter must accurately register in legible figures total miles, paid miles, number of fare units, number of trips, extras, and total fare for a trip. Figures denoting the fare must be illuminate when the meter is activated. 
    A taximeter must be mounted in a conspicuous location in the taxicab in a manner approved by the city secretary. A taximeter must be equipped to indicate whether the taxicab is engaged or vacant. 
    An owner shall cause each taximeter in taxicabs operating under its business permit to be maintained in good operating condition and be tested along with the annual inspection at least once each year. 
    A person commits an offense if he or she operates a taxicab that is equipped with a taximeter that: 
(a)  Does not have a current decal authorized by the city secretary; 
(b)  Has been tampered with or altered; or 
(c)  Incorrectly registers or computes taxicab fares because of alterations to the taxicab or taximeter. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Secs. 27-122-27-126. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MISCELLANEOUS OWNER AND DRIVER REGULATIONS 

Sec. 27-127. - Owner's and driver's duty to comply. 
(a)  Owner. In the operation of a taxicab business, an owner shall comply with this article, regulations established under this article and other laws applicable to the operation of a taxicab business. 
(b)  Driver. While on duty, a driver shall comply with this article, regulations established under this article, other laws applicable to the operation of a motor vehicle in this state and orders issued by the holder employing or contracting with the driver in connection with the owner's discharging of its duty under its business license and this article. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-128. - Owner's duty to enforce compliance by drivers. 
    An owner shall establish policy and take action to discourage, prevent or correct violations of this article by drivers who are employed by or contracting with the holder. 
    An owner shall not permit a driver who is employed by or contracting with the holder to drive a taxicab if the owner knows or has reasonable cause to suspect that the driver has failed to comply with this article, the rules and regulations established by the city secretary and other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-129. - City-wide taxicab service required. 
    Except as otherwise provided by the owner's business license, an owner shall: 
(a)  Provide taxicab service to the general public to and from any point inside the city that is accessible by public street, except that this provision does not require an owner to subject a taxicab to mob violence or destruction; 
(b)  Respond to each call received for service inside the city as soon as practicable and if the service cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, the owner shall inform the caller of the reason for the delay and the approximate time required to respond to the call; and 
(c)  Maintain a single station/location for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching taxicabs. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-130. - Refusal to convey passengers by taxicab. 
    While driving a taxicab a driver shall not refuse to convey a person who requests service unless: 
(a)  The person is disorderly; 
(b)  The driver is engaged in answering a previous request for service; 
(c)  The driver has reason to believe that the person is engaged in unlawful conduct; or 
(d)  The driver is in fear of his or her personal safety. 
    While operating a taxicab, a driver shall not refuse service requested by a radio dispatch when the location for pick up is within a reasonable distance from the location of the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-131. - Conduct of drivers. 
    A driver shall: 
(a)  Act in a reasonable, prudent and courteous manner; 
(b)  Maintain a sanitary and well-groomed appearance; 
(c)  Not consume an alcoholic beverage, drug or other substance that could adversely affect the driver's ability to operate a taxicab; 
(d)  Not monitor the radio frequency of a taxicab company other than the driver's own nor respond to a call for service dispatched to another taxicab; 
(e)  Not possess a radio capable of receiving the frequency of a taxicab company other than the driver's own; 
(f)  Not interfere with the city secretary in the performance of the city secretary's duties; 
(g)  Comply with lawful orders of the city secretary issued in the performance of his or her duties; and 
(h)  Provide the passengers with a quote on the estimated amount of fare before the ride starts, unless the fare is "tips only" at the customer's discretion. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-132. - Return of passenger's property. 
    Upon finding property in a taxicab, left by a passenger, the driver shall immediately return the property to the owner. However, if the driver is unable to locate the owner or if the driver does not know the identity or whereabouts of the owner, the driver shall, within a reasonable time, deliver the property to the owner who employs or contracts with the driver. 
    Upon return of property to the owner or delivery of property to the holder, the driver shall prepare a written report stating the description of the property, the identity of the owner if known, the date the property was left in the taxicab, the circumstances relating to the loss and the taxicab number. The owner shall keep the report on field for at least one (1) year and shall hold the property for not less than three (3) months. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 27-133. - No property rights created; city liability. 
    Permits, licenses, and decals are a means of administrating and do not constitute property or rights to property for a person issued a permit, license, or decal. Permits, licenses, and decals have no value and cannot be transferred, pledged as a security interest, or be subjected to execution by a judgment holder or bankruptcy estate. The city reserves the right to stop or prohibit taxicab services at any time without providing compensation, or modify, suspend, or revoke a permit, license, or decal without providing compensation. Whenever use of public right-of-way for public purposes prevents the use of a taxicab by the holder of a permit, license, or decal, such person is not entitled to compensation for losses resulting from the use of such rights-of-way. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to create any liability against the city. 
(Ord. No. 4857, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Secs. 27-134-27-136. - Reserved. 
Chapter 28 - ZONING[1] 
Section Page Article I. Establishing Zoning RegulationSec. 28.1. Enacting clause ..... 1713 Sec. 28.2. Title and purpose ..... 1713 Sec. 28.3. Zoning district map ..... 1713 Sec. 28.4. Zoning district boundaries ..... 1714 Sec. 28.5. Compliance required and application of regulations ..... 1715 Sec. 28.6. Zoning upon annexation ..... 1716 Article II. Zoning Procedures and AdministrationSec. 28.7. Planning and zoning commission ..... 1717 Sec. 28.8. Zoning board of adjustments and appeals (ZBA) ..... 1719 Sec. 28.9. Nonconforming uses and structures ..... 1724 Sec. 28.10. Amendments to zoning ordinance and districts, administrative 
procedures, and enforcement ..... 1728 Sec. 28.11. Conditional use permit ..... 1733 Sec. 28.12. Cluster development plan ..... 1737 Sec. 28.13. Site plan requirements ..... 1739 Sec. 28.14. Building permits; certificates of occupancy and compliance ..... 1746 Sec. 28.15A. Complete application ..... 1749 Sec. 28.15B. Determination of vested rights ..... 1751 Sec. 28.15C. Dormant projects ..... 1755 Sec. 28.16. Enforcement and revocation of permits ..... 1756 Article III. Zoning DistrictsSec. 28.17. Zoning districts established ..... 1758 Sec. 28.18. A-Agricultural District ..... 1760 Sec. 28.19. Reserved ..... 1762 Sec. 28.20. RD-Rural Development District ..... 1762 Sec. 28.21. SF-20-Single-Family Residential District ..... 1766 Sec. 28.22. SF-10-Single-Family Residential District ..... 1768 Sec. 28.23. SF-7.5-Single-Family Residential District ..... 1770 Sec. 28.24. SF-5-Single-Family Residential District ..... 1773 Sec. 28.25. SF-PH-Single-Family Residential District-Patio homes ..... 1775 Sec. 28.26. SF-TH-Single-Family Residential District-Attached ..... 1778 Sec. 28.27. LD-Lakeside Development District ..... 1782 Sec. 28.28. UD-Urban Development District ..... 1793 Sec. 28.29. 2F-Two-Family (Duplex) Residential District ..... 1796 Sec. 28.30. MF-1-Multi-Family Residential District ..... 1799 Sec. 28.31. MF-2-Multi-Family Residential District ..... 1803 Sec. 28.32. MH-Manufactured Home District ..... 1806 Sec. 28.33. O-Office District ..... 1813 Sec. 28.34. NS-Neighborhood Services District ..... 1816 Sec. 28.35. LR-Local Retail District ..... 1819 Sec. 28.36. CR-Community Retail District ..... 1822 Sec. 28.37. RR-Regional Retail District ..... 1826 Sec. 28.38. C-Commercial District ..... 1829 Sec. 28.39. CA-Central Area District ..... 1831 Sec. 28.40. BP-Business Park District ..... 1834 Sec. 28.41. LI-Light Industrial District ..... 1836 Sec. 28.42. HI-Heavy Industrial District ..... 1838 Overlay DistrictsSec. 28.43. PD-Planned Development Overlay District ..... 1840 Sec. 28.44. NGB-Native Greenbelt Overlay District ..... 1846 Sec. 28.45. MO-Morton Street Overlay Boundary ..... 1847 Sec. 28.46. HO-Highway-Oriented and Corridor District ..... 1853 Sec. 28.47. CH-Commercial Historic Overlay District ..... 1859 Sec. 28.48. AO-Austin Avenue Overlay District ..... 1861 Sec. 28.48A. RI-Residential Infill Overlay District ..... 1864 Article IV. Use RegulationsSec. 28.49. Use regulations (charts) ..... 1870.3 Article V. Development StandardsSec. 28.50. Off-street parking and loading requirements ..... 1870.14.4 Sec. 28.51. Landscape requirements ..... 1870.28 Sec. 28.52. Accessory building and use regulations ..... 1870.34.5 Sec. 28.53. Fence, screening and wall regulations ..... 1870.36 Sec. 28.54. Exterior construction and design requirements ..... 1870.39 Sec. 28.55. Supplemental regulations ..... 1870.42 Sec. 28.56. Wind energy conversion systems (WECS) ..... 1870.49 Sec. 28.57. Lighting and glare standards ..... 1870.53 Sec. 28.58. Home occupation regulations ..... 1870.54 Sec. 28.59. Reserved ..... 1870.57 Sec. 28.60. Alcoholic beverages ..... 1870.58 Sec. 28.61. Development standards for cluster development plans ..... 1870.77 Sec. 28.62. Sexually oriented businesses ..... 1870.84 Article VI. DefinitionsSec. 28.63. Definitions ..... 1870.97 Article VII. Penalties and NonconformitiesSec. 28.64. Effect of interpretation ..... 1870.126 Sec. 28.65. Preserving rights in pending litigation and violations under 
existing ordinances ..... 1870.126 Sec. 28.66. Penalty for violations ..... 1870.126 Sec. 28.67. Validity ..... 1870.126 Sec. 28.68. Public meeting ..... 1870.126 AppendicesAppendix A. Illustrations ..... 1870.127 Appendix B. Summary of Zoning District Regulations ..... 1870.141 Appendix C. Recommended Plant List ..... 1870.143  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Denison, Texas, Ordinance No. 4720, as adopted by the city council on July 29, 2009. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - ESTABLISHING ZONING REGULATION 

Sec. 28.1. - Enacting clause. 
THIS CHAPTER IS HEREBY ENACTED AND ADOPTED AS THE COMPREHENSIVE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF DENISON, TEXAS. THE PREVIOUS ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY, CHAPTER 28, ADOPTED ON THE 7 th DAY OF JULY, 1965, TOGETHER WITH ALL AMENDMENTS THERETO, IS HEREBY AMENDED, REPEALED AND REPLACED IN ITS ENTIRETY BY THIS ORDINANCE TO READ AS FOLLOWS: 
Sec. 28.2. - Title and purpose. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Denison's "Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance" or "Zoning Ordinance." 
As authorized by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211, the zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with an adopted comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals and general welfare, and protecting and preserving places and areas of historical, cultural and/or architectural importance and significance within the city. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to ensure adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land and thus avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, wastewater treatment, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of each zoning district and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
Sec. 28.3. - Zoning district map. 
28.3.1.  The city is hereby divided into zones, or districts, and the boundaries of zoning districts set out herein are delineated upon the zoning district map of the city, which may also be cited as the "zoning map," said map being adopted as a part of this chapter as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail. 
28.3.2.  One (1) original of the zoning district map shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and labeled as "Official Zoning Map of the City of Denison, Texas-Ordinance No. 4720." For legibility purposes the zoning map may be printed in sections at a large scale. This copy shall bear the signature of the mayor, attested by the city secretary, and shall bear the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 28.3.3. of the Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance No. 4720 of the City of Denison, Texas, adopted on the 29 th day of July, 2009." This copy shall not be changed in any manner. In case of any question, this copy, together with amending ordinances, shall be controlling. 
28.3.3.  A copy of the official zoning district map shall be placed in the office of the planning director. The map copy (including any sections) shall be used for reference and shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all subsequent amendments. Reproductions for informational purposes may be made of the official zoning district map or this copy. 
Any changes or amendments made to the zoning district boundaries shall be made on the map copy promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city council, together with a descriptive entry on the map as follows: "On the ___th day of ___________, 20___, by official action of the City Council of Denison, Texas, the following change(s) was made on the city's official zoning district map: ___________ (enter a brief description of the nature of the change), Ordinance No. ___, effective date _______, 20___." Each descriptive entry for a zoning map amendment shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city secretary. 
28.3.4.  In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret due to age, exposure, or the nature or number of changes or additions, the city council may adopt, by ordinance following a public hearing, a new official zoning map which shall replace and supersede the prior zoning map, but which shall not, in effect, amend or otherwise change the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereto. The new official zoning map shall bear the signature of the mayor, attested by the city secretary, and shall bear the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the original official zoning map referred to in section 28.3.3 of the Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance No. 4720 of the City of Denison, Texas, adopted on the 29 th day of July, 2009." Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
28.3.5.  The city council may adopt, by ordinance following a public hearing, a new official zoning map which shall replace and supersede the prior zoning map. The adoption of a new official zoning map shall require public hearing and notice requirements specified in section 28.10. The new official zoning map shall bear the signature of the mayor, attested by the city secretary, and shall bear the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the original Official Zoning Map referred to in subsection 28.3.3 of the Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance No. 4720 of the City of Denison, Texas, adopted on the 29 th day of July, 2009." Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
Sec. 28.4. - Zoning district boundaries. 
28.4.1.  The zoning district boundary lines shown on the zoning district map are usually along streets, alleys, property lines, or extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the zoning district map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Boundaries shown falling along a street shall be interpreted to be the centerline of the street. 
B.  Boundaries shown as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
C.  Boundaries shown as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits. 
D.  Boundaries shown as following railroad lines shall be construed to be located along the centerline of the railroad right-of-way lines. 
E.  Boundaries shown as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. Boundaries shown as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, creeks, canals, bodies of water, or drainage ways shall be construed to follow such centerlines, and in the event of change in any such centerlines shall be construed to move with such centerlines. 
F.  Boundaries shown as parallel to, or extensions of, features described in subsections A. through E. above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the zoning district map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
G.  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the city council, or whenever such area is franchised for building purposes, the zoning district line adjoining each side of such street, alley or other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley or public way and all areas so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
H.  The zoning classification applied to a tract of land adjacent to a street shall extend to the centerline of the street unless, as a condition of zoning approval, it is stated that the zoning classification shall not apply to the street. 
I.  Where physical features on the ground are at variance with information shown on the zoning district map, or if there arises a question as to how or whether a parcel of property is zoned and such question cannot be resolved by the application of subsections A. through H. above, then the board of adjustment shall interpret the zoning district boundaries. 
J.  If the zoning of property is invalidated by a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, no application for establishment or development of any use of the land shall be accepted for filing other than for a use authorized in the "A" (agricultural) district that meets the standards governing development within such district, until the land is rezoned, except as expressly required otherwise by the court. 
K.  Zoning changes which are still valid and which were made between the effective date of the previous zoning ordinance codified as chapter 28, Denison Code of Ordinances, adopted on July 7, 1965 and the effective date of this ordinance [Ordinance No. 4720], are indicated in approximate locations on the zoning district map. For exact legal descriptions, refer to the adopting ordinances for each particular zoning change. 
Sec. 28.5. - Compliance required and application of regulations. 
28.5.1.  All land, buildings, structures or appurtenances thereon located within the City of Denison, Texas which are hereafter occupied, used, constructed, erected, removed, placed, demolished, and/or converted shall be occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished and/or converted in conformance with the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such land or building is located, as hereinafter provided, or such shall be subject to penalties as per section 28.66 of this chapter. All of the standards and regulations prescribed herein shall be considered as the minimum requirement unless explicitly stated otherwise. 
28.5.2.  No lot upon which a building has been erected shall later be so reduced in area that the setbacks, yards and/or open spaces shall be smaller than those required by this chapter, nor shall a part of a yard or other open space required by this chapter for any building/lot be included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building/lot. 
28.5.3.  No building shall hereafter be erected or altered: 
A.  To have more narrow or smaller front, side or rear yards than those required by this chapter; 
B.  To exceed the maximum height allowed by this chapter; 
C.  To occupy a greater percentage of lot area than allowed by this chapter; or 
D.  To accommodate or house a greater number of families than is specified within this chapter for the zoning district in which such building is located. 
Sec. 28.6. - Zoning upon annexation. 
28.6.1.  As soon as practical following annexation, but in no event more than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days thereafter, the city council shall, on its own motion or by property owners of the annexed area, initiate proceedings to establish agricultural ("A") zoning or other such zoning in compliance with the land use plan, as amended, on the newly annexed territory zoning on the newly annexed territory, thereupon the planning director (or his/her designee) shall commence public notification and other standard procedures for zoning amendments as set forth in section 28.10 of this chapter. Said proceedings to establish zoning may be undertaken concurrently with annexation procedures (i.e., notified at the same time, public hearings scheduled at the same time as annexation, etc.), however zoning approval and formal adoption of the ordinance establishing zoning must occur after annexation approval and adoption have occurred, and as a separate and distinct action by the city council. 
28.6.2.  The initial zoning of a land parcel, whether by initiation of the landowner or by initiation of the city, must meet the requirements for notification and public hearings as set forth in section 28.10 of this chapter and all other applicable state laws. 
28.6.3.  The owner of land to be annexed may submit an application for zoning the property simultaneously with submission of the petition for annexation, but no such annexation application may be made conditioned upon the approval of any particular zoning classification. 
28.6.4.  Until annexed land is initially zoned pursuant to this section, no application for establishment or development of any use of the land shall be accepted for filing other than for a use authorized in the "A" (agricultural) district that meets the standards governing development within such district. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 28.7. - Planning and zoning commission. 
28.7.1.   General:
The planning and zoning commission (also referred to as the "commission") shall function according to the following criteria that establish membership and operating procedures. 
28.7.2.   Created; membership; officers; rules and bylaws:
A.  There is created, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211, the "planning and zoning commission," hereafter sometimes referred to as the "commission," which shall consist of five (5) people residing within the city limits. The city council may appoint up to four (4) alternates. 
B.  Members shall be nominated by the city council, and each person so nominated must be approved by a simple majority vote of the city council before being appointed as a member of the commission. 
C.  All appointments to the commission shall serve as a member of the commission for a term of office of two (2) years. All members shall serve three (3) terms of office in accordance with chapter 2, article 2 of the Denison Code of Ordinances (pertaining to residing and attendance requirements). 
D.  Any vacancy(s) on the commission shall be filled via appointment by a simple majority vote of the city council. 
E.  Members of the planning and zoning commission may be removed from office at any time by a simple majority vote of the full city council either upon its own motion or upon recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. Failure to attend three (3) consecutive scheduled meetings shall be deemed as neglect and cause for removal from office, unless such absences were due to unusual circumstances beyond the member's control such as sickness of the member or someone within the member's immediate family. A vote to remove a commission member shall be placed on the appropriate agenda as a regular item, and shall be voted upon accordingly. 
F.  The members of the commission shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the commission, shall serve without compensation, and shall not hold any other office within, or serve as an employee of, the city while serving on the commission. The commission shall meet a minimum of once per month at a time established by the city council. If there have been no applications filed for review by the commission, the city secretary shall notify the chairman and no meeting shall be required for that month. 
G.  The commission shall appoint a chairperson and a vice-chairperson from among the commission membership, and each officer shall hold office for two (2) years or until replaced by a simple majority vote of the full city council. The city manager's designee shall serve as secretary to the commission, and shall keep minutes of all meetings held by the commission as well as the full record of all recommendations made by the commission to the city council. 
H.  The commission shall have the power to make rules, regulations and bylaws for its own governance, which shall conform to those set forth by the city council, and such rules, regulations and bylaws shall be subject to approval by the city council. Such rules and bylaws shall include, among other items, provisions for the following: 
1.  Regular and special meetings, open to the public; 
2.  A record of its proceedings, to be open for inspection by the public; 
3.  Reporting to the city council and the public, from time to time and annually; and 
4.  Reviewing the comprehensive plan on a regular basis. 
28.7.3.   Parliamentary procedure; quorum; voting:
The commission will follow any parliamentary procedures adopted by the city council, and said procedures shall not be in conflict with the laws applicable to the commission on the following: 
A.  Quorum. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the membership of the commission, and any issue to be voted upon shall be resolved by a majority of those members present. 
B.  Voting. All commission members, including the chairperson, shall be entitled to one (1) vote each upon any question, a quorum being present. 
C.  Conflict of interest. If any member has a conflict of interest regarding any item on the commission's agenda, that member shall remove himself or herself from the room and shall refrain from voting only on the item for which a conflict exists. 
28.7.4.   Meetings; public record:
A.  The planning and zoning commission shall meet in the municipal building or in some other specified location as may be designated by the presiding city and at such intervals as may be necessary to orderly and properly transact the business of the commission but not less than once each month. 
B.  Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Open Meetings Law. 
28.7.5   Establishing extraterritorial jurisdiction:
Statutes of the State of Texas authorizing and empowering cities to regulate the platting and recording of subdivisions or additions within the city's corporate limits and establishing extraterritorial jurisdiction are hereby adopted, and the commission, acting through its duly authorized officials, shall have all the rights, powers, privileges and authority authorized and granted by and through said statutes pertaining to regulation of subdivisions in the city limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
28.7.6.   Powers and duties:
A.  The commission shall have all the rights, powers, privileges and authority authorized and granted by the city council and through the statutes of the State of Texas authorizing and granting cities the power of zoning and subdivision regulation as found in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211, as amended from time to time. 
B.  The commission shall be an advisory body and adjunct to the city council, and shall make recommendations regarding amendments to the comprehensive plan, changes of zoning, zoning ordinance amendments, and zoning to be given to newly annexed areas and other planning related matters. The commission shall conduct an annual review of the city's comprehensive plan and shall be prepared to make recommendations to the city council as deemed necessary to keep the city's comprehensive plan current with changing conditions and trends and with the planning needs of the city. The commission shall also serve in an advisory capacity on any planning related item(s) in the city. The commission shall have final approval on subdivision plat review. 
28.7.7.   Procedure on zoning hearings:
The procedure and process for zoning changes or amendments shall be in accordance with section 28.10 of the zoning ordinance of the City of Denison. 
28.7.8.   Joint meetings with the city council:
Whenever the city council and the commission are required by the laws of the State of Texas to conduct public hearings in matters pertaining to planning, zoning or subdividing property, and at other times when it is in the best interest of the city to do so, the city council and the commission are hereby authorized, after published notice as required by law, to hold joint meetings and to conduct joint public hearings. 
Sec. 28.8. - Zoning board of adjustments and appeals (ZBA). 
28.8.1.   Creation:
There is hereby created a zoning board of adjustments and appeals, hereafter referred to as the "ZBA," for the purpose, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, to make special exceptions to the terms of this chapter that are consistent with the general purpose and intent of this chapter. 
28.8.2.   Members; terms of office:
A.  The zoning board of adjustments and appeals shall operate in accordance with of the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.008 through 211.011, as amended. 
B.  The ZBA shall consist of five (5) members and two (2) alternate members residing within the City of Denison appointed by the city council. 
C.  Each person nominated by the city council to be a ZBA member must be approved by a simple majority vote of the city council before being appointed as a member of the ZBA. 
D.  All appointments to the ZBA shall serve as a member for a term of office of two (2) years. All members shall serve three (3) terms of office in accordance with chapter 2, article 2, of the Denison Code of Ordinances (pertaining to residency and attendance requirements). 
E.  The zoning board of adjustments and appeals shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson from among its membership, and each officer shall hold office until replaced by a simple majority vote of the full ZBA. The city manager's designee shall serve as secretary to the zoning board of adjustments and appeals, and shall keep minutes of all meetings held by the board. 
F.  The zoning board of adjustments and appeals shall have the power to make the rules, regulations and bylaws for its own government. 
28.8.3.   Meetings:
A.  Meetings of the zoning board of adjustments and appeals shall be held at the call of the chairperson or secretary and at such other times as the ZBA may determine. All meetings of the ZBA shall be open to the public. 
B.  All cases to be heard by the zoning board of adjustments and appeals shall always be heard by at least seventy-five (75) percent of the members. 
28.8.4.   Authority of zoning board of adjustments:
A.  The board of adjustments and appeals shall have the authority, granted in of the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.008 through 211.011, and those established herein, to exercise powers and to perform duties including the following: 
1.  Hear and decide an appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter; 
2.  Authorize, in specific cases, a variance from the terms of this chapter if the variance is not contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this chapter is observed and substantial justice is done; 
3.  In exercising its authority under subsection 1. above, the zoning board of adjustments and appeals may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision or determination, and for that purpose the board has the same authority as the administrative official; 
4.  The concurring vote of at least seventy-five (75) percent of the full zoning board of adjustments and appeals is necessary to: 
a.  Reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official; 
b.  Decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the board is required to review under this chapter; 
c.  Authorize a variance from the terms of this chapter; or 
d.  Hear and decide special exceptions to this chapter. 
28.8.5.   Limitations on authority of zoning board of adjustments and appeals:
A.  The zoning board of adjustments and appeals may not grant a variance authorizing a use other than those permitted in the district for which the variance is sought, except as provided in subsection 28.8.6.C. below. 
B.  The zoning board of adjustments and appeals shall have no power to grant or modify conditional use permits authorized under section 28.11 of these regulations. 
C.  The zoning board of adjustments and appeals shall have no power to grant a zoning amendment. In the event that a written request for a zoning amendment is pending before the planning and zoning commission or the city council, the zoning board of adjustments and appeals shall neither hear nor grant any variances with respect to the subject property until final disposition of the zoning amendment. 
D.  The zoning board of adjustments and appeals shall not grant a variance for any parcel of property or portion thereof upon which an application for a site plan, preliminary plat, or final plat is pending for decision on the agenda of the commission or, where applicable, of the city council, in which case the site plan or plat application shall be decided first. If the site plan or construction plat application is dependent on the granting of a variance by the board, the application may only be approved on condition that the variance is granted. All administrative and procedural remedies available to the applicant shall have been exhausted prior to hearing by the zoning board of adjustments and appeals. 
28.8.6.   Variances:
A.  The zoning board of adjustments and appeals may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance, the board shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary for, or desirable to, the public interest. In making the findings herein below required, the board shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work within the proposed use, and the probable effect such variance will have upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare of the community. 
B.  Conditions required for variance: 
1.  No variance shall be granted without first having given public notice and having held a public hearing on the written variance request in accordance with this chapter and unless the zoning board of adjustments and appeals finds: 
a.  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land; and 
b.  That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; and 
c.  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property within the area; and 
d.  That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly use of other land within the area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  Such findings of the zoning board of adjustments and appeals, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the zoning board of adjustments and appeals meeting at which such variance is granted. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and that substantial justice may be done. 
C.  Findings of undue hardship: 
1.  In order to grant a variance, the zoning board of adjustments and appeals must make written findings that an undue hardship exists, using the following criteria: 
a.  That literal enforcement of the controls will create an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty in the development of the affected property; and 
b.  That the situation causing the hardship or difficulty is neither self-imposed nor generally affecting all or most properties in the same zoning district; and 
c.  That the relief sought will not injure the permitted use of adjacent conforming property; and 
d.  That the granting of a variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purpose of these regulations. 
2.  A variance shall not be granted to relieve a self-created or personal hardship, nor shall it be based solely upon economic gain or loss, nor shall it permit any person the privilege of developing a parcel of land not permitted by this chapter to other parcels of land in the particular zoning district. No variance may be granted which results in undue hardship upon another parcel of land. 
3.  The applicant bears the burden of proof in establishing the facts that may justify a variance. 
D.  Special exceptions for nonconforming uses and structures: Upon written request of the property owner, the zoning board of adjustments and appeals may grant special exceptions to the provisions of subsection 28.9.2, limited to the following, and in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Expansion of a nonconforming use within an existing structure provided that, in the case of a nonconforming residential use, such expansion does not increase the number of dwelling units to more than the number existing when the use first became nonconforming; or 
2.  Expansion of the gross floor area of a nonconforming structure provided that such expansion does not decrease any existing setback. 
3.  Change from one nonconforming use to another, reconstruction of a nonconforming structure that has been totally destroyed, or resumption of a nonconforming use previously abandoned, only upon finding that the failure to grant the special exception deprives the property owner of substantially all use or economic value of the land. 
4.  In granting special exceptions under this section, the ZBA may impose such conditions as are necessary to protect adjacent property owners and to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare, including but not limited to conditions specifying the period during which the nonconforming use may continue to operate or exist before being conformed to the standards of the zoning ordinance. 
28.8.7.   Appeals to the zoning board of adjustments and appeals:
A.  The appellant must file with the zoning board of adjustments and appeals and the official from whom the appeal is taken a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The appeal must be filed within sixty (60) days after the decision has been rendered. Upon receiving the notice, the official from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the zoning board of adjustments and appeals all papers constituting the record of action that is appealed. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action that is appealed unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certifies in writing to the zoning board of adjustments and appeals facts supporting the official's opinion that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, the proceedings may be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the zoning board of adjustments and appeals or a court of record on application, after notice to the official, if due cause is shown. The appellant party may appear at the appeal hearing in person or by agent or attorney. The zoning board of adjustments and appeals shall decide the appeal within four (4) weeks after the written request (notice of appeal) was received, after which time the written request shall be deemed automatically approved if no formal action is taken. The zoning board of adjustments and appeals may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision or determination from which an appeal is taken, and may make the correct order, requirement, decision or determination. 
B.  A member or members of the zoning board of adjustments and appeals may not bring an appeal on behalf of a property owner other than himself/herself to the zoning board of adjustments and appeals. An appeal must be requested by the owner of the property being considered. 
28.8.8.   Procedures:
A.  Application and fee. An application for a variance by the zoning board of adjustments and appeals shall be made in writing using forms prescribed by the city, and shall be accompanied by an application fee, a site plan and such additional information as may be requested in writing in order to properly review the application. Such information may include, but is not limited to, plat plans, site building plans, photographs, topographic contour maps, and other similar documents. All drawings must be to scale. 
B.  Review and report by the city. The city manager or his/her designee, shall visit the site where the proposed variance will apply and the surrounding area, and shall report his or her findings to the zoning board of adjustments and appeals. 
C.  Notice and public hearings. The zoning board of adjustments and appeals shall hold a public hearing for consideration of the written variance request no later than forty-five (45) days after the date the application for action, or an appeal, is filed. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided to all property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the affected property at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing, and also published in the official local newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. 
D.  Action by the zoning board of adjustments and appeals. The zoning board of adjustments and appeals shall not grant a variance unless it finds, based upon evidence, that each of the conditions in subsection 28.8.6.2. has been established. The zoning board of adjustments and appeals may impose such conditions, limitations and safeguards as it deems appropriate upon the granting of any variance. Violation of any such condition, limitation or safeguard shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
28.8.9.   Finality of decisions; judicial review:
All decisions of the zoning board of adjustments and appeals are final and binding. However, any person aggrieved by a decision of the zoning board of adjustments and appeals may present a verified petition to a court of record which states that the decision of the zoning board of adjustments and appeals is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition must be presented within ten (10) days after the date the decision is filed in the city secretary's office. Subject to the provisions of the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211.011, only a court of record may reverse, affirm or modify a decision of the zoning board of adjustments and appeals. 
Sec. 28.9. - Nonconforming uses and structures. 
28.9.1.   Intent of provisions:
A.  Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments thereto, there may exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawfully in existence and operating before this chapter was enacted, amended or otherwise made applicable to such lots, structures or uses, but which do not now conform to the regulations of the district in which they are located. It is the intent of this chapter to permit such nonconforming uses to continue, as long as the conditions within this section and other applicable sections of the chapter are met, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
B.  It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, and shall not be used as a basis for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
C.  Nonconforming uses are hereby declared to be incompatible with the permitted uses in the districts involved. 
28.9.2.   Nonconforming status:
A.  Any use, platted lot or structure which does not conform with the regulations of this zoning chapter on the effective date hereof or any amendment hereto, except as expressly provided in subsection C. below, shall be deemed a nonconforming use, platted lot or structure provided that: 
1.  Such use, platted lot or structure was in existence under and in compliance with the provisions of the immediately prior zoning ordinance; or 
2.  Such use, platted lot or structure was a lawful, nonconforming use, platted lot or structure under the immediately prior zoning ordinance; or 
3.  Such use, platted lot or structure was in existence at the time of annexation into the city, was a legal use of the land at such time, and has been in regular and continuous use since such time. 
B.  Any other use, platted lot or structure which does not conform with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located on the effective date of this chapter or any amendment hereto, and except as provided in subsection C. below, shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter, and the city shall be entitled to enforce fully the terms of this chapter with respect to such use, platted lot or structure. 
C.  The following types of platted lots shall be deemed conforming lots as lots of record, notwithstanding the fact that such lots do not meet the standards of this chapter in the zoning district in which they are located: 
1.  Any vacant lot that conformed to the city's zoning district regulations at the time that it was platted; or 
2.  Any lot occupied by a single-family dwelling authorized under the zoning district regulations in which the lot is located. 
D.  A lot of record that is nonconforming may be occupied by a single-family dwelling provided that the zoning district in which the lot of record is located allows a single-family land use. 
28.9.3.   Continuing lawful use of land and structures:
A.  A nonconforming use or structure may continue to be used, operated or occupied in accordance with the terms of the zoning regulations by which it was established, or in the case of annexed property, in accordance with the regulations under which it was created. 
B.  A nonconforming structure occupied by a nonconforming use may be re-occupied by a conforming use, following abandonment of the nonconforming use. 
28.9.4.   Abandonment of nonconforming uses and structures, and cessation of use of structures and land:
A.  If a nonconforming use or structure is abandoned, any future use of the premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, as amended, and with any other applicable city codes or ordinances that are in effect at the time the use is resumed or the structure is reoccupied. 
B.  A nonconforming use or structure shall be deemed "abandoned" in the following circumstances: 
1.  The use ceases to operate for a continuous period of six (6) months (i.e., one hundred eighty (180) calendar days); 
2.  The structure remains vacant for a continuous period of six (6) months (i.e., one hundred eighty (180) calendar days); or 
3.  In the case of a temporary use, the use is moved from the premises for any length of time. 
C.  If the use of any lot, tract or property that does not have a building on it and that is used for open/outside storage as of the effective date of this chapter (or amendment thereto) is made nonconforming by this chapter (or amendment thereto), then such storage use shall cease within six (6) months (i.e., one hundred eighty (180) calendar days) following the effective date of this chapter (or amendment thereto). The lot, tract or property shall be cleaned up and all trash, debris, stored items and vehicles, and other materials shall be removed from the premises such that the property is not a physical or visual nuisance to the public or to surrounding property owners. 
28.9.5.   Changing nonconforming uses:
A.  A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
B.  A nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use provided that, once such change is made, the use shall not be changed back to a nonconforming use. 
C.  A conforming use located in a nonconforming structure may be changed to another conforming use, but shall not be changed to a nonconforming use. 
28.9.6.   Expansion of nonconforming uses and structures:
A.  A nonconforming use may be extended throughout the structure in which it is located, provided that: 
1.  The structure or its premises shall not be enlarged or increased in height, in floor area or in land area to accommodate extension of the nonconforming use; 
2.  No alteration shall be made to the structure occupied by the nonconforming use, except those alterations that are required by law to preserve the integrity of the structure and alterations that would upgrade the quality, safety or aesthetic appeal of the structure; and 
3.  The number of dwelling units occupying the structure shall not exceed the number of dwelling units existing at the time the use became nonconforming. 
B.  A nonconforming use occupying a structure shall not be extended to occupy land outside the structure. 
C.  A nonconforming use or structure shall not be enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the time the use or structure became nonconforming, except to provide additional off-street parking or loading areas required by this chapter. 
28.9.7.   Reconstruction or repair of nonconforming structure:
A.  If more than sixty (60) percent of the total appraised value, as determined by the Grayson County Appraisal District, of a nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire, the elements, or some other cause, then the structure may be rebuilt only in conformity with the standards of this chapter. 
B.  If less than sixty (60) percent of the total appraised value, as determined by the Grayson County Appraisal District, of a nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire, the elements, or some other cause, then the structure may be reconstructed as it was before the partial destruction but only to its original dimensions and floor area, and provided that such reconstruction is completed within one (1) year (i.e., three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days) following the event that caused the partial destruction. If reconstruction is delayed by contested insurance claims, litigation, or some other similar cause, then the one-year reconstruction period may be extended by the planning director (or his/her designee). 
C.  If a nonconforming structure that is totally or partially destroyed was occupied by a nonconforming use at the time of such destruction, then the nonconforming use may be reestablished subject to the limitations on expansion set forth in subsection 28.9.6. above. 
D.  Any conforming structure that is totally or partially destroyed shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the standards of this chapter. 
E.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the upgrading, strengthening, repair or maintenance of any part of any structure, conforming or nonconforming, that is declared unsafe or uninhabitable by the proper authority, unless such repairs or maintenance exceeds fifty (50) percent of the structure's appraised value, as determined by the Grayson County Appraisal District. 
28.9.8.   Moving of nonconforming structure:
No nonconforming structure or building shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot, or to any other location or lot, unless every portion of such structure is in compliance with all the regulations of the zoning district wherein the structure is to be relocated. Such building relocation shall also require any permits required by the city, and may also require platting of the intended building site pursuant to the city's subdivision ordinance as well as concept plan, site plan or building permit plan approval per section 28.13 and 28.14 of this chapter. 
28.9.9.   Nonconforming lots:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the use of a lot that does not meet the minimum lot standards of the zoning district in which it is located, provided that the lot is zoned for the land use(s) intended and the lot was platted as a lot of record prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
28.9.10.   Right to proceed reserved:
Nothing contained in this section 28.9 is intended to alter any rights that may have accrued to proceed under prior regulations, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 245.001 to 245.006 and section 28.8 of this zoning chapter. 
28.9.11.   Payment of all indebtedness attributable to the subject property:
No person who owes delinquent taxes, delinquent paving assessments, impact fees, or any other delinquent debts or obligations to the City of Denison, and which are directly attributable to a piece of property shall be allowed to submit any application for any type of zoning change or plan review until the taxes, assessments, debts, or obligations directly attributable to said property and owed by the owner or previous owner thereof to the City of Denison shall have been first fully discharged by payment, or until an arrangement satisfactory to the city has been made for the payment of such debts or obligations. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to provide evidence or proof that all taxes, fees, etc. have been paid, or that other arrangements satisfactory to the city have been made for payment of said taxes, fees, etc. 
Sec. 28.10. - Amendments to zoning ordinance and districts, administrative procedures, and enforcement. 
28.10.1.   Declaration of policy and review criteria:
A.  The city declares the enactment of these regulations governing the use and development of land, buildings, and structures as a measure necessary to the orderly development of the community. Therefore, no change shall be made in these regulations or in the boundaries of the zoning districts except: 
1.  To correct any error in the regulations or map; 
2.  To recognize changed or changing conditions or circumstances in a particular locality; 
3.  To recognize changes in technology, the style of living, or manner of conducting business; or 
4.  To change the property to uses in accordance with the city's adopted comprehensive plan. 
B.  In making a determination regarding a requested zoning change, the planning and zoning commission and the city council shall consider the following factors: 
1.  Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change will be appropriate in the immediate area concerned, and their relationship to the general area and to the city as a whole; 
2.  Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing public schools, streets, water supply, sanitary sewers, and other utilities to the area; 
3.  The amount of vacant land currently classified for similar development in the vicinity and elsewhere in the city, and any special circumstances that may make a substantial part of such vacant land unavailable for development; 
4.  The recent rate at which land is being developed in the same zoning classification as the request, particularly in the vicinity of the proposed change; 
5.  How other areas designated for similar development will be, or are likely to be, affected if the proposed amendment is approved; 
6.  Whether the zoning petition is consistent with the current land use plan; and 
7.  Any other factors that will substantially affect the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. 
28.10.2.   Authority to amend ordinance:
A.  The city council may from time to time, after receiving a recommendation thereon by the planning and zoning commission and after public hearings required by law, amend, supplement, or change the regulations herein provided or the boundaries of the zoning districts specified on the zoning map. Any amendment to the zoning ordinance text or to zoning district boundaries may be ordered for consideration by the city council, may be initiated by the planning and zoning commission, or may be requested by the owner of real property (or his/her authorized representative). 
B.  Consideration for a change in any zoning district boundary line or special zoning regulation may be initiated only by the property owner or his/her authorized agent (proof of such authorization must be submitted with the zoning application, per subsection 28.10.3.), or by the planning and zoning commission or the city council on its own motion when it finds that public benefit will be derived from consideration of such matter. In the event the ownership stated on an application and that shown in city records are different, the applicant shall submit proof of ownership and verification that he/she is acting as an authorized agent for the property owner. 
C.  No person who owes delinquent taxes, delinquent paving assessments, impact fees, or any other delinquent debts or obligations to the City of Denison, and which are directly attributable to a piece of property requested for zoning shall be allowed to submit a zoning request until the taxes, assessments, debts, or obligations directly attributable to said property and owed by the owner or previous owner thereof shall have been first fully discharged by payment, or until an arrangement satisfactory to the city has been made for the payment of such debts or obligations. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to provide evidence or proof that all taxes have been paid. 
28.10.3.   Application:
A.  Each application for zoning, rezoning, or for a text amendment to a provision(s) of this zoning chapter, shall be made in writing on an application form available in the office of the planning director. The application shall be delivered to the city at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the public hearing before the planning and zoning commission, and by motion of the city council. An accurate metes and bounds description of the subject property (or other suitable legal description), a survey (i.e., drawing) exhibit, and other appropriate exhibits (i.e., site plans, maps, architectural elevations, information about proposed uses, etc.) that are determined necessary by the planning director (or his/her designee) shall also be submitted with the zoning application in order to ensure that the request is understood. 
B.  All zoning change requests involving real property (including PD requests) may be accompanied by a notarized statement verifying land ownership and, if applicable, authorization of land owner's agent to file the zoning change request. 
C.  Official submission date and completeness of application: Zoning applications which do not include all required information and materials will be considered incomplete in accordance with subsection 28.15A.2 of this chapter. 
28.10.4.   Notice requirements of zoning hearing:
A.  Published notice of the planning and zoning commission hearing for zoning amendment involving real property. For zoning and rezoning requests involving real property (including PD requests), the planning and zoning commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on each zoning application, as per applicable state law (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211, as amended). For proposed changes to zoning district boundaries (including rezoning requests), notice of the public hearing to occur before the planning and zoning commission shall be accomplished by publishing the purpose, time and place of the public hearing in the official newspaper of the city before the fifteenth calendar day prior to the date of the public hearing. 
B.  Personal notice of the planning and zoning commission hearing for zoning amendment involving real property. Written notice of the public hearing shall also be sent to all owners of property, as indicated by the most recently approved city tax roll, that is located within the area of application and within two hundred (200) feet of any property affected thereby, said written notice to be sent before the tenth calendar day prior to the date such hearing is held. Such notice may be served by using the last known address as listed on the most recently approved tax roll and depositing the notice, postage paid, in the United States mail. 
C.  Notice of the planning and zoning commission hearing for proposed changes to the text of the zoning ordinance. For requests involving proposed changes to the text of the zoning ordinance, notice of the planning and zoning commission hearing shall be accomplished by publishing the purpose, time and place of the public hearing in the official newspaper of the city before the fifteenth calendar day prior to the date of the public hearing. Changes in the ordinance text that do not change zoning district boundaries (i.e., which do not involve specific real property) do not require written notification to individual property owners. 
D.  Notice of the city council hearing for zoning amendments. Published notice of the city council public hearing for a zoning request, rezoning request or zoning ordinance text amendment request shall be given in accordance with subsection 28.10.4.A. Notification for the city council's public hearing may be accomplished simultaneously with the public notification given for the public hearing to be held before the planning and zoning commission. 
E.  Protests. For zoning and rezoning requests involving a proposal change to a regulation or zoning district boundary, a favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the city council shall be required to approve any change in zoning when written objections are received from twenty (20) percent or more of the land area covered by the proposed change, or of the land area within two hundred (200) feet of the subject property, in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.006. If a protest against such proposed zoning change has been filed with the city secretary, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more, either of the area of the land included in such a proposed change or those owners of property immediately adjacent to the subject property and extending two hundred (200) feet there from, such zoning change shall not become effective except by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the full city council. 
F.  Joint public hearings. The city council may hold a joint public hearing on a zoning, rezoning or zoning ordinance text amendment request with the planning and zoning commission, but the city council shall not take action on the request until it has received a final recommendation from the commission. Any such joint public hearing shall only be held after passage of an ordinance setting the hearing date, purpose for the hearing, and location of the hearing. The city council by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote may prescribe the type of notice to be given of the time and place of the joint public hearing, in which case the notice requirements of subsections A. through D. shall not apply. 
28.10.5.   Failure to appear:
Failure of the applicant or his/her authorized representative to appear before the planning and zoning commission or the city council for more than one (1) hearing without an approved delay by the planning director (or his/her designee) shall constitute sufficient grounds for the planning and zoning commission or the city council to table or deny the application unless the city is notified in writing by the applicant at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the hearing. 
28.10.6.   Planning and zoning commission consideration and recommendation:
A.  The planning and zoning commission shall function in accordance with applicable provisions in the city's Code of Ordinances. 
B.  The commission shall hold a public hearing on a zoning or rezoning request (including a PD request or a proposed text amendment to the zoning ordinance). After all public input has been received and the public hearing closed, the commission shall make its recommendations on the proposed zoning request stating its findings, its overall evaluation of the request, and its assessment regarding how the request relates to the city's comprehensive plan. The planning and zoning commission may, on its own motion or at the applicant's request, defer its decision/recommendation for not more than ninety (90) calendar days from the time the public hearing was first opened, or until it has had an opportunity to consider other information or proposed modifications to the request which may have a direct bearing thereon. If the commission elects to table the request, such tabling shall specifically state the time period of the tabling by citing the meeting date whereon the request will reappear on the commission's agenda, and further notice in the newspaper and to surrounding property owners shall not be required. 
C.  When the commission is ready to act upon the zoning request, it may recommend approval of the request as it was submitted by the applicant, approval of the request subject to certain conditions, or denial. The commission's recommendation for approval, approval with conditions, or denial will be automatically forwarded to the city council for a second public hearing thereon (see section 28.10.7). 
28.10.7.   City council consideration:
A.  Applications forwarded from the planning and zoning commission to the city council. Every zoning application which is recommended for approval, approval with conditions, or denial by the planning and zoning commission shall be automatically forwarded to the city council for setting and holding of a second public hearing thereon following appropriate public hearing notification as prescribed in subsection 28.10.4 above (i.e., publication in the newspaper, notices sent to property owners within two hundred (200) feet, etc.). 
B.  City council action on zoning, rezoning or text amendment requests. After a public hearing is held before the city council regarding the zoning application, the city council may approve the request in whole or in part, deny the request in whole or in part, table the application to a future meeting (and specifically citing the city council meeting to which it is tabled), or it may refer the application back to the planning and zoning commission for further study. 
1.  If the city council approves the request, then subsection 28.10.7.C. will apply. 
2.  If the city council denies the request, then no other zoning application may be filed for all or part of the subject tract of land (or for that portion of the zoning ordinance, in the case of a text amendment request submitted by a property owner or citizen) for a waiting period of six (6) months following the denial. In the instance that the request was initiated by the city and involved a proposed amendment to the text of the zoning ordinance, then there is no waiting period before the request can be reconsidered. The city council may, at its option, waive the six-month waiting period if, after due consideration of the matter at a scheduled and posted meeting, it is determined that denial of the request was based upon erroneous or omitted information, or if substantial new information pertaining to the request is discovered. 
C.  Final approval and ordinance adoption. Upon approval of the zoning request by the city council, the applicant shall submit all related material with revisions, if necessary, to the planning director (or his/her designee) for the preparation of the amending ordinance. The amending ordinance will not be prepared for adoption until a correct description and all required exhibits have been submitted to the planning director (or his/her designee) and the amending ordinance shall not be formally adopted until it is adopted by the city council, signed by the mayor, and attested by the city secretary. 
Sec. 28.11. - Conditional use permit. 
28.11.1.   Conditional use purpose:
The purpose of a conditional use permit is to allow the establishment of uses which may be suitable only in certain locations in a zoning district or only when subject to standards and conditions that assure compatibility with adjoining uses. Conditional uses are those uses which are generally compatible with the permitted land uses in a given zoning district, but which require individual review of their location, design and configuration and the imposition of conditions in order to ensure the appropriateness of the use at a particular location within a given zoning district. Only those uses that are enumerated as conditional uses in a particular zoning district shall be authorized as conditional uses. A conditional use permit may authorize variations from the standards in the zoning district only such as are necessary to meet the conditions attached to the permit. 
28.11.2.   Applicability:
A.  A conditional use permit is required to develop property within city limits for any use designated as a conditional use, or for the expansion of an existing conditional use. Conditional uses are of two (2) types. A Type I conditional use is a use that is identified as such in the use charts in section 28.49 of this zoning chapter for the zoning district in which the property is located. A Type II conditional use is a use that has been classified as such for a particular district as of the effective date of this chapter. Type II conditional uses are not listed in the use charts in section 28.49, may not be established within the designated district after the effective date of this zoning chapter and are subject to the conditions set forth in the ordinance adopting these zoning regulations. The conditional use permit application must be accompanied by a general site plan prepared in accordance with subsection 28.13.8. 
B.  A conditional use permit is not a zoning amendment and does not require a zoning map change. 
28.11.3.   Exemptions and exceptions:
None. 
28.11.4.   Official submission date and completeness of application:
Conditional use permit applications that do not include all required information and materials (as outlined below and per other city development review policies which may change from time to time) will be considered incomplete in accordance with subsection 28.15A.2 of this chapter. 
28.11.5.   Supplemental requirements:
The city's staff may require other information and data for specific conditional use permit applications. this data may include but is not limited to geologic information, water yields, flood data and/or hydrological studies, environmental information, traffic impact analysis, road capacities, market information, economic data for the proposed development, hours of operation, and similar information. Approval of a general site plan may establish conditions for construction based upon such information. 
28.11.6.   Effect of approval:
Approval of a conditional use permit authorizes the use of the property in accordance with the conditions of the permit. Approval of a conditional use permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use for which the permit is issued. No conditionally permitted use shall be enlarged, extended, increased in intensity or relocated unless an application is made for a new conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. Development of the use shall not be authorized until the applicant has secured all the permits and approvals required by this zoning chapter. 
28.11.7.   Prior approvals:
A.  A conditional use permit for a Type I conditional use shall not be approved unless the use is authorized in the zoning district in which the applicant's property is located and until a final subdivision plat, that includes the lot for which the conditional use permit is sought, has been approved. 
B.  Type II conditionals are not permitted unless they were in existence prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
28.11.8.   Application requirements:
A.  Responsible official. The planning director shall be the official responsible for processing a conditional use permit application. 
B.  Contents. An application for approval of a Type I conditional use permit shall contain the following information and documents: 
1.  An application for a conditional use permit with signatures of the owner or his/her designated representative if the applicant is not the owner of the subject property; 
2.  Application fee as established on the City of Denison schedule of fees; 
3.  Verification that all taxes and assessments on the subject property have been paid; 
4.  Copies of the required general site plan(s), including all information specified by this chapter and any applicable sections of the City of Denison subdivision ordinance, on 24? × 36? sheet(s) drawn to a known engineering scale (with dimensions labeled) that is large enough to be clearly legible and other required information, the quantity of which shall be determined by the planning director, or his/her designee; 
5.  Reduced copies (11? × 17?) of the required plan(s) as required by the planning director or his/her designee; 
6.  Any additional information/materials (such as plans, maps, exhibits, legal description of property, information about proposed uses, etc.) as deemed necessary by the planning director (or his/her designee) in order to ensure that the development request is understood; 
7.  A general site plan illustrating the following items: 
a.  The location of all existing structures on the subject property and on adjoining property; 
b.  Landscaping and/or fencing of yards and setback areas and proposed additions or changes; 
c.  Design and location of ingress and egress; 
d.  Off-street parking and loading spaces; 
e.  Height of all structures; 
f.  Proposed structures and uses; and 
g.  The location and types of all existing and proposed signs. 
8.  All information and illustrations necessary to show the nature and effect of proposed variations to the standards in the zoning district. 
28.11.9.   Processing of application and decision:
A.  Hearings. The planning director shall schedule successive public hearings before the planning and zoning commission and before the city council on the application for a conditional use permit. The hearings shall be conducted on the application in accordance with section 28.10 of this zoning chapter. 
B.  Commission's action. Following the initial public hearing, the commission shall make its recommendation to the city council for approval, approval with modifications or denial of the application for a conditional use permit. The commission also shall recommend whether any requested variations from the standards in the zoning district regulations should be granted. 
C.  Council decision. Upon receipt of the commission's recommendation, the city council shall approve, approve with modifications, or deny the application. The council also shall decide whether to grant any requested variations from the standards in the zoning district regulations. 
D.  No variances. The conditions imposed on the application shall not be subject to variances that otherwise could be granted by the board of adjustment and appeals, nor may conditions imposed by the city council subsequently be waived or varied by the board of adjustments and appeals. 
28.11.10.   Criteria for approval:
A.  Factors. When considering applications for a conditional use permit, the commission and the council shall evaluate the impact of the proposed conditional use on and its compatibility with surrounding properties and neighborhoods to ensure the appropriateness of the use at the particular location, and shall consider the extent to which: 
1.  The proposed use at the specified location is consistent with the policies embodied in the adopted comprehensive plan; 
2.  The proposed use is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the applicable zoning district regulations; 
3.  The proposed use is compatible with and preserves the character and integrity of adjacent development and neighborhood and includes improvements either on site or within the public rights-of-way to mitigate development-related adverse impacts, such as traffic, noise, odors, visual nuisances, drainage or other similar adverse effects to adjacent development and neighborhoods; 
4.  The proposed use does not generate pedestrian and vehicular traffic which will be hazardous or conflict with the existing and anticipated traffic in the neighborhood; 
5.  The proposed use incorporates roadway adjustments, traffic control devices or mechanisms, and access restrictions to control traffic flow or divert traffic as may be needed to reduce or eliminate development generated traffic on neighborhood streets; 
6.  The proposed use incorporates features to minimize adverse effects, including visual impacts, of the proposed conditional use on adjacent properties; and 
7.  The proposed use meets the standards for the zoning district, or to the extent variations from such standards have been requested, that such variations are necessary to render the use compatible with adjoining development and the neighborhood. 
B.  Conditions. The commission may recommend and the council may require such modifications in the proposed use and attach such conditions to the conditional use permit as are necessary to mitigate adverse effects of the proposed use and to carry out the spirit and intent of this section. Conditions include but are not limited to matters related to limitation of building size or height, increased open space, increased impervious surface, enhanced loading and parking requirements, additional landscaping and improvements including curbing and sidewalks, vehicular access and parking, placement or orientation of buildings and entryways, buffer yards, landscaping and screening, signage restrictions and design, maintenance of buildings and outdoor areas, duration of the permit and hours of operation. 
28.11.11.   Expiration and revocation:
A.  Time of expiration. A conditional use permit shall expire if: 
1.  A building permit for the use has not been approved within one (1) year of the date of approval of the permit; 
2.  The building permit subsequently expires; 
3.  The use has been discontinued or abandoned for a period exceeding six (6) months; or 
4.  A termination date attached to the permit has passed. 
B.  Revocation. The city council may revoke any conditional use permit that is in violation of any condition of use imposed under subsection 28.11.10. 
28.11.12.   Abandonment and replacement of conditional use:
A.  In determining whether a conditional use has been discontinued or abandoned, the city shall apply the standards in subsection 28.9.4 of this zoning chapter applicable to a nonconforming use. 
B.  A conditional use that has been destroyed in whole or the part may be replaced subject to the same standards and conditions applicable to the original use. 
Sec. 28.12. - Cluster development plan. 
28.12.1.   Purpose:
The purpose of a cluster development plan shall be to authorize the use of residential density standards in substitution for minimum lot size standards for residential uses. 
28.12.2.   Applicability:
A cluster development plan shall be required inside the city limits or where authorized by a development agreement, whenever the property owner seeks authorization to have subsequent development applications reviewed under residential density standards in lieu of minimum lot size standards, as authorized in the RD or UD Zoning Districts. 
28.12.3.   Effect:
Approval of a cluster development plan authorizes the property owner to submit a plat application for the property subject to the cluster development plan. 
28.12.4.   Sequence of approvals:
A.  Prior approvals. An application for a cluster development shall not be approved unless all legislative applications, including the establishment of an RD, or UD Zoning District, have been approved, or as stated in B. below. 
B.  Accompanying applications. The application for a cluster development plan may be included with an application to rezone a piece of property to an RD, or UD zoning district where a cluster development is proposed or prior to plat approval. 
28.12.5.   Application requirements:
A.  Responsible official. The director of planning shall be the responsible official for processing a cluster development plan. 
B.  Contents. All cluster development plans shall be prepared by a qualified civil engineer, land planner, or other qualified professional and it shall show how the site will be developed. To ensure the submission of adequate information, the city is hereby empowered to maintain and distribute a separate list of specific requirements for the review of cluster development plan applications. Among other requirements a site inventory shall be required to document existing trees and woodland areas. 
28.12.6.   Processing of application and decision:
A.  Hearing and notification. The director of planning shall schedule a public hearing before the planning and zoning commission on the application for approval of a cluster development plan. 
B.  Commission's action. The planning and zoning commission shall conduct a public hearing on the application in accordance with section 28.10 of this chapter. The commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the application for a cluster development plan. 
C.  Appeals. See subsection 28.12.8 for appeal and extension process. 
28.12.7.   Criteria for approval:
A.  Factors. The planning and zoning commission, if applicable, or the city council on appeal, shall apply the following factors in taking action on the cluster development plan application: 
1.  The cluster development plan meets the density standards (dwelling units per acre) as specified in the RD or UD Base Zoning Districts as applicable. 
2.  The cluster development plan is consistent with other zoning district regulations. 
3.  The cluster development plan meets the development standards specified in section 28.61 of this chapter. 
B.  Conditions. The planning and zoning commission, or the council on appeal, may impose such conditions on approval of the cluster development plan as are necessary to assure conformity with the conditions and requirements of this chapter and compatibility with existing or future adjoining uses and neighborhood character. 
28.12.8.   Appeals:
A.  The applicant or property owner may appeal a denied cluster development plan to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal in the office of the director of planning, no later than ten (10) calendar days after the date upon which the planning and zoning commission denied the cluster development plan. 
B.  The notice of appeal shall set forth in clear and concise fashion the basis for the appeal. The city council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date upon which the notice of appeal was filed. 
C.  The city council may affirm or may change the decision of the planning and zoning commission by a simple majority vote. 
28.12.9.   Expiration and revocation:
A.  Expiration. If a final plat has not been approved for a portion of the land subject to the cluster development plan within two (2) years from the date of approval of a cluster development plan, the cluster development plan shall lapse and no application for plat approval, on another phase of the development, shall be accepted for filing thereafter unless the cluster development plan is reinstated. 
B.  Extension and reinstatement. The planning and zoning commission may extend the time of expiration for or reinstate a cluster development plan for a period not to exceed one (1) year, in accordance with the following procedures: 
1.  Extension procedures. A permit holder may apply for an extension of the expiration date for a cluster development plan for a period not to exceed one (1) year, or for a second extension of the expiration date of the permit for a period not to exceed one (1) additional year. No more than two (2) extensions shall be granted. The application must be in writing and set forth the reasons why the applicant is unable to obtain approval of the final plat before the plan is due to expire. Such an extension may be granted only by the planning and zoning, commission following a public hearing. In determining whether to grant a request for extension, the planning and zoning commission shall take into account the reasons for the requested extension, the ability of the applicant to comply with any conditions attached to the original approval, whether extension is likely to result in timely completion of the project, and the extent to which any newly adopted regulations should be applied to the proposed development. 
2.  Conditions. In granting an extension, the planning and zoning commission may impose such conditions as are needed to assure that the land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the public interest is served. In granting a subsequent extension request, the planning and zoning may require that one (1) or more newly adopted development standard(s) be applied to the development subject to the extension request. 
3.  Reinstatement. An applicant may request reinstatement of an expired cluster development plan by filing a written request with the responsible official within thirty (30) days of the date of expiration. The request for reinstatement shall include a statement of the reasons why the cluster plan should be reinstated. A request for reinstatement shall be processed and decided in the manner provided for an extension of an expiration period as prescribed in subsections 28.12.5 and 28.12.6 above. The cluster development plan shall not be reinstated for more than two (2) years from the original date of expiration. 
4.  Effect of decision on extension or reinstatement. The granting of an extension or reinstatement request for a cluster development plan also extends or reinstates any other permits otherwise deemed expired pursuant to this section 28.12. The denial of an extension or reinstatement results in the immediate lapse of the plan. Thereafter, the permit holder shall file a new application for a cluster development plan before undertaking any activity authorized by the lapsed cluster development plan. 
Sec. 28.13. - Site plan requirements. 
28.13.1.   Purpose:
This section establishes a review process for all non-residential, multi-family and townhouse development that includes a concept plan (where required) and a site plan. The purpose of this process is to: 
1.  Ensure compliance with all applicable adopted city ordinances and regulations prior to construction. 
2.  Promote safe, efficient and harmonious use of land. 
3.  Protect and enhance the city's environmental and aesthetic qualities. 
4.  Integrate storm water management planning into the site planning process. 
5.  Ensure adequate public facilities to serve development. 
6.  Aid evaluation and coordination of land subdivision. 
28.13.2.   Applicability:
The site plan review process shall apply to the following types of development: 
1.  Development within a planned development district, except for single-family detached residential subdivisions. 
2.  Non-residential development, except as provided in subsection 28.13.3. 
3.  Multi-family residential development. 
4.  Single-family residence attached (townhouse) development. 
5.  Manufactured/Mobile home parks. 
6.  Parking lot development, reconstruction, or restriping (only if the angle of parking is changed) of more than twenty (20) spaces. 
7.  Private amenities and golf courses that are part of a single-family residential development. 
8.  Any increase that is greater than thirty (30) percent of the existing building square footage for an existing non-residential structure or a multi-family development. 
28.13.3.   Exemptions:
The following types of development are exempted from the requirements of this section: 
1.  Agricultural buildings. 
2.  Temporary buildings, including but not limited to model homes and construction and sales trailers associated with active non-residential and residential development projects. 
3.  Single-family detached residential homes. 
28.13.4.   Submission of applications and fees:
Site plan applications must be submitted to the planning department on or before an official submittal date as published by the department. City council shall establish a schedule of fees as required to recoup costs related to the administration of this section. The planning department may establish and maintain procedures, forms, requirements and standards for the content, format and number of copies of information that will constitute a complete application for concept plans and site plans. 
28.13.5.   Building permit and certificate of occupancy:
No building permit shall be issued until a site plan, if required, and all other required engineering and construction plans are first approved by the city. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all construction and development conforms to the approved site plan and engineering and construction plans. 
28.13.6.   Concept plan:
A concept plan is the initial plan in the site plan review process and portrays the general site conditions and development concept for the property. The purpose of the plan is to: 
1.  Ensure compliance with applicable development regulations and previously approved, valid plans affecting development of the property. 
2.  Determine the approximate placement, configuration and height of buildings. 
3.  Determine the design of public street improvements and rights-of-way, and the design and location of drives, aisles and parking. 
4.  Determine location of open space and public parks. 
5.  Delineate development phasing. 
6.  Determine the preliminary design of drainage facilities and utilities. 
7.  Other purposes related to the establishment of a planned development district. 
28.13.7.   Applicability:
A concept plan is required for: 
1.  All residential and non-residential development proposed as part of a planned development district, in accordance with article III, section 28.43. 
2.  All non-residential and multi-family development within the Lakeside Development District, in accordance with article III, section 28.27.2. 
28.13.8.   Concept plan requirements:
The concept plan shall include existing and proposed site conditions and improvements as follows: 
1.  Site boundaries and dimensions, site acreage and square footage and approximate distance to the nearest cross street. 
2.  Location map, north arrow, scale and title block. 
3.  Topography at five-foot contours or less. 
4.  Natural features including tree masses, floodplains, drainage ways and creeks. 
5.  Land use onsite and on adjacent properties. 
6.  The approximate location and shape of building sites, including maximum building intensity, density, height and use. 
7.  Public streets, alleys and private drives and fire lanes with pavement widths, rights-of-way, median openings, turn lanes and driveways (including those on adjacent property) with approximate dimensions. 
8.  Propose parking areas and parking requirements. 
9.  Proposed dedications and reservations of land for public use including but not limited to rights-of-way, easements, park land, open space drainage ways, floodplains and facility sites. 
10.  Phases of development, including delineation of areas, building sites, land use and improvements to be constructed in independent phases and the sequence of development. 
28.13.9.   Standards of approval:
The planning and zoning commission (and city council, if the plan is associated with the establishment of a planned development district in accordance with section 28.43) may approve, conditionally approve, table or deny a concept plan based on: 
1.  Conformance with the comprehensive plan and adopted design studies. 
2.  Conformance to the zoning ordinance and other applicable development regulations. 
3.  Impact on the site's natural resources and effect on adjacent area, property and land uses. 
28.13.10.   Effect:
Approval of a concept plan by the planning and zoning commission and where required, city council, constitutes authorization by the city for the property owner to submit an application for approval of a site plan subject to compliance with any condition attached to the approval of the concept plan. While the concept plan remains valid, the location of streets, drives, median openings, and curb cuts shall be fixed and any subsequently prepared plan for an adjacent property or property on the opposite side of a public street shall coordinate its circulation system with the earlier approved concept plan. Except when authorized, a concept plan may not be used to approve a variance to development regulations. Where an approved plan conflicts with an adopted regulation and no variance or exception is expressly approved, the regulation shall apply. Where approved, valid concept plans delineate areas as separate phases of development, each phase may be independently planned and developed in accordance with the concept plan and applicable regulations. 
28.13.11.   Lapse:
Concept plan approval shall expire two (2) years following the date of original approval, at the end of which time the applicant must have submitted and received approval of a site plan. If a site plan is not approved within two (2) years, the concept plan approval is null and void. If site plan approval is only for a portion of the property, the approval of the concept plan for the remaining property shall be null and void. The applicant shall be required to submit a new concept plan for review and approval subject to the regulations in place at that time. 
28.13.12.   Site plan:
A site plan is the final plan required in the site plan approval process. The site plan is a detailed plan of the public and private improvements to be constructed. The purpose of the plan is to: 
1.  Ensure compliance with applicable development regulations and previously approved, valid plans affecting development of the property. 
2.  Coordinate and document the design of public and private improvements to be constructed. 
3.  Coordinate the subdivision of land, including the granting of easements, development agreements and the provision of surety. 
28.13.13.   Applicability:
An approved, valid site plan shall be required prior to the approval of any construction plan and building permit for development defined in subsection 28.13.2. 
28.13.14.   Site plan requirements:
The site plan shall include existing and proposed site conditions and improvements as follows: 
1.  Boundaries and dimensions, lot lines, site acreage and square footage and approximate distance to the nearest cross street. 
2.  Location map, north arrow, scale and title block. 
3.  Topography at one-foot contours or less, reference to sea level datum. 
4.  Natural features including tree masses and anticipated tree loss, floodplains, drainage ways and creeks. 
5.  Land use onsite and on adjacent properties. 
6.  Building locations and footprints, including dimensions, size, coverage, height, building intensity, building lines and setbacks, and use. 
7.  Public streets, alleys and private drives and fire lanes with pavement widths, rights-of-way, median openings, turn lanes and driveways (including those on adjacent property) with approximate dimensions and radii. 
8.  Parking areas and structures, including the number and layout of standard spaces, handicapped spaces, and loading areas with typical dimensions and surface type. 
9.  Access easements and offsite parking. 
10.  Dumpster and trash compactor locations and screening. 
11.  Proposed dedications and reservations of land for public use including but not limited to rights-of-way, easements, park land, open space drainage ways, floodplains and facility sites. 
12.  Screening walls, fences, living screens, retaining walls, headlight screens and service area screens, including height and type of construction and/or planting specifications. 
13.  Landscaping and open space areas with dimensions and total square footage. 
14.  Fire hydrants, water meter locations and sizes. 
15.  Inlets, culverts, and other drainage structures onsite and immediately adjacent to the site. 
28.13.15.   Additional requirements:
In addition to meeting the requirements for site plan approval, the following approvals may be necessary prior to authorization for development: 
1.  Concept plan and preliminary plat approvals. 
2.  Engineering plans. 
3.  Traffic impact analysis. 
4.  Landscape and irrigation plans. 
5.  Façade plans. 
6.  Other approvals as required by ordinance. 
28.13.16.   Standards of approval:
The planning and zoning commission shall consider all applications for site plan approval for properties located within planned development districts and the Austin Avenue, Morton Street, and Highway Oriented overlay districts, and may approve, conditionally approve or deny such applications. The planning department may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the site plans submitted for development in all other zoning districts and areas of the city. Actions of the commission and the Department on site plans shall be based on the criteria below: 
1.  Conformance with the zoning ordinance and other applicable regulations and previously approved, valid plans for the property. 
2.  The design and location of off-street parking and loading facilities to ensure that all such spaces are usable and are safely and conveniently arranged. 
3.  The width, grade and location of street designed to accommodate prospective traffic and to provide access for firefighting and emergency equipment to buildings. 
4.  The use of landscaping and screening to provide adequate buffers to shield lights, noise, movement or activities from adjacent properties when necessary, and to complement the design and location of buildings and be integrated into the overall site design. 
5.  The location, size and configuration of open space areas to insure they are suitable for intended recreation and conservation uses. 
6.  The adequacy of streets, water, drainage, sewerage facilities, garbage disposal and other utilities necessary for essential services to residents and occupants. 
7.  Consistency with the comprehensive plan. 
28.13.17.   Effect:
Approval of a site plan is the city's authorization to apply for approval of a final plat and engineering plans. During the site plan's period of validity, the city shall not apply any additional requirements concerning building placement, streets, drives, parking, landscaping or screening. Site plan approval is separate and distinct from other permits and approvals as may be required by the city and other regulatory agencies. Approval of a site plan shall not affect other applicable regulations concerning development and land use. Except where authorized by ordinance, a site plan shall not be used to approve a variance to development regulations. Where an approved plan conflicts with an adopted regulation and no variance or exception is expressly approved, the regulation shall apply. 
28.13.18.   Lapse:
The approval of a site plan shall be effective for a period of two (2) years from the date of approval by the planning and zoning commission, city council or staff, at the end of which time the applicant must have submitted and received approval of a final plat, engineering plans and building permits. If the final plat, engineering plans and permits are not approved, the site plan approval is null and void. If a final plat, engineering plans and permits have been approved only for a portion of the property and for improvements, the site plan for the remaining property and/or improvements shall be null and void. The applicant shall be required to submit a new site plan for review and approval subject to the then existing regulations. Site plan approval shall expire upon completion of the improvements shown on the plan. Subsequent additional development, site modifications and redevelopment shall be permitted in accordance with section 29.13.19. 
28.13.19.   Amendments:
At any time following the approval of a concept plan or site plan and before the lapse of such approval, the property owner may request an amendment. Amendments may be classified as major or minor. Minor amendments shall include corrections of distances and dimensions, adjustments of building configuration and placement, realignment of drives and aisles, layout of parking, adjustments to open space, landscaping, and screening, and changes to utilities and service locations which do not substantially change the original plan. The planning and zoning commission must approve major amendments to concept plans and site plans which were initially approved by the planning and zoning commission. Other major and all minor amendments to site plans may be approved by the planning department. The planning department may approve or disapprove amendments. Disapproval may be appealed to the planning and zoning commission. 
28.13.20.   Extension and reinstatement procedure:
Sixty (60) days prior to or following the lapse of approval of a concept plan or site plan, the property owner may petition the city to extend or reinstate the approval. The planning and zoning commission must consider extension and reinstatement of concept plans and site plans which were initially approved by the commission. The planning department shall consider extension and reinstatement of other site plans; however, if the request is denied by the department the property owner may appeal the decision to the planning and zoning commission. The commission and planning department shall consider the reasons for the lapse, the ability of the property owner to comply with any conditions attached to the original approval, and the extent to which newly adopted regulations shall apply to the plans. The property owner's request may be approved or denied. If the request is denied the property owner must submit a new application for approval. 
28.13.21.   Appeals:
The planning and zoning commission's denial of a concept plan or site plan may be appealed to the city council. The planning department's denial of a site plan may be appealed to the planning and zoning commission. Appeals must be made in writing to the planning department no later than ten (10) days after the commission's action or the planning department's denial. The notice of appeal shall set forth the basis for the appeal. The planning and zoning commission may affirm or change the decision of the planning department by a simple majority vote. 
(Ord. No. 4924, § 2(2.01), 12-11-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4924, § 2(2.01), adopted December 11, 2017, repealed the former § 28.13, and enacted a new § 28.13 as set out herein. The former § 28.13 pertained to similar subject matter. 
Sec. 28.14. - Building permits; certificates of occupancy and compliance. 
28.14.1.   Building permits required:
A.  Applicability and effect: 
1.  Applicability. An application for a building permit is required within the city limits, or where authorized by a development agreement, in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, prior to placement, construction or alternation of a building or structure. 
2.  Effect. Approval of an application for a building permit authorizes the property owner to construct, alter or place a structure on the lot, tract or parcel. Approval of an application for a building permit also authorizes the property owner, upon completion of a structure intended for human occupancy, to make application for a certificate of occupancy. 
B.  Application requirements: 
1.  Responsible official. The building official (or his/her designee) shall be the responsible official for a building permit. 
2.  Contents. An application for approval of a building permit shall be prepared in accordance with the procedures as established by the building official (or his/her designee). 
C.  Decision: 
1.  Decision. The building official (or his/her designee) shall approve or deny the application for a building permit. 
2.  Time for decision. The building official shall determine whether the application for a building permit is complete and shall notify the applicant in the manner provided in sections 28.10 and 28.15A and 28.15B of this chapter. 
a.  If the application is complete, the building official shall approve or deny the application not later than the forty-fifth day after the date the application is submitted. 
b.  If the application is incomplete, the building official shall approve or deny the application not later than the thirtieth day after the date the notice of incompleteness is mailed, unless the applicant and the city enter into a written agreement for a deadline for granting or denying the application. 
D.  Appeals: 
1.  Any interested person may appeal the building official's (or his/her designee's) decision on the building permit application to the zoning board of adjustments and appeals in accordance with section 28.8 of this zoning chapter, other than an appeal arising under the building code or other construction codes included or adopted by the City of Denison, in which case such appeal shall be made to the appropriate board or commission as specified in the appropriate code. The zoning board of adjustment and appeals shall decide the appeal in accordance with section 28.8 of this zoning chapter. 
E.  Criteria for approval: 
1.  The building official (or his/her designee) shall apply the following criteria in deciding the application for a building permit: 
a.  The application generally conforms to all prior approved development applications for the property and any variance petition authorizing variation from the standards otherwise applicable to the permit. 
b.  The location of the structure on the property is in accordance with all prior approved development applications. 
c.  The proposed plan for construction or alteration conforms to the building code and other applicable construction codes adopted by the city. 
d.  All applicable fees, including impact fees, if applicable, have been paid. 
F.  Expiration and extension: 
1.  Expiration. A building permit expires if construction, alteration or placement of the structure authorized by the permit has not commenced on the property within six (6) months after final approval of the permit. The building permit shall expire within one (1) year of the date of approval if a certificate of occupancy for the structure has not been approved, or if the structure is not intended for human occupation, the construction, alteration or placement of the structure on the property has not been completed, within such period. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit chief building official from imposing different or distinct time limits that are imposed and appearing on the face of the building permit. 
2.  Extension and Reinstatement. Application for extension and reinstatement may be of a building permit may be made to the city's building appeals board and the zoning board of adjustment. 
G.  Revocation of building permit: 
1.  If the building official (or his/her designee) determines, based upon his/her inspection or investigation, that there are reasonable grounds for revocation of an approved building permit, the building official is hereby authorized and directed to revoke any such permit. Circumstances that warrant revocation of an approved building permit shall include but not be limited to the following: 
a.  A material mistake was made in approving the building permit application; 
b.  Approval of the building permit application was procured on the basis of material misrepresentations or fraud on the part of the applicant; or 
c.  Construction activities being undertaken on the land subject to the building permit are not in conformity with terms of the approved building permit application. 
2.  The applicant and any interested parties shall be given notice of the revocation of a building permit. Said written notice shall be mailed via certified mail and shall state the reasons for the revocation of the building permit. 
3.  In rendering its decision whether to revoke the approved building permit, the decision-maker shall determine whether the activity authorized under the original approved application complies with the terms, conditions and requirements of such approval. The decision-maker may revoke the application, affirm it, or affirm it with attached conditions that assure that the terms; conditions and requirements of the application shall be met. 
4.  A decision to revoke an approved development application shall become final ten (10) days after the date notice is mailed to the applicant, unless appealed. Appeal from the decision to revoke the approved building permit application shall be in accordance with the procedures specified in subsection 28.14.1.D. 
28.14.2.   Certificate of occupancy:
A.  A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any of the following: 
1.  Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered (including renovation or rehabilitation of residential structures; 
2.  Change in use of an existing building to a use of a different classification; and 
3.  Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification. 
B.  No such use, or change of use, shall take place until a certificate of occupancy therefor shall have been issued by the building official. 
C.  A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the building departments office and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person in accordance with state laws governing public records. 
D.  Procedure for new or altered buildings: Written application for a certificate of occupancy for a new building or for an existing building that is to be altered shall be made at the same time as the application for the building permit for such building. Said certificate shall be issued after the building official (or his/her designee) orders the building or structure inspected and finds no violations of the provisions of this chapter or other regulations that are enforced by the building official, or his/her designee. Said certificate shall be issued by the building official (or his/her designee) after the erection or alteration of such building or part thereof has been completed in conformity with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
E.  Procedure for vacant land or a change in building use: Written application for a certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant land, a change in the use of land or a change in the use of a building, or for a change from a nonconforming use to a conforming use, shall be made to the building official, or his/her designee. If the proposed use is a conforming use, as herein provided, written application shall be made to said building official, or his/her designee. If the proposed use is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the certificate of occupancy shall be issued after the application for same has been made and all required inspections are completed and approved by the building official or his/her designee. 
F.  Contents of certificate of occupancy: Every certificate of occupancy shall contain the following: 
(1)  Building permit number; 
(2)  The address of the building; 
(3)  The name and address of the owner; 
(4)  A description of that portion of the building for which the certificate is issued; 
(5)  A statement that the described portion of the building has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of the city's building codes for the particular group and division of occupancy; 
(6)  The name of the building official (or his/her designee); 
(7)  Use(s) allowed; 
(8)  Maximum number of persons/occupants; and 
(9)  Issue date of certificate of occupancy. 
G.  Posting of certificate of occupancy: The certificate of occupancy shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises and shall not be removed except by the building official, or his/her designee. 
H.  Revocation of certificate of occupancy: The building official (or his/her designee) may, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy issued under the provisions of this chapter whenever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or when it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provision of this chapter or the building code and other codes adopted by the city, and any amendments thereto. 
28.14.3.   Completion of buildings in progress:
Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building, the foundation for which has been completely constructed as of the effective date of this chapter, and the remaining construction of which shall have been completed within one (1) year (i.e., three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days) following the effective date of this chapter. In addition, any nonresidential building or structure for which a building permit has been approved by the city not more than one (1) year (i.e., three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days) prior to the effective date of this chapter may be constructed according to the terms of that building permit. 
Sec. 28.15A. - Complete application. 
28.15A.1.   Definitions: For purposes of sections 28.15A, B and C:
A.  Zoning permit means any of the following types of applications, approval of which was granted pursuant to chapter 28 of the City Code of Ordinances, as amended, or any predecessor zoning ordinance, whether or not such permits were issued in conjunction with or as a condition of approval of any other permits: site plans for special use permits; in planned development districts, preliminary development plans or concept plans, and comprehensive site plans; zoning permits; landscaping or site plans within planned parkway development areas or corridor development plan areas; any application that was approved subject to a schematic drawing illustrating the location, arrangement, orientation or design of land uses or improvements on a site intended for development; or a building permit. 
B.  Initial permit application means the first application for approval required by the city to initiate a development project, and includes an application for a zoning permit or preliminary plat. 
C.  Subsequent application means an application for approval of any zoning permit, certificate of occupancy, or preliminary or final plat that is required to complete or further the development for which a prior zoning permit was approved, and that is consistent with the prior zoning permit. 
28.15A.2.   Completeness determination:
Every application for a zoning permit authorized by this zoning chapter shall be subject to a determination of completeness by the official responsible for processing the application. No application shall be accepted by the responsible official for processing unless it is accompanied by all documents required by and prepared in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
28.15A.3.   Incompleteness as grounds for denial:
The processing of an application by any city official or employee prior to the time the application is determined to be complete shall not be binding on the city as the official acceptance of the application for filing, and the incompleteness of the application shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the application. A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of this zoning chapter. 
28.15A.4.   Pre-application conference:
A property owner may request a pre-application conference with the administrator for purposes of identifying requirements that are applicable to a zoning permit. The request shall be made in writing on a form prepared by the administrator and shall state that any proposed development concept discussed at the pre-application conference is not intended as a plan of development or application for zoning permit approval. 
28.15A.5.   Responsible official:
A determination of completeness shall be made by the official responsible for processing the application in writing not later than the tenth business day after the date the application is submitted to the official. The determination shall specify the documents or other information needed to complete the application and shall state the date the application will expire if the documents or other information is not provided. 
28.15A.6.   When deemed complete:
An initial permit application that is filed on or after April 28, 2005, or any subsequent application filed after approval of such initial zoning permit, shall be deemed complete on the eleventh business day after the application has been received, if the applicant has not otherwise been notified that the application is incomplete. 
28.15A.7.   Time for completing application:
If an application is not completed on or before the forty-fifth day after the application is submitted to the official responsible for processing the application in accordance with the official's written notification, the application will be deemed to have expired and it will be returned to the applicant together with any accompanying documents. 
28.15A.8.   Sequence of applications:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter 28 to the contrary, an application for a zoning permit, or an application to the board of adjustment for a variance or special exception, shall not be considered complete unless accompanied by a copy of the zoning ordinance or other certification verifying that the proposed use for which the application is submitted is authorized by the zoning district in which the property is located. No application for a building permit shall be considered complete unless accompanied by an approved site plan or other zoning permit that applies standards to the property required by this chapter 28. 
28.15A.9.   Vested rights:
For purposes of determining a vested rights petition pursuant to section 28.15B, no vested rights accrue solely from the filing of an application that has expired pursuant to this section, or from the filing of a complete initial application that is subsequently denied. 
28.15A.10.   Official filing date:
The time period established by state law or this zoning chapter for processing or deciding an application shall commence on the date that a complete application has been accepted for filing, which date shall be deemed the official filing date. 
Sec. 28.15.B. - Determination of vested rights. 
28.15B.1.   Vested rights petition:
A.  Purpose. The purpose of a vested rights petition is to determine whether one (1) or more standards of this zoning chapter should not be applied to a zoning permit application by operation of state law, or whether certain permits are subject to expiration. 
B.  Applicability. A vested rights petition may be filed with an application for a zoning permit. A vested rights petition may not be filed with a request to amend the text of the zoning regulations or the zoning map, or with a request for approval of a special use permit. A vested rights petition also may be filed to prevent expiration of certain zoning permits pursuant to section 28.15C. 
C.  Effect. Upon granting of a vested rights petition in whole or in part, the zoning permit application shall be decided in accordance with the standards specified in the relief order based on prior ordinance requirements or development standards, or the permit otherwise subject to expiration pursuant to section 28.15C shall be extended. 
28.15B.2.   Petition requirements:
A.  Who may petition. A vested rights petition may be filed by a property owner or the owner's authorized agents, including the applicant, with any zoning permit application, or by the holder of a permit subject to expiration pursuant to section 28.15C. 
B.  Form of petition. The vested rights petition shall allege that the petitioner has a vested right for some or all of the land subject to the zoning permit application under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245 or successor statute, or pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.002 or successor statute, that requires the city to review and decide the application under standards in effect prior to the effective date of the currently applicable standards. The petition shall include the following information and documents: 
1.  A narrative description of the grounds for the petition; 
2.  A copy of each approved or pending zoning permit or other development application which is the basis for the contention that the city may not apply current standards to the zoning permit application which is the subject of the petition; 
3.  The date of submittal of the application for the permit, or of a development plan pursuant to which the permit was subsequently filed, if different from the official filing date; 
4.  The date the project for which the application for the zoning permit was submitted was commenced; 
5.  Identification of all standards otherwise applicable to the zoning permit application from which relief is sought; 
6.  Identification of the standards which the petitioner contends apply to the zoning permit application; 
7.  Identification of any current standards which petitioner agrees can be applied to the zoning permit application at issue; 
8.  A narrative description of how the application of current standards affect proposed use of the land, landscaping or tree preservation, open space, or park dedication, lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage or building size shown on the development application for which the petition is filed; 
9.  A copy of any prior vested rights determination involving the same land; and 
10.  Where the petitioner alleges that a zoning permit subject to expiration under section 28.15C should not be terminated, a description of the events, including any zoning permit or other development applications on file that should prevent such termination. 
C.  Time for filing petition. A vested rights petition shall be filed with a zoning permit application for which a vested right is claimed, except that the petition may be filed before the date of expiration of any permit subject to expiration under section 28.15C. Where more than one (1) zoning permit application is authorized to be filed by this zoning chapter, the petition may be filed simultaneously for each application. 
28.15B.3.   Processing of petition and decision:
A.  Responsible official. The official responsible for processing the zoning permit application shall process the vested rights petition. A copy of the petition shall be forwarded to the city attorney following acceptance. 
B.  Official's decision. If the responsible official is the decision maker on the zoning permit application, the official shall determine whether the relief requested in the vested rights petition should be granted in whole or in part, and shall formulate a written report summarizing the official's reasoning and setting forth the decision on the petition, which shall be delivered to the applicant within ten (10) days of the date the vested rights petition is accepted for filing. 
C.  Decision by commission on petition. If the zoning permit application is to be decided by the planning and zoning commission, the planning and zoning administrator shall submit a report in the form of a recommendation to the decision maker. The commission shall render a decision on the vested rights petition in conjunction with its decision on the zoning permit application. 
D.  Appeal of decision on petition. The petitioner or any interested person may appeal the responsible official's or the commission's decision on the vested rights petition within ten (10) working days of the date of such decision to the city council. An appeal under this subsection stays acceptance of filing of any related development applications. 
E.  Decision by city council. Where the city council is the final decision maker on the zoning permit application, for any petition submitted pursuant to section 28.15C, or upon appeal, the city council shall decide the vested rights petition. The request must be accompanied by a waiver of the time for decision on the application imposed under this zoning chapter pending decision by the council, which shall stay further proceedings on the application. The council shall decide the petition, after considering the responsible official's report and any decision by the planning and zoning commission with its decision on the zoning permit application or within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the responsible official's report, or the notice of appeal, whichever is later. 
28.15B.4.   Action on petition and order:
A.  Action on the petition. The decision-maker on the vested rights petition may take any of the following actions: 
1.  Deny the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the zoning permit application shall be reviewed and decided under currently applicable standards; 
2.  Grant the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the zoning permit application shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with the standards contained in identified prior regulations; or 
3.  Grant the relief requested in part, and direct that certain identified current standards shall be applied to the zoning permit application, while standards contained in identified prior regulations also shall be applied; or 
4.  For petitions filed pursuant to section 28.15C, determine whether the zoning permit(s) should be terminated, or specify the expiration date or the conditions of expiration for such permit(s). 
B.  Order on petition. The responsible official's report and each decision on the vested rights petition shall be memorialized in an order identifying the following: 
1.  The nature of the relief granted, if any; 
2.  The approved or filed zoning permit or other development application(s) upon which relief is premised under the petition; 
3.  Current standards which shall apply to the zoning permit application for which relief is sought; 
4.  Prior standards which shall apply to the zoning permit application for which relief is sought, including any procedural standards; 
5.  The statutory exception or other grounds upon which relief is denied in whole or in part on the petition; 
C.  For petitions filed pursuant to section 28.15C, determine whether the zoning permit(s) should be terminated, and specify the expiration date or the conditions of expiration for the permit(s). 
28.15B.5.   Criteria for approval:
A.  Factors. The decision maker shall decide the vested rights petition based upon the following factors: 
1.  The nature and extent of prior zoning permit or other development applications filed or approved for the land subject to the petition; 
2.  Whether any prior vested rights determinations have been made with respect to the property subject to the petition; 
3.  Whether any prior approved applications for the property have expired or have been terminated in accordance with law; 
4.  Whether current standards adopted after commencement of the project affect proposed use of the land, landscaping or tree preservation, open space, or park dedication, lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage or building size based upon the proposed development application; 
5.  Whether any statutory exception applies to the standards in the current zoning regulations from which the applicant seeks relief; 
6.  Whether any prior approved zoning permit or other development applications relied upon by the petitioner have expired; 
7.  For petitions filed pursuant to section 28.15C, whether any of the events in subsection B. have occurred. 
B.  Conditions. If the claim of vested rights under a petition is based upon a pending zoning or other development application subject to standards that have been superseded by current standards under this zoning chapter, the decision maker may condition any relief granted on the petition on the approval of the application under such prior standards. 
28.15B.6.   Application following relief order:
Following the city's final decision on the vested rights petition, the property owner shall conform the zoning permit application for which relief is sought to such decision. If the zoning permit application on file is consistent with the relief granted on the vested rights petition, no revisions are necessary. Where proceedings have been stayed on the zoning permit application pending referral of the vested rights petition to the city council, proceedings on the application shall resume after the council's decision on the vested rights petition. 
28.15B.7.   Expiration:
Relief granted on a vested rights petition shall expire on occurrence of one (1) of the following events: 
A.  The petitioner or property owner fails to submit a required revised zoning permit application consistent with the relief granted within thirty (30) days of the final decision on the petition; 
B.  The zoning permit application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition is denied under the criteria made applicable through the relief granted on the petition; or 
C.  The zoning permit application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition expires. 
Sec. 28.15C. - Dormant projects. 
28.15C.1.   Termination of zoning permits:
Any application for a zoning permit that has been approved by the city but which is not subject to an expiration date shall expire ninety (90) days from the effective date of this section, unless one (1) of the following events has occurred by such date: 
A.  A subsequent application has been approved and remains in effect; provided, however, that if the subsequent application is for a zoning permit, such subsequent application also is subject to expiration under this subsection B.; or 
B.  A subsequent application has been filed and is pending for decision; or 
C.  Substantial construction on the development has occurred as authorized by and consistent with the zoning permit. 
28.15C.2.   Effect on prior SUPs and PD Districts:
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter 28 of the City Code of Ordinances, relating to special use permits (SUP) or planned development districts, to the contrary, the expiration of any zoning permit pursuant to subsection 28.15A for land that is subject to a special use permit or that is located within a planned development district shall thereupon suspend the authority to file any subsequent application for such land pending a determination by the city council whether to reinstate such authority with or without conditions, or to rezone the land in accordance with the procedures in section 28.10. 
28.15C.3.   Expiration dates:
Notwithstanding any other provision of chapter 28 of the City Code of Ordinances, for any application for a zoning permit to which no expiration date applies under chapter 28 and which has been filed and is pending for decision on, or which is filed on or after the effective date of this chapter, approval of such application shall expire six (6) months from the date of approval, unless a subsequent application is filed and approved, or construction is commenced consistent with and pursuant to the zoning permit, within such period. This subsection does not apply to a zoning permit application within a planned development district or subject to a special use permit. 
28.15C.4.   Vested rights petition:
The owner of the land subject to a zoning permit that expires under subsection (b) may petition the city council to reinstate such zoning permit by filing a vested rights petition pursuant to section 28.15B, as hereinafter established, prior to the expiration date. 
Sec. 28.16. - Enforcement and revocation of permits. 
28.16.1.   Enforcement procedures and revocation of permits.
A.  Enforcement activities. Enforcement activities include informal contacts with individuals to advise them of requirements, the issuance of verbal warnings, written warnings, and municipal court citations, formal court action, and billing and collection. Employees of the planning, building inspections, code enforcement, public works, environmental health, water and wastewater, and environment and engineering departments are the responsible officials authorized to issue municipal court citations for violations of this article. 
B.  Right to enter. The responsible official shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises that may be necessary to carry out the duties in the enforcement of this zoning chapter. Submittal of any application for a development permit that authorizes construction of structures or improvements shall be construed as a grant of authority to the responsible official to enter on land subject to the application for purposes of enforcing the approved permit. 
C.  General remedies. If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained or any building, structure, or land is used or developed in violation of this zoning chapter or any development application approved there under, in addition to other remedies, the city may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent or abate such activity. Appropriate action or proceedings include termination of utility services (water, gas, electric); revocation of permits, licenses, or bonds; and institution of legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
D.  Stop work orders. 
1.  Whenever any construction or development activity is being done contrary to any term, condition or requirements of an approved development application or this zoning chapter, the responsible official or the official's authorized representative may order the work stopped by notice in writing, served on the property owner or authorized agent. Notice shall be given before the order shall be effective, except when the order should be effective immediately to protect and preserve the public health, safety, or general welfare. Any person thereafter shall cease and desist from further development or construction material to the alleged noncompliance, until corrected by compliance and authorized by the responsible official to proceed with the work. This prohibition shall extend throughout any appeal period. 
2.  The owner or authorized agent may appeal the stop work order to the building official by giving written notice. The responsible official shall hear the appeal within five (5) working days of receiving the notice. The appellant may appeal a negative ruling by the responsible official in writing to the city council, which shall hear the appeal at the next regular meeting that occurs at least ten (10) days after receipt of the notice of appeal. 
3.  The decision-maker on the appeal may require the placement of temporary erosion control, water quality protection or other measures by the owner or appellant in order to protect the site and the community resources during the appeal period. 
4.  The responsible official or the city council, as the case may be, shall decide the appeal and make such order as is necessary to assure compliance with the terms of this zoning chapter and all approved development applications. 
E.  Municipal court actions. The city attorney is authorized to prosecute violations of this zoning chapter in the municipal court where jurisdiction lies for the action. 
F.  Civil court actions. If authorized by the city council, the city attorney is authorized to file and prosecute an action at law or in equity, where permitted under the laws of Texas, in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this zoning chapter. The initiation of one (1) form of enforcement action by the city attorney will not preclude the city attorney from initiating any other form of enforcement action. 
G.  Fines and penalties. A person who violates any provision of this zoning chapter pertaining to zoning or public health and sanitation shall be punished, upon conviction, by a penalty not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist, any architect, builder, contractor, agent, persons or corporation employed in connection therewith, and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be fined as herein provided. 
H.  Separate offenses. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense under this section. 
I.  Revocation proceedings. 
1.  If the building official determines, based on inspection or investigation by the city, that there are reasonable grounds for revocation of an approved development application, the official shall set a hearing before the original decision-maker, or if the decision was made by the official or another responsible official, before the board or commission to which appeal may be taken from such decision under this zoning chapter. If the city council was the original decision-maker, the council may refer the proposed revocation to the planning and zoning commission for its report and recommendation prior to such hearing. Circumstances that warrant revocation of an approved development application shall include but not be limited to the following: 
a.  A material mistake was made in approving the development application; 
b.  Approval of the development application was procured on the basis of material misrepresentations or fraud on the part of the applicant; 
c.  Development activities being undertaken on the land subject to the development permit are not in conformity with terms of the approved development application; 
d.  The land use is in violation of a condition of approval of the development application; 
2.  The applicant and any interested parties shall be given notice of the hearing in the manner provided in section 28.10. The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures described in section 28.10. 
3.  In rendering its decision whether to revoke the approved application, the decision-maker shall determine whether the activity authorized under the original approved application complies with the terms, conditions and requirements of such approval. The decision-maker may revoke the application, affirm it, or affirm it with attached conditions that assure that the terms; conditions and requirements of the application shall be met. 
4.  A decision to revoke an approved development application shall become final ten (10) days after the date notice of the decision was given, unless appealed. After the effective date, it shall be unlawful to undertake or perform any activity that was previously authorized by the approved application without applying for and obtaining approval of a new development application for the activity. Appeal from the decision to revoke the approved development application shall be to the city council, unless the decision to revoke was made by the council. 
28.16.2.   Schedule of fees, charges and expenses:
A.  Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any zoning or development application or on any appeal, in accordance with section 28.8 of this zoning chapter. 
B.  The city council, upon the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, shall determine and adopt a fee schedule for the purpose of recovering a portion of the administrative costs associated with processing zoning and development requests, including public hearings that are called for in this chapter. Such fees shall be paid by the applicant and shall not be designed to in any way restrict the applicant's ability to seek and receive a hearing or to generate revenue for other than recovery of actual administrative costs incurred by the city in the review and processing of applications. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 28.17. - Zoning districts established. 
28.17.1  The City of Denison, Texas is hereby divided into the following zoning districts. The use, height, area regulations, and other standards, as set out herein apply to each district. The districts established herein shall be known as: 
Abbreviated 
Designation Zoning District Name Residential Districts A Agricultural Zoning District-2-Acre Lot RD Rural Development District-1.0 Dwelling Units/Acre SF-20 Single-Family Residential Zoning District-20,000 S.F. Lot SF-10 Single-Family Residential Zoning District-10,000 S.F. Lot SF-7.5 Single-Family Residential Zoning District-7,500 S.F. Lot SF-5 Single-Family Residential Zoning District-5,000 S.F. Lot SF-PH Single-Family Residential Zoning District-Patio Homes SF-TH Single-Family Residential Zoning District-Single-Family Attached LD Lakeside Development District UD Urban Development District MH Manufactured Home Park District 2F Two-Family (Duplex) District MF-1 Multi-Family Residential District MF-2 Multi-Family Residential District Nonresidential Districts O Office District NS Neighborhood Services Zoning District LR Local Retail Zoning District CR Community Retail Zoning District RR Regional Retail Zoning District C Commercial District CA Central Area District BP Business Park District LI Light Industrial District HI Heavy Industrial District Special Districts PD Planned Development Overlay District CUP Conditional Use Permit (CUP) HO Highway Oriented and Corridor District (U.S. Highway 75, Spur 503 and FM Hwy 120) AO Austin Avenue Overlay District H Historic Overlay District NGB Native Greenbelt Overlay District MO Morton Street Overlay District  
28.17.2  A summary of the area regulations for the following zoning districts is included within Appendix A. 
28.17.3  Certain terms and definitions used within this chapter can be found in section 28.63. 
28.17.4  All appendices are hereby incorporated by reference. 
Sec. 28.18. - A-Agricultural District. 
28.18.1.   General purpose and description:
This district is primarily to accommodate agricultural uses, such as the keeping of livestock, and such incidental uses necessary for agricultural uses in addition to some limited single-family residential detached uses. A minimum of one (1) acre is required for lots located within an "A" zoning district. 
28.18.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the A-Agricultural District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.18.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: 
A.  Three (3) stories, but not to exceed forty-five (45) feet for the main building/house. 
B.  Forty-five (45) feet for agricultural structures (e.g., barns, silos, water towers, etc.), provided they are no closer than one hundred (100) feet from any residential structure on the premises, and they are set back at least one hundred (100) feet or three (3) times their height (whichever is greater) from any front, side or rear property line. 
C.  Twenty-five (25) feet for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, etc. 
D.  Other requirements (see article V). 
28.18.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lots (existing): 
Standard lots: 
1.  Minimum lot area-One (1) acre. 
2.  Minimum lot width-One hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Minimum lot depth-One hundred fifty (150) feet. 
B.  Size of lots: 
1.  Standard lots: 
a.  Minimum lot area-One (1) acre (43,560 square feet). 
b.  Minimum lot width-Three hundred (300) feet at the front property line. 
c.  Minimum lot depth-Three hundred (300) feet. 
d.  Average lot depth-Lots shall maintain an average lot depth that is not less than two (2) times the lot width as measured at the front property line. 
2.  Flag lots/panhandle lots: 
a.  Minimum lot area -One (1) acre (43,560 square feet) for that portion of the lot located outside of the narrow "flag" or "panhandle" portion that extends from the right-of-way. 
b.  Minimum lot width -One hundred (100) feet at the right-of-way and three hundred (300) feet at the front building line. 
c.  Minimum lot depth -Three hundred (300) feet for that portion of the lot located outside of the narrow "flag" or "panhandle" portion that extends from the right-of-way. 
d.  Average lot depth -Lots shall maintain an average lot depth that is not less than two (2) times the lot width as measured at the front building line for that portion of the lot located outside of the narrow "flag" or "panhandle" portion that extends from the right-of-way. 
e.  Maximum length of "flag" or "panhandle" portion of lot -The narrow portion of a "flag" or "panhandle lot" that extends from the right-of-way shall not exceed nine hundred (900) feet as measured perpendicular to the front property line. 
C.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Thirty-five (35) feet. 
2.  Minimum side yard -Fifteen (15) feet; twenty (20) feet from a street right-of-way line along a local street or collector street as designated on the City of Denison Thoroughfare Plan, as amended; twenty-five (25) feet from a street right-of-way line for an arterial street as designated on the City of Denison Thoroughfare Plan; fifty (50) feet from a street right-of-way line for a key corner lot. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: 
a.  No main residential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one (1) side lot line with the opposite side lot line. 
c.  Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lots, except for accessory buildings allowed pursuant to this chapter and the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs, and other architectural features projecting a maximum of four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
4.  Garages -Garage entries for automobiles shall not be located nearer than twenty-four (24) feet to a street right-of-way or the minimum side yard or rear yard setbacks, whichever is greater. 
D.  Maximum lot coverage: Fifteen (15) percent for main buildings and accessory buildings. 
E.  Parking regulations: 
1.  Single-family dwelling unit-A minimum of two (2) enclosed parking spaces behind the front building line on the same lot as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces on a paved driveway having a minimum length of fifty (50) feet as measured from the street right-of-way line. 
2.  Other-See section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
3.  All vehicular parking shall be on an improved, paved surface. 
F.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: One thousand (1,000) square feet. 
G.  Minimum exterior construction standards : Seventy-five (75) percent standard masonry construction (see section 28.54). 
28.18.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
B.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption such as firewood, garden materials, farm equipment, etc., which cannot be stored in any required setback and which shall be screened from view of public streets and neighboring properties). 
C.  The elimination of a garage space by enclosing the garage with a stationary building wall shall be prohibited. 
D.  Swimming pools (see article V). 
E.  Site plan approval (see section 28.13) shall be required for any nonresidential use in the A District. Any nonresidential land use which may be permitted in this district shall conform to the "NS"-Neighborhood Service District standards with respect to building setbacks, landscaping, exterior building construction, screening requirements, lighting, signage, etc. 
F.  Other regulations: As established by article V. 
Sec. 28.19. - Reserved. 
Sec. 28.20. - RD-Rural Development District. 
28.20.1.   General purpose and description:
This district is for the development of semi-rural, low density, single-family residential detached development at a maximum density of one (1.0) dwelling unit per four (4) acres. This district will provide for the clustering of homes on lots of not less than twelve thousand (12,000) square foot lots in area provided that open spaces are preserved. Appropriate open spaces would preserve rural landscape character, natural resource areas, and other large areas of open land, while permitting residential development in an open space setting, located and designed to reduce the perceived intensity of development and provide privacy for dwellings. Specific objectives are as follows: 
A.  To maintain and protect the natural environment of the city's existing rural areas by preserving important landscape elements, including those areas containing unique and environmentally sensitive natural features such as woodlands, hedgerows, stream corridors, wetlands, floodplains, ridge tops, steep slopes, critical species habitat, and natural areas by setting them aside from development. Such areas designated for Type A Residential Development by the City of Denison Future Land Use Plan, are of particular significance for conservation. 
B.  To preserve scenic views and to minimize views of new development from existing streets. 
C.  To provide for the unified and planned development of parcels thirty-five (35) acres or larger in size for clustered, single-family, low density residential uses, incorporating large areas of permanently protected common open space. 
D.  To provide for greater design flexibility in the siting of dwellings and other development features than would be permitted by the application of standard district regulations in order to minimize the disturbance of rural landscape elements, scenic quality, and overall aesthetic value of the landscape. 
E.  To increase flexibility and efficiency in the siting of services and infrastructure, by reducing street length, utility requirements, drainage requirements, and the amount of paving required for residential development, where possible. 
F.  To create groups of dwellings with direct visual and physical access to common open space. 
G.  To permit active and passive recreational use of common open space by residents of a cluster development or by the public. 
H.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by retaining existing vegetation and minimizing development on steep slopes. 
I.  To allow for the continuation of agricultural uses in those areas best suited for such activities and when such activities are compatible with adjoining residential uses. 
J.  To permit various means for owning common open space and for protecting it from development in perpetuity. 
K.  To create an attitude of stewardship, or caring, for the land within common open space by requiring a land management, or stewardship, plan for the common open space. 
L.  To implement the objectives of the adopted city comprehensive plan, or elements thereof. 
28.20.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the RD District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.20.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: 
A.  Three (3) stories, or forty-five (45) feet for the main building/house. 
B.  Forty-five (45) feet for agricultural structures (e.g., barns, silos, water towers, etc.), provided they are no closer than one hundred (100) feet from any residential structure on the premises, and they are set back at least one hundred (100) feet or three (3) times their height (whichever is greater) from any front, side or rear property line. 
C.  One (1) story, or twelve (12) feet for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, gazebo, etc. 
D.  Other requirements (see article V). 
28.20.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Minimum standards: 
Criteria Standard/Non-Clustered 
Development Clustered Development Minimum Site Area Not Specified 35 acres Maximum Density a 1 Dwelling Unit/4 Gross Acres 2 Dwelling Units/Net Buildable Acre Minimum Lot Area;sup\sup; 160,000 Square Feet 12,000 Square Feet Measured @ Bldg. Setback 
 Measured @ Front Lot Line 
 Minimum Lot Width   
150' 
100'   
90' 
35' Minimum Lot Depth 300' 150' Minimum Front Yard Average Lot Depth 2 Times Lot Width 
50'   
25' Minimum Rear Yard 50' 15' Minimum Side Yard Ten (10) percent of the lot width but need not exceed twenty (20) feet; fifteen (15) feet from a street right-of-way line for a corner lot Ten (10) percent of the lot width but need not exceed ten (10) feet; fifteen (15) feet from a street right-of-way line for a corner lot Accessory Building Setback c 
 From Side Lot Lines 
 From Rear Lot Line   
10' 
10'   
10' 
10' Minimum Common Open Space 
(Percentage of Gross Acres) Not Specified 50% Maximum Building Coverage Per 10% 50%  
a Existing dwellings that will remain on the site shall be included in the calculation of maximum density. 
;sz=8q en;For an existing farmstead on a parcel used for cluster development, the minimum lot area shall be four (4) acres or a lot large enough to accommodate all structures within a building envelope created by a hundred-foot setback from all sides of the lot, whichever is larger. For farmsteads with livestock, the setback shall be increased to two hundred (200) feet. 
;sz=8q 
en;Accessory buildings shall not be permitted within the front yard. 
B.  Garages: Garage entries for automobiles shall not be located nearer than twenty-four (24) feet to a street right-of-way or the minimum side yard or rear yard setbacks, whichever is greater. 
C.  Parking regulations: 
1.  Single-family dwelling unit-A minimum of two (2) enclosed parking spaces behind the front building line on the same lot as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces on a paved driveway having a minimum length of twenty-five (25) feet as measured from the street right-of-way line. 
2.  Other-See section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
D.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: One thousand seven hundred (1,700) square feet. 
E.  Minimum exterior construction standards Seventy-five (75) percent standard masonry construction (see section 28.54). 
28.20.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
B.  Electrical fencing and barbed wire is prohibited as perimeter fencing except for containment of farm animals on parcels of three (3) or more acres. 
C.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption such as firewood, garden materials, farm equipment, etc., which cannot be stored in any required setback and which shall be screened from view of public streets and neighboring properties). 
D.  Single-family homes with side-entry garages where lot frontage is only to one street (not a corner lot) shall have a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the door face of the garage or carport to the side property line for maneuvering. The minimum setback from any garage door to a street or alley right-of-way line shall also be twenty-five (25) feet. 
E.  The elimination of a garage space by enclosing the garage with a stationary building wall shall be prohibited. 
F.  Swimming pools (see article V). 
G.  Site plan approval (see section 28.13) shall be required for any nonresidential use (e.g., school, church, child care center, private recreation facility, etc.) in the RD District. Any nonresidential land use which may be permitted in this district shall conform to the "NS"-Neighborhood Service District standards with respect to building setbacks, landscaping, exterior building construction, screening requirements, lighting, signage, etc. 
H.  Cluster developments: An application for a clustered development in the RD District shall be prepared and processed as a cluster development plan in accordance with section 28.12 and shall be consistent with the standards specified in subsection 28.20.4.A. 
I.  Other regulations-As established by article V. 
Sec. 28.21. - SF-20-Single-Family Residential District. 
28.21.1.   General purpose and description:
This district is for the development of medium density, single-family residential detached development on a minimum lot size of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
28.21.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the SF-20 District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.21.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: 
A.  Two and one-half (21/2) stories, but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet for the main building/house. 
B.  One (1) story, or twelve (12) feet for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, gazebo, etc. 
C.  Other requirements (see article V). 
28.21.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lots: 
1.  Minimum lot area -Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum lot width -One hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Minimum lot depth -One hundred fifty (150) feet. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Thirty (30) feet. 
2.  Minimum side yard -Ten (10) percent of the lot width but need not exceed fifteen (15) feet for an interior side yard; twenty (20) feet from a street right-of-way line for a corner lot on a residential or collector street; twenty (20) feet for a corner lot on an arterial street; thirty (30) feet from a street right-of-way line for a key corner lot. 
3.  Minimum rear yard : 
a.  No main residential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one (1) side lot line with the opposite side lot line. 
c.  Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lots, except for accessory buildings allowed pursuant to this chapter and the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs, and other architectural features projecting a maximum of four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
4.  Garages -Garage entries for automobiles shall not be located nearer than twenty-four (24) feet to a street right-of-way or the minimum side yard or rear yard setbacks, whichever is greater. 
C.  Maximum lot coverage: Thirty-five (35) percent including main buildings and accessory buildings. 
D.  Parking regulations: 
1.  Single-family dwelling unit-A minimum of two (2) enclosed parking spaces behind the front building line on the same lot as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces on a paved driveway (all concrete or a similar paved surface such as turf pavers, brick pavers or asphalt). 
2.  Other-See section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
E.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: One thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. 
F.  Minimum exterior construction standards: Seventy-five (75) percent standard masonry construction (see section 28.54). 
28.21.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
B.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption such as firewood, garden materials, farm equipment, etc., which cannot be stored in any required setback and which shall be screened from view of public streets and neighboring properties). 
C.  The elimination of a garage space by enclosing the garage with a stationary building wall shall be prohibited. 
D.  Swimming pools (see article V). 
E.  Site plan approval (see section 28.13) shall be required for any nonresidential use (e.g., school, church, child care center, private recreation facility, etc.) in the SF-20 District. Any nonresidential land use which may be permitted in this district shall conform to the "NS"-Neighborhood Service District standards with respect to building setbacks, landscaping, exterior building construction, screening requirements, lighting, signage, etc. 
F.  Other regulations: As established by article V. 
(Ord. No. 4870, § 3, 5-1-17) 
Sec. 28.22. - SF-10-Single-Family Residential District. 
28.22.1.   General purpose and description:
The SF-10, Single-Family Residential District is intended to provide for development of primarily medium-density, detached, single-family residences on lots of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in size, churches, schools and public parks in logical neighborhood units. Areas zoned for the SF-10 District shall have, or shall make provision for, City of Denison water and sewer services. They shall be designed to adequately accommodate storm drainage; with logical and efficient vehicular circulation patterns that discourage non-local traffic; they shall be properly buffered from nonresidential uses; and they shall be protected from pollution and undesirable environmental and noise impacts. 
28.22.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the SF-10 District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.22.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: 
A.  Two and one-half (21/2) stories, or thirty-five (35) feet for the main building/house. 
B.  One (1) story, or twelve (12) feet for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, gazebo, etc. 
C.  Other requirements (see article V). 
28.22.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lots: 
1.  Minimum lot area -Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum lot width -Eighty (80) feet. 
3.  Minimum lot depth -One hundred (100) feet. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Twenty-five (25) feet. 
2.  Minimum side yard -Ten (10) percent of the lot width but need not exceed twelve feet (12) for an interior side yard; fifteen (15) feet from a street right-of-way line for a corner lot on a residential or collector street; twenty (20) feet for a corner lot on an arterial street; thirty (30) feet from a street right-of-way line for a key corner lot. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: 
a.  No main residential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one (1) side lot line with the opposite side lot line. 
c.  Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lots, except for accessory buildings allowed pursuant to this chapter and the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs, and other architectural features projecting a maximum of four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
4.  Garages -Garage entries for automobiles shall not be located nearer than twenty-four (24) feet to a street right-of-way or the minimum side yard or rear yard setbacks, whichever is greater. 
C.  Maximum lot coverage: Thirty-five (35) percent including main buildings and accessory buildings 
D.  Parking regulations: 
1.  Single-family dwelling unit-A minimum of two (2) enclosed parking spaces behind the front building line on the same lot as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces on a paved driveway (all concrete or a similar paved surface such as turf pavers, brick pavers or asphalt). 
2.  Other-See section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
E.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: One thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. 
F.  Minimum exterior construction standards: Seventy-five (75) percent standard masonry construction (see section 28.54). 
28.22.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
B.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption such as firewood, garden materials, etc., which cannot be stored in any required setback and which shall be screened from view of public streets and neighboring properties). 
C.  The elimination of a garage space by enclosing the garage with a stationary building wall shall be prohibited. 
D.  Swimming pools (see article V). 
E.  Site plan approval (see section 28.13) shall be required for any nonresidential use (e.g., school, church, child care center, private recreation facility, etc.) in the SF-10 District. Any nonresidential land use which may be permitted in this district shall conform to the "NS"-Neighborhood Service District standards with respect to building setbacks, landscaping, exterior building construction, screening requirements, lighting, signage, etc. 
F.  Other regulations: As established by article V. 
(Ord. No. 4870, § 3, 5-1-17) 
Sec. 28.23. - SF-7.5-Single-Family Residential District. 
28.23.1.   General purpose and description:
This district is for an urban style of single-family detached uses on a minimum lot size of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
28.23.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the SF-7.5 District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.23.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: 
A.  Two and one-half (21/2) stories, but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet for the main building/house. 
B.  One (1) story, but not to exceed eighteen (18) feet for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, gazebo, etc. 
C.  Other requirements: In addition to other applicable ordinance regulations, article V regulations shall apply. 
28.23.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lots: 
1.  Minimum lot area -Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
2.  Minimum lot width -Sixty (60) feet. 
3.  Minimum lot depth -One hundred (100) feet. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Twenty-five (25) feet. 
2.  Minimum side yard -Ten (10) percent of the lot width but need not exceed eight (8) feet for an interior side yard; fifteen (15) feet from a street right-of-way line for a corner lot on a residential or collector street; twenty (20) feet for a corner lot on an arterial street; thirty (30) feet from a street right-of-way line for a key corner lot. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: 
a.  No main residential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet from the rear property line. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one (1) side lot line with the opposite side lot line. (See appendix: A Illustrations - Illustration #8) 
c.  Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lots, except for accessory buildings allowed pursuant to this chapter and the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs, and other architectural features projecting a maximum of four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
4.  Garages -Garage entries for automobiles shall not be located nearer than eighteen (18) feet to a street right-of-way or a distance equivalent to the minimum side yard or rear yard setbacks, whichever is greater. 
C.  Maximum lot coverage: Fifty (50) percent including main buildings and accessory buildings. 
D.  Parking regulations: 
1.  Single-family dwelling unit - A minimum total of four (4) paved parking spaces shall be required for each dwelling unit. A minimum of two (2) enclosed parking spaces shall be located behind the front building line on the same lot as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces shall also be located on a paved driveway on the same lot as the main structure (all concrete or a similar solid paved surface such as turf pavers, brick pavers or asphalt). 
2.  Other -In addition to other applicable ordinance regulations section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations shall apply. 
E.  Minimum floor area: One thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet 
F.  Minimum exterior construction standards: Seventy-five (75) percent standard masonry construction, exterior walls (building "faces") (excluding doors and windows) shall be finished with masonry-brick, stone, synthetic stone, cast stone, cultured stone products or stucco in accordance with section 28.54. Hardie board or cementitious fiber board shall be allowed but may not be counted toward the seventy-five (75) percent standard masonry construction requirement for all elevations, but may be used along with, wood or Smartside siding or equivalent engineered siding for the remaining twenty-five (25) percent of the exterior walls (building "faces") (excluding doors and windows). Metal exterior construction for the primary structure is prohibited in the SF-7.5 Zoning District. Masonite and similar products are prohibited as exterior building materials. 
28.23.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
B.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption such as firewood, garden materials, farm equipment, etc., which cannot be stored in any required setback and which shall be screened from view of public streets and neighboring properties). 
C.  The elimination of a garage space by enclosing the garage with a stationary building wall shall be prohibited. 
D.  Swimming pools (see article V). 
E.  Site plan approval (see section 28.13) shall be required for any nonresidential use (e.g., school, church, child care center, private recreation facility, etc.) in the SF-7.5 District. Any nonresidential land use which may be permitted in this district shall conform to the "NS-Neighborhood Service District standards with respect to building setbacks, landscaping, exterior building construction, screening requirements, lighting, signage, etc. 
F.  Roofs. Stone coated steel roofing systems equivalent to Decra or Gerard with a minimum of twenty-six (26) gauge and/or Standing Seam or equivalent interlocking metal roof panels that do not have exposed screws or grommets with painted factory finish guaranteed for a minimum of twenty (20) years in a color compatible with the surrounding residential roofs- Colors shall include Galvalume (Matte Finish/non-reflective), pewter, burnished slate, ivy green, light stone and copper (Matte Finish/non-reflective) and similar earth tones are allowed. Roofs with Bright colors such as bright red, neon, and similar colors or reflective or shiny finishes are prohibited. 
G.  Other regulations: In addition to other applicable ordinance regulations, article V regulations shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 4820, § 2(2.01-2.03), 7-18-16; Ord. No. 4841, § 2(2.01), 10-3-16; Ord. No. 4870, § 3, 5-1-17) 
Sec. 28.24. - SF-5-Single-Family Residential District. 
28.24.1.   General purpose and description:
This district is for an urban style of single-family detached uses on a minimum lot size of five thousand (5,000) square feet. This district will remain consistent with that of the existing zoning standards. 
28.24.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the SF-5 District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.24.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: 
A.  Two and one-half (21/2) stories, but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet for the main building/house. 
B.  One (1) story, but not to exceed eighteen (18) feet for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, gazebo, etc. 
C.  Other regulations: In addition to other applicable ordinance regulations, article V regulations shall apply. 
28.24.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lots: 
1.  Minimum lot area -Five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum lot width -Fifty (50) feet. 
3.  Minimum lot depth -One hundred (100) feet. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Twenty-five (25) feet. 
2.  Minimum side yard -Ten (10) percent of lot width but need not exceed six (6) feet for an interior side yard; fifteen (15) feet from a street right-of-way line for a corner lot on a residential or collector street; twenty (20) feet for a corner lot on an arterial street; thirty (30) feet from a street right-of-way line for a key corner lot. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: 
a.  No main residential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet from rear property line. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one (1) side lot line with the opposite side lot line. (See Appendix: A Illustrations - Illustration #8) 
c.  Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lots, except for accessory buildings allowed pursuant to this chapter and the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs, and other architectural features projecting a maximum of four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
4.  Garages -Garage entries for automobiles shall not be located nearer than eighteen (18) feet to a street right-of-way or the distance of minimum side yard or rear yard setbacks, whichever is greater. 
Prefab metal carports or garages are prohibited with new residential construction. (July 18, 2016.) 
Prefab metal carports or garages up to a maximum of four hundred (400) square feet are allowed in the rear yard (past the mid-point of the lot) for existing residences. Carports shall be of a similar color and architectural style as the existing structure on the property and also compatible with existing residential development in the neighborhood. (July 18, 2016.) 
C.  Maximum lot coverage: Fifty (50) percent including main buildings and accessory buildings. 
D.  Parking regulations: 
1.  Single-family dwelling unit-(New construction)-A minimum of two (2) paved parking spaces shall be required. A minimum of one (1) space shall be covered parking (garage or carport) and one (1) additional space may be open parking. All parking spaces shall consist of a paved driveway constructed completely of concrete or similar solid paved surface such as turf pavers, brick pavers, or asphalt. (July 18, 2016.) 
(Existing residences)-A minimum of two (2) parking spaces on a paved driveway all concrete or similar solid paved surface such as turf pavers, brick pavers, or asphalt shall be required. (July 18, 2016.) 
2.  Upon compliance with all requirements of section 28.24.4.D.1., additional parking may be provided in the rear yard. Such additional parking may have a drive/ parking area surface consisting of a minimum of three (3) inches of graded and compacted aggregate material. This is allowed only if the required solid paved parking requirements outlined in section 28.24.4 D.1. have been met. 
3.  Other regulations: In addition to other applicable ordinance regulations, section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
E.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: Nine hundred fifty (950) square feet. 
F.  Minimum exterior construction standards: Metal exterior construction for a primary structure is prohibited in the SF-5 Zoning District. All exterior walls (building "faces") (excluding doors and windows) of a structure shall be finished with Hardie board or cementitious fiber board siding, Smartside siding or equivalent engineered siding, wood or standard masonry construction. Masonite and similar products are prohibited as exterior building materials. 
28.24.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
B.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption such as firewood, garden materials, farm equipment, etc., which cannot be stored in any required setback and which shall be screened from view of public streets and neighboring properties). 
C.  The elimination of a garage space by enclosing the garage with a stationary building wall shall be prohibited. 
D.  Swimming pools (see article V). 
E.  Site plan approval (see section 28.13) shall be required for any nonresidential use (e.g., school, church, child care center, private recreation facility, etc.) in the SF-5 District. Any nonresidential land use which may be permitted in this district shall conform to the "NS"-Neighborhood Service District standards with respect to building setbacks, landscaping, exterior building construction, screening requirements, lighting, signage, etc. 
F.  Roofs. Stone coated steel roofing systems equivalent to Decra TM or Gerard TM with a minimum of 26 gauge and/or standing seam or equivalent interlocking metal roof panels that do not have exposed screws or grommets with painted factory finish guaranteed for a minimum of twenty (20) years in a color compatible with the surrounding residential roofs- Colors shall include Galvalume (matte finish/non-reflective), pewter, burnished slate, ivy green, light stone and copper (matte finish/non-reflective) are allowed. Roofs with Bright colors such as bright red, neon, and similar colors or reflective or shiny finishes are prohibited. 
G.  Other regulations: In addition to other applicable ordinance regulations, article V regulations shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 4820, § 2(2.04, 2.05), 7-18-16; Ord. No. 4841, § 2(2.02), 10-3-16; Ord. No. 4870, § 3, 5-1-17) 
Sec. 28.25. - SF-PH-Single-Family Residential District-Patio homes. 
28.25.1.   General purpose and description:
This district is intended primarily for a patio home or "zero lot line" style of development. Minimum lot sizes would be five thousand (5,000) square feet per residential unit. A minimum separation of ten (10) feet would be maintained between structures. Zoning provisions would also limit the size of an SF-PH zoned area and would establish minimum separation standards between SF-PH Districts/areas. A site plan would be required for this district. 
28.25.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the SF-PH District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.25.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: 
A.  Two and one-half (21/2) stories, but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet for the main building/house. 
B.  One (1) story, but not to exceed eighteen (18) feet for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, gazebo, etc. 
C.  Other regulations: In addition to other applicable ordinance regulations, article V regulations shall apply. 
28.25.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lots: 
1.  Minimum lot area -Five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum lot width -Forty (40) feet. 
3.  Minimum lot depth -One hundred (100) feet. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Twenty-five (25) feet. 
2.  Minimum side yard -One side reduced to zero feet; other side yard a minimum of ten (10) feet required with primary structures being located no closer than ten (10) feet to another primary structure; fifteen (15) feet from a street right-of-way line for a corner lot. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: 
a.  No main residential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet to the rear property line. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one (1) side lot line with the opposite side lot line. 
c.  Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lots, except for accessory buildings allowed pursuant to this chapter and the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs, and other architectural features projecting a maximum of four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
C.  Maximum lot coverage: Seventy (70) percent including main buildings and accessory buildings. 
D.  Parking regulations: 
1.  Single-family dwelling unit -A minimum total of four (4) paved parking spaces shall be required for each dwelling unit. A minimum of two (2) enclosed parking spaces shall be located behind the front building line on the same lot as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces on a solid paved surface shall also be located on a solid paved driveway on the same lot as the main structure and shall be constructed of all concrete or a similar solid paved surface such as turf pavers, brick pavers or asphalt. The driveway shall have a minimum length of twenty-five (25) feet as measured from the street right-of-way line. (July 18, 2016.) 
2.  Visitor parking -One-half (1/2) parking space per dwelling unit (off-street) that is located within six hundred (600) feet of the dwelling unit. 
3.  Other -See section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
E.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: Six hundred fifty (650) square feet. 
F.  Minimum exterior construction standards: Seventy-five (75) percent standard masonry construction (see section 28.54). 
28.25.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
B.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption such as firewood, garden materials, farm equipment, etc., which cannot be stored in any required setback and which shall be screened from view of public streets and neighboring properties). 
C.  Single-family homes with side-entry garages where lot frontage is only to one (1) street (not a corner lot) shall have a minimum setback of eighteen (18) feet from the door face of the garage or carport to the side property line to allow for maneuvering. The minimum setback from any garage door to a street or alley right-of-way line shall also be eighteen (18) feet. 
D.  The elimination of a garage space by enclosing the garage with a stationary building wall shall be prohibited. 
E.  Swimming pools (see article V). 
F.  Site plan approval (see section 28.13) shall be required for any nonresidential use (e.g., school, church, child care center, private recreation facility, etc.) in the SF-PH District. Any nonresidential land use which may be permitted in this district shall conform to the "NS"-Neighborhood Service District standards with respect to building setbacks, landscaping, exterior building construction, screening requirements, lighting, signage, etc. 
G.  Stone coated steel roofing systems equivalent to Decra or Gerard with a minimum of 26 gauge and/or standing seam or equivalent interlocking metal roof panels that do not have exposed screws or grommets with painted factory finish guaranteed for a minimum of twenty (20) years in a color compatible with the surrounding residential roofs-Colors shall include Galvalume (matte finish/non-reflective), pewter, burnished slate, ivy green, light stone and copper (matte finish/non-reflective) are allowed. Roofs with bright colors such as bright red, neon or similar colors or reflective or shiny finishes are prohibited. 
H.  Other regulations: In addition to other applicable ordinance regulations, article V regulations shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 4820, § 2(2.06-2.08), 7-18-16) 
Sec. 28.26. - SF-TH-Single-Family Residential District-Attached. 
28.26.1.   General purpose and description:
This district is intended primarily for attached single-family residential developments. The primary uses appropriate to this district would be townhomes and condominiums. The maximum allowable density would be eight (8.0) dwelling units per acre. Minimum standards would include percent open space (community space) of at least twenty (20) percent, a maximum development of twenty (20) acres, a minimum development of five (5) acres, and minimum separation requirements between SF-TH developments. Site plans would be required with this district. 
28.26.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the SF-TH District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.26.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height. 
A.  Two and one-half (21/2) stories but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet for the main building/house; where a structure exceeds twenty-five (25) feet in height, it shall be set back from the front property line one (1) additional foot beyond the required front yard setback for each foot above twenty-five (25) feet in height. 
B.  One story, but not to exceed eighteen (18) feet for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, carports, garden shed, gazebo, clubhouse, mail kiosks, etc. 
C.  Other requirements. Other regulations: In addition to other applicable ordinance regulations, section 28.42 shall apply. 
28.26.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lots: 
1.  Minimum lot area -Five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
2.  Maximum density -Eight (8) units per gross acre of land area within the development. 
3.  Minimum project size -The minimum size of a single-family attached residential development shall be five (5) acres. 
4.  Maximum project size -The maximum size of a single-family attached residential development shall be twenty (20) acres. No SFA zoning district may be located nearer than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet to another SFA zoning district. 
5.  Minimum lot width -Forty (40) feet. 
6.  Minimum lot depth -One hundred ten (110) feet. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Twenty-five (25) feet; front yard setback shall be staggered in at least five-foot increments such that no more than two (2) units have the same front setback in a row, and such that at least thirty (30) percent of the lots along any block face are set back at least thirty (30) feet, at least thirty (30) percent of the lots are set back at least thirty-five (35) feet, and no more than forty (40) percent of the lots may use the minimum twenty-five-foot-front setback; no front-entry garages shall be permitted. 
2.  Minimum side yard: 
a.  Single-family attached dwellings shall not have an interior side yard; however, a minimum twenty-five (25) foot side yard is required for a key corner lot, a minimum fifteen-foot side yard is required on a corner lot adjacent to a residential or collector street, and a minimum twenty-foot side yard is required for a corner lot adjacent to an arterial street. The ends of any two (2) adjacent building complexes or rows of buildings shall be at least twenty (20) feet apart. The required side yards shall be designated upon a plat approved by the city council. One (1) side yard may be reduced to zero feet where the units join; the other side yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet required with fifteen (15) feet required on corner lots adjacent to a residential or collector street, twenty (20) feet required on corner lots adjacent to an arterial street; and twenty-five (25) feet required for a key corner lot. 
b.  A complex or continuous row of attached single-family dwellings shall have a minimum length of three (3) dwelling units (triplex), a maximum length of eight (8) dwelling units, and shall not exceed two hundred eighty (280) feet in length. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: 
a.  No main residential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet to the rear property line. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one (1) side lot line with the opposite side lot line. 
c.  Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lots, except for accessory buildings allowed pursuant to this chapter and the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs, and other architectural features projecting a maximum of four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
C.  Maximum lot coverage: Fifty (50) percent by main and accessory buildings on each individual lot. 
D.  Parking regulations: 
1.  A minimum of two (2) enclosed parking spaces for each dwelling unit, shall be located behind, beside or incorporated into the dwelling unit, and accessed only from the rear via an alley, and located on the same lot as each dwelling unit (see section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements). 
2.  Designated visitor parking spaces shall be provided in off-street, common areas at a ratio of one (1) guest/visitor space per four (4) units. 
3.  Additional parking shall be required for any recreational uses, clubhouse, office, sales offices and other similar accessory structures and uses. 
4.  All driveways and parking areas shall be concrete or a similar solid paved surface such as turf pavers, brick pavers or asphalt. 
E.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: One thousand (1,000) square feet. 
F.  Minimum exterior construction standards: See section 28.54 for exterior construction standards. 
28.26.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Usable open space requirements: Except as provided below, any single-family attached subdivision shall provide useable open space which equals or exceeds twenty (20) percent of the gross platted area, excluding rights-of-way for collector and larger-sized streets. Useable open space shall not be required for a SF-TH development if it contains twenty (20) or fewer lots and if the property is contiguous to or abuts a usable open space area adequate to serve the development. Said usable open space shall meet the criteria established in subsection 28.26.5.A. below. Properties that are separated by thoroughfares larger than a collector street and/or by drainage/utility easements in excess of sixty (60) feet in width shall not be considered as contiguous. 
1.  Specific criteria for usable open space -Areas provided as usable open space shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  All residential lots must be located within six hundred (600) feet of a usable open space area as measured along a street. The planning and zoning commission may recommend, and city council may allow, this distance to be increased to up to one thousand two hundred feet (1,200) if the shape of the subdivision is irregular or if existing trees or other natural features on the site can be preserved by increasing the distance. 
b.  Individual usable open space areas shall be at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size. Useable open space must be a minimum of fifty (50) feet wide, and must have no slope greater than ten (10) percent. At the time of site plan and subdivision plat approval, the planning and zoning commission may recommend, and the city council may allow, full or partial credit for open areas that exceed the ten (10) percent maximum slope if it is determined that such areas are environmentally or aesthetically significant and that their existence enhances the development and the surrounding area. 
c.  Pools, tennis courts, walkways, patios and similar outdoor amenities may be located within areas designated as useable open space. Areas occupied by enclosed buildings (except for gazebos and pavilions), driveways, parking lots, overhead electrical transmission lines, drainage channels, and antennas may not be included in calculating useable open space. 
d.  Within useable open space areas, there shall be at least one (1) large shade tree for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of space. New trees planted to meet this requirement shall be a minimum three-inch caliper, and at least twenty-five (25) percent of the trees shall be nondeciduous (for qualifying tree species, see appendix C of this chapter for the city's recommended plant list). 
e.  A useable open space area must have street frontage on at least thirty-three (33) percent of the area's perimeter to ensure that the area is accessible to residents of the subdivision. 
f.  Useable open space areas must be easily viewed from adjacent streets and homes. Side or rear yard fences along common open space areas shall be of open, wrought iron design, and shall not exceed four (4) feet in height adjacent to the open space and for a distance of ten (10) feet perpendicular or radial to the open space area. 
2.  Landscaped areas -Additional common open space and landscaped areas that do not qualify as usable open space may be provided, but shall not be counted toward the usable open space requirement. 
B.  Maintenance requirements for common areas: A property owners association is required for continued maintenance of common land and facilities. 
C.  Alleys: Each attached dwelling unit within the SF-TH District shall be rear-entry only from an alley that is constructed along with the rest of the subdivision (i.e., at the same time as the streets, utilities, etc.) and that is in conformance with the city's design standards for alleys (see the subdivision ordinance). 
D.  Refuse facilities: Every single-family attached dwelling unit shall be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a refuse facility, measured along the designated pedestrian and vehicular travel way. A refuse facility shall be a dumpster or other similar container designed for receiving garbage in bulk for more than one (1) dwelling, and all refuse containers shall be maintained in accordance with local public health and sanitary regulations. Refuse containers shall be located no closer than thirty (30) feet to any adjacent single-family property, shall be located so as to provide safe and convenient pickup by refuse collection agencies, and shall be screened in accordance with section 28.53 of this chapter (see Illustration 1 for refuse container enclosure diagrams). 
E.  All utilities shall be provided separately to each lot within an SF-TH District so that each unit is individually metered. 
F.  A swimming pool shall be provided in single-family attached developments of fifty (50) or more units. See the city's Code of Ordinances for additional requirements for swimming pools. 
G.  Single-family detached dwellings (and their respective lots) constructed within this district shall conform to the standards as set forth in the SF-7.5 District. 
H.  Each SF-TH lot shall contain a private yard with not less than four hundred (400) square feet of area (i.e., a back yard or large side yard). Private yards may include a patio cover, gazebo or other similar non-enclosed structure which does not cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the private yard, and they may also include a swimming pool, swing set, play fort, or other private leisure amenity. 
I.  The elimination of a garage space by enclosing or converting any portion of the garage space with a stationary building wall shall be prohibited unless another garage of the same size and same parking capacity is built on the lot within the standards specified for the SF-TH Zoning District. 
J.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
K.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption such as firewood, garden materials, etc., which cannot be stored in any required setback and which shall be screened from view of public streets and neighboring properties). 
L.  Single-family and two-family homes with side-entry garages where lot frontage is only to one (1) street (not a corner lot) shall have a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet from the door face of the garage or carport to the side property line for maneuvering. The minimum setback from any garage door to a street or alley right-of-way line shall also be twenty-four (24) feet. 
M.  Site plan approval (see section 28.13) shall be required for any single-family attached or nonresidential use (e.g., school, church, child care center, private recreation facility, etc.) in the SF-TH District. Any nonresidential land use which may be permitted in this district shall conform to the "NS"-Neighborhood Service District standards with respect to building setbacks, landscaping, exterior building construction, screening requirements, lighting, signage, etc. Said site plan approval shall not be required for home occupations uses that conform to the city's standards. 
N.  Other regulations: As established by article V. 
(Ord. No. 4820, § 2(2.09, 2.10), 7-18-16) 
Sec. 28.27. - LD-Lakeside Development District. 
28.27.1.   General purpose and description:
This district is intended for a mixture of residential types, residential densities, office, retail, service, and restricted commercial uses. It is the intent that all lake front property develop in accordance with this Lakeside Development District, except where vacant land is annexed to the city subject to an agreement that includes a conceptual plan of development implementing the objectives of this section. The primary objectives of this district are to protect the community's view of the lake and to ensure that development occurs in a manner that integrates community open spaces and preserves public access. Standards within the LD District include minimum open space or park dedication requirements in addition to minimum development design/layout standards. The maximum residential density appropriate to the LD District is four (4.0) dwelling units per acre for single-family residential dwellings. As land uses approach the Lake Texoma shoreline, maximum heights become less restricted and allowable densities increase. Specific objectives are as follows: 
A.  To maintain and protect the natural environment of the city's undeveloped areas by preserving important landscape elements, including those areas containing unique and environmentally sensitive natural features such as woodlands, hedgerows, stream corridors, wetlands, floodplains, ridge tops, steep slopes, critical species habitats, and natural areas by setting them aside from development. Such areas designated for lakeside development by the City of Denison Future Land Use Plan, are of particular significance for conservation. 
B.  To preserve scenic views of Lake Texoma and to minimize views of new development from existing streets. 
C.  To provide for the unified and planned development of parcels fifty (50) acres or larger in size for clustered, single-family, low density residential uses, incorporating large areas of permanently protected common open space. 
D.  To provide for greater design flexibility in the siting of dwellings and other development features than would be permitted by the application of standard district regulations in order to minimize the disturbance of rural landscape elements, scenic quality, and overall aesthetic value of the landscape. 
E.  To create groups of dwellings with direct visual and physical access to common open space. 
F.  To permit active and passive recreational use of common open space by residents of a cluster development or by the public. 
G.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by retaining existing vegetation and minimizing development on steep slopes. 
H.  To permit various means for owning common open space and for protecting it from development in perpetuity. 
I.  To create an attitude of stewardship, or caring, for the land within common open space by requiring a land management, or stewardship, plan for the common open space. 
J.  To implement the objectives of the adopted city comprehensive plan, or elements thereof. 
28.27.2.   Concept plan-Required:
A.  Concept plan: No Lakeside Development District shall be established, nor shall any development occur within the LD District, except in accordance with a lakeside development concept plan prepared and approved in accordance with section 28.13 and this section. The ordinance that establishes the LD District shall incorporate the concept plan. However, land annexed to the city that is subject to a development agreement that implements the objectives of this section may be developed as a planned development overlay district pursuant to section 28.43 of the zoning ordinance, with the LD District being the base zoning district. 
B.  Approval process: A proposed concept plan shall be reviewed and acted upon utilizing the procedures for approval of a planned development overlay district pursuant to section 28.43. 
C.  Approval criteria: 
1.  Factors. The planning and zoning commission, in making its recommendation, and the city council in deciding the application for a concept plan, shall apply the following factors in taking action on the plan application: 
a.  The concept plan furthers the specific objectives of the Lakeside Development District. 
b.  The plan meets the standards in this section 28.27 for development within the district. 
c.  For single-family residential developments, the plan satisfies the standards for a cluster plan development in section 28.16 of this zoning chapter. In the event of a conflict between the requirements of this section and the requirements for a cluster plan development, the standards in this section shall control. 
2.  Conditions. The planning and zoning commission in recommending approval of a concept plan, and the council in approving the plan, may impose such conditions on approval of the concept plan as are necessary to assure conformity with the conditions and requirements of this ordinance and compatibility with existing or future adjoining uses and neighborhood character. 
D.  Effect: Approval of a concept plan authorizes the property owner to submit a plat application for single-family residential components of the project and a plat or site plan application for other types of development subject to the plan. 
28.27.3.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the LD District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.27.4.   Height regulations:
A.  Residential uses: 
1.  Property located more than one thousand (1,000) feet from the Lake Texoma property take line: 
Maximum height: 
a.  Three (3) stories, but not to exceed forty-five (45) feet for the main building/house. 
b.  Forty-five (45) feet for agricultural structures (e.g., barns, silos, water towers, etc.), provided they are no closer than one hundred (100) feet from any residential structure on the premises, and they are set back at least one hundred (100) feet or three (3) times their height (whichever is greater) from any front, side or rear property line. 
c.  One (1) story, but not to exceed eighteen (18) feet for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, gazebo, etc. 
d.  Other regulations: In addition to other applicable ordinance regulations, article V regulations shall apply. 
2.  Property located one thousand (1,000) feet or closer to the Lake Texoma property take line: 
Maximum height: 
a.  Twenty (20) stories, but not to exceed two hundred (200) feet for the main building/structure. 
b.  Forty-five (45) feet for agricultural structures (e.g., barns, silos, water towers, etc.), provided they are no closer than one hundred (100) feet from any residential structure on the premises, and they are set back at least one hundred (100) feet or three (3) times their height (whichever is greater) from any front, side or rear property line. 
c.  Three (3) stories, but not to exceed forty-five (45) feet for other accessory buildings, including parking structures, amenity centers, gazebos, etc. 
d.  Other regulations: In addition to other applicable ordinance regulations, article V regulations shall apply. 
B.  Nonresidential uses: 
1.  Property located more than one thousand (1,000) feet from the Lake Texoma property take line: 
Maximum height: 
a.  Three (3) stories, but not to exceed forty-five (45) feet for the main building/house. 
b.  One (1) story, but not to exceed eighteen (18) feet for other accessory buildings, including detached garages, carports, clubhouse, gazebo, mail kiosks, laundry rooms, etc. 
c.  Other regulations: In addition to other applicable ordinance regulations, article V regulations shall apply. 
2.  Property located one thousand (1,000) feet or closer to the Lake Texoma property take line: 
Maximum height: 
a.  Twenty (20) stories, but not to exceed two hundred (200) feet for the main building/structure. 
b.  Three (3) stories, or forty-five (45) feet for other accessory buildings, including parking structures, amenity centers, gazebos, etc. 
c.  Other requirements (see article V). 
28.27.5.   Residential area and performance regulations:
A.  Residential standards: Single-family detached structures: 
Minimum Site Area 2 Acres Maximum Density a 4 Dwelling Units/Net Buildable Acre Minimum Lot Area;sup\sup; 6,500 Square Feet Minimum Lot Width 
 Measured @ Bldg. Setback 
 Measured @ Front Lot Line   
50' 
35' Minimum Lot Depth 115' Average Lot Depth 
Minimum Front Yard   
25' Minimum Rear Yard 15' Minimum Side Yard Five (5) feet; ten (10) feet from a street right-of-way line for a corner lot Accessory Building Setback c 
 From Side Lot Lines 
 From Rear Lot Line   
5' 
5' Minimum Common Open Space 
(Percentage of Gross Acres) 20% (see subsection 28.27.5 F.) Maximum Building Coverage Per Lot 50%  
a Existing dwellings that will remain on the site shall be included in the calculation of maximum density. 
;sz=8q en;For an existing farmstead on a parcel used for cluster development, the minimum lot area shall be four (4) acres or a lot large enough to accommodate all structures within a building envelope created by a one-hundred-foot setback from all sides of the lot, whichever is larger. For farmsteads with livestock, the setback shall be increased to two hundred (200) feet. 
;sz=8q 
en;Accessory buildings shall not be permitted within the front yard. 
B.  Residential standards: Single-family attached and multiple-family uses: 
Minimum Site Area Two Acres Maximum Density a 10.0 Dwelling Units/Net Buildable Acre Minimum Lot Area;sup\sup; 5.0 Acres Minimum Lot Width 
 Measured @ Bldg. Setback 
 Measured @ Front Lot Line   
150' 
100' Minimum Lot Depth 300' Average Lot Depth 
Minimum Front Yard   
1.5' for Every 1' in Height Minimum Rear Yard 1.5' for Every 1' in Height Minimum Side Yard 1.5' for Every 1' in Height Accessory Building Setback c 
 From Side Lot Lines 
 From Rear Lot Line   
Greater of 50' or 1.5' for Every 1' in Height 
Greater of 50' or 1.5' for Every 1' in Height Minimum Common Open Space 
(Percentage of Gross Acres) 50% (see subsection 28.27.5.F.) Maximum Building Coverage Per Lot 50%  
a Existing dwellings that will remain on the site shall be included in the calculation of maximum density. 
;sz=8q en;For an existing farmstead on a parcel used for cluster development, the minimum lot area shall be four (4) acres or a lot large enough to accommodate all structures within a building envelope created by a one-hundred-foot setback from all sides of the lot, whichever is larger. For farmsteads with livestock, the setback shall be increased to two hundred (200) feet. 
;sz=8q 
en;Accessory buildings shall not be permitted within the front yard. 
C.  Garages: Garage entries for automobiles shall not be located nearer than twenty (20) feet to a street right-of-way or the minimum side yard or rear yard setbacks, whichever is greater. 
D.  Parking regulations: 
1.  Single-family dwelling unit -A minimum of two (2) enclosed parking spaces behind the front building line on the same lot as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces on a paved driveway having a minimum length of twenty (20) feet as measured from the street right-of-way line. 
2.  Other -See section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
3.  [Parking areas] -All driveways and parking areas shall be concrete or similar paved surface such as turf pavers, brick pavers or asphalt. 
E.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: One thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet. 
F.  Open space requirements: 
1.  Riparian protection buffer: 
a.  A riparian protection buffer is intended to: 
1.  Protect natural stormwater management provided by rivers, creeks and wetlands; 
2.  Protect surface water and groundwater quality; 
3.  Protect water-dependent aquatic and terrestrial wildlife corridors; 
4.  Maintain natural vegetation needed to protect the floodplain and provide wildlife habitat; or 
5.  Protect wetlands under federal jurisdiction that exist within the floodplain buffer. 
b.  A riparian protection buffer shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from both sides of the centerline of a drainage way or the limit of a one-hundred-year floodplain, whichever is greater. 
c.  No building shall be placed or excavation shall be conducted within the riparian protection buffer provided, however, that a single-family residential structure may be constructed in the riparian protection buffer when a plat is not required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212 and the existence of the buffer would otherwise prohibit such use on the tract or parcel of land. 
d.  No riparian buffer shall be cleared, graded, filled or subject to construction provided, however, that rights-of-way for trails, any streets needed to provide access to the property and water, sewer, electric or other utility lines may be cleared. 
e.  The riparian protection buffer may be used for passive or active recreation purposes. 
f.  Drainage channels and watercourses located within a riparian protection buffer, except streets, shall be of earthen construction only. A retention or detention facility may be located within a riparian protection buffer, provided that it is of earthen construction and is screened with vegetative screening. Modifications to existing earthen channels and watercourses or newly created open channels or retention/detention facilities shall be designed with earth and sodded to enhance the rural aesthetic character or habitat value and shall be constructed and maintained as required by the city's technical standards. 
g.  Riparian protection buffers shall be designed and constructed in accordance with standards submitted with the lakeside development plan. 
h.  A riparian protection buffer may be credited toward the minimum common open space required by this section provided that the riparian protection buffer is placed within a conservation easement dedicated to the city or is dedicated to the city as parks and open space. 
i.  The floodplain administrator may reduce the required riparian protection buffer area by up to fifty (50) percent for: 
1.  For a single-family residence when a plat is not required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212; or 
2.  If the applicant demonstrates that the portion of the riparian protection buffer being reduced does not contain significant existing vegetative cover, such as protected native trees or wetlands, and the applicant provides one (1) or more of the following mitigation measures: 
a.  Enhanced vegetative cover provided in the remaining buffer area; 
b.  Earthen water breaks, drainage facilities or catch basins; or 
c.  Erosion control and slope stabilization. 
2.  Other open space-No residential property shall be located further than five thousand two hundred eighty (5,280) linear feet from a public park or private common open space. Said linear measurement shall be from the property line of the residential lot, tract or parcel to the property line of the public park or private common open space. 
3.  Any park land dedicated to the city or any common open space areas dedicated to an HOA for active or passive recreational purposes may be credited toward the minimum common open space required by this section. 
4.  A pedestrian circulation plan shall be required with all residential requests for an LD District. Said pedestrian circulation plan shall provide for pedestrian connections from each residential area, lot, tract or parcel to adjacent lots, tracts or parcels; public parks; riparian protection buffers; existing or planned pedestrian corridors; and common open spaces. All pedestrian connections shall be located within in pedestrian access easements dedicated to the city or in common open spaces dedicated to an HOA. 
5.  United States Corps of Engineer owned parcels or tracts that have been secured by the applicant through purchase or a long-term lease agreement for public passive or active uses may be applied to the minimum common open space required by subsection 28.27.5 and may be used to calculate the maximum density allowed by subsection 28.27.5. 
G.  Minimum exterior construction standards: Seventy-five (75) percent standard masonry construction (see article V). 
28.27.6.   Nonresidential area and performance regulations:
A.  Size of lot: 
1.  Minimum lot area -None. 
2.  Minimum lot width (lots fronting onto a collector, arterial or higher order street as designated on the thoroughfare plan, as amended) -One hundred fifty (150) feet at the front property line with shared access; three hundred (300) feet at the front property line without shared access. 
3.  Minimum lot width (lots other than those specified in 2. above) -One hundred (100) feet at the front building line. 
4.  Minimum lot depth (lots fronting onto a collector, arterial or higher order street as designated on the thoroughfare plan, as amended) -Two hundred (200) feet. 
5.  Minimum lot depth (lots other than those specified in 4. above) -None. 
6.  Minimum lot frontage for cul-de-sac lots -Lots with frontage onto a cul-de-sac end shall provide for a minimum lot frontage of one hundred (100) feet at the front property line. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Fifteen (15) feet from ultimate right-of-way line of roadway; all yards adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard (see section 28.55 for additional setback requirements). 
2.  Minimum rear yard adjacent to a residential zoning district -No main nonresidential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet. 
3.  Minimum side and rear yards not adjacent to a residential zoning district -When nonresidential uses are platted adjacent to other nonresidential uses and integrated into an overall development with lots or lease spaces abutting one another, no side yard is required provided that the city's building code requirements have been met. 
4.  Minimum side yard adjacent to a residential district -Ten (10) feet as measured along the front property line but need not to exceed fifty (50) feet. 
C.  Maximum lot coverage: Sixty (60) percent including main and accessory buildings; maximum eighty (80) percent impervious coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.). 
D.  Floor to area ratio (F.A.R.): The gross square footage of all structures, including primary and all accessory structures, shall not exceed an amount equal to the square footage of the lot or tract in which they are located (1:1). 
E.  Parking requirements: As established by section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
F.  Minimum design criteria: 
1.  Orientation and scale of primary structure(s): 
a.  Buildings located within thirty (30) feet of a street right-of-way shall have their primary orientation toward a front yard. 
b.  Primary entrances: 
1.  Primary entrances shall have a clearly defined, highly visible customer entrance with distinguishing features such as a canopy, portico or other prominent element of the architectural design. 
2.  Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass, surface or finish so as to give emphasis to primary entrances. 
c.  Buildings that are open to the public and are within thirty (30) feet of the street right-of-way shall have a pedestrian walkway from the street to the primary entrance. Said pedestrian walkway shall consist of a concrete sidewalk meeting the city's construction standards for sidewalks and measuring a minimum of four (4) feet in width. 
d.  Loading docks or loading areas are not permitted to be visible from the street and may not be accessed directly from the street. 
2.  Building materials for primary structures: 
a.  Seventy-five (75) percent of any exposed exterior wall that is visible from a public street of main buildings, parking structures, and accessory buildings shall consist of glass, native stone, clay-fired brick or tile, or a combination of these materials. Other finishes and materials may be used at the sole discretion of the city council if adopted as a condition of the site plan and if permitted by the City of Denison building and fire codes. 
b.  Any finish permitted by the City of Denison building and fire codes may be used on the remaining twenty-five (25) percent of any exposed exterior wall. 
c.  The city council may allow, at its sole discretion, the use of concrete or concrete block on exterior walls that are not visible from a public right-of-way. These finishes must be consistent in color with the remainder of the building. These would include the walls of service courts and other facilities that are secluded from view by the specific design of a building or group of buildings. 
d.  Glass: 
1.  All exterior building materials comprised of glass shall have a maximum exterior visible reflectance of twenty (20) percent. 
2.  Glass shall not comprise more than seventy (70) percent of the building skin. 
3.  Large-scale projects: 
a.  These design standards shall apply to developments having forty thousand (40,000) square feet and more in gross floor area of building space, inclusive of all primary, secondary, and accessory structures. 
b.  Large-scale design criteria: 
1.  Developments shall design large building masses to relate to human scale by incorporating changes in building mass or direction, sheltering roofs, a distinct pattern of divisions on surfaces, windows, trees and small-scale lighting. 
2.  All on-site circulation systems shall incorporate a streetscape, which includes curbs, sidewalks, pedestrian-scale light standards, and street trees. 
c.  Public spaces: 
1.  One (1) square foot of plaza or public space shall be required for every ten (10) square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Plazas or public spaces shall incorporate at least three (3) of the five (5) following elements: 
a.  Sitting space-At least one (1) sitting space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of area included in the plaza. Seating shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) inches in height and thirty (30) inches in width. Ledge benches shall have a minimum depth of thirty (30) inches. 
b.  A mixture of areas that provide both sunlight and shade. 
c.  Trees in proportion to the space at a minimum of one (1) tree per eight hundred (800) square feet that measure a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter at twelve (12) inches above the ground. 
d.  Water features or public art. 
e.  Outdoor eating areas or food vendors. 
f.  Mandatory open space: 
1.  A minimum of forty (40) percent of the total lot area of a project shall be devoted to open space. 
2.  Minimum open space requirements may be calculated on the basis of the overall development including required buffer yard(s), provided that the minimum open space on any individual lot within the development is not less than fifteen (15) percent. 
4.  On-site circulation: 
a.  Protected, raised walkways shall be installed through parking areas of fifty (50) or more spaces or more than one hundred (100) feet in average width or depth. 
b.  Parking lots with two hundred (200) spaces or more shall be divided into separate areas divided by landscaped areas or walkways measuring a minimum of ten (10) feet in width or by a building or group of buildings. 
c.  Developments of one (1) acre or more must provide a pedestrian circulation plan for the site. Pedestrian walkways shall be directly linked to entrances and the internal circulation of the building. 
d.  Connections shall be made when feasible to any streets adjacent to the property and to any pedestrian facilities that connect to the property unless pedestrian and/or traffic hazards prohibit such connections. 
G.  [Required pedestrian plan]: A pedestrian circulation plan shall be required with all nonresidential requests for an LD District. Said pedestrian circulation plan shall provide for pedestrian connections with adjacent lots, tracts or parcels; public parks; riparian protection buffers; existing and proposed pedestrian corridors; and common open spaces. All pedestrian connections shall be located within in pedestrian access easements dedicated to the city or in common open spaces dedicated to an HOA. 
28.27.7.   Special requirements:
A.  Residential uses: 
1.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
2.  Barbed wire is prohibited as perimeter fencing except for containment of farm animals on parcels of one (1) acre or more. 
3.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption such as firewood, garden materials, farm equipment, etc., which cannot be stored in any required setback and which shall be screened from view of public streets and neighboring properties). 
4.  Single-family homes with side-entry garages where lot frontage is only to one street (not a corner lot) shall have a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the door face of the garage or carport to the side property line for maneuvering. The minimum setback from any garage door to a street or alley right-of-way line shall also be twenty-five (25) feet. 
5.  The elimination of a garage space by enclosing the garage with a stationary building wall shall be prohibited. 
6.  Swimming pools (see article V). 
7.  Cluster developments-The procedures and requirements of a cluster plan as specified in section 28.12 shall be required for developments that will implement the clustered development standards specified in subsection 28.27.5. 
8.  Other regulations-As established by article V. 
B.  Nonresidential uses: 
1.  Driveway spacing (distance between driveways, measured edge-to-edge): 
a.  Highway -One (1) driveway per three hundred (300) linear feet of frontage. 
b.  Arterial street -One (1) driveway per two hundred fifty (250) linear feet of frontage. 
c.  Collector street -One (1) driveway per one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage. 
d.  Local street -One (1) driveway per fifty (50) linear feet of frontage. 
e.  Minimum distance from driveway to street corner -Fifty (50) feet, as measured from the street corner radius point of tangency. 
2.  Driveway separation from intersections (distance measured from the centerline of the rights-of-way to the pavement edge of the driveway). 
a.  Highway intersection with another street -Three hundred (300) feet. 
b.  Arterial street intersection with another street -Two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
c.  Collector street intersection with another street -One hundred (100) feet. 
d.  Residential street intersection with another street -Fifty (50) feet. 
3.  Landscaping requirements-See section 28.51. 
4.  Screening requirements-See section 28.53. 
5.  Outside display of merchandise and seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins, etc.) shall be limited to the following: 
a.  Shall not be placed/located more than thirty (30) feet from the main building. 
b.  Shall not occupy any of the parking spaces that are required by this chapter for the primary use(s) of the property (except on a temporary basis only, which is a maximum of thirty (30) days per display and a maximum of two (2) displays per calendar year). 
c.  Shall not pose a safety or visibility hazard, nor impede public vehicular or pedestrian circulation, either on-site or off-site, in any way. 
d.  Shall not extend into public right-of-way or onto adjacent property. 
e.  All outside display items shall be removed at the end of business each day (except for large seasonal items such as Christmas trees). 
f.  All merchandise shall be displayed in a neat, orderly manner, and the display area shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free manner. 
6.  Open storage is prohibited. 
7.  Building facade (i.e., elevation) plans shall be submitted for review and approval along with the site plan. Facade plans shall clearly show how the building(s) will look, especially as viewed from the major thoroughfare upon which the property faces and/or sides, and will portray a reasonably accurate depiction of the materials and colors to be used. The planning director (or his/her designee) may, as he/she deems appropriate, require submission of additional information and materials (possibly actual samples of materials to be used) during the site plan review process. 
8.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling or nonresidential purposes. 
9.  Maintenance requirements for common areas-A property owners association is required for continued maintenance of any common areas and facilities provided within the development. The ownership, maintenance and operation of common areas shall be provided in accordance with subsection 28.61.E. of this zoning chapter. 
10.  Other regulations-As established in the development standards, article V. 
(Ord. No. 4728, § 1, 2-3-14; Ord. No. 4820, § 2(2.11), 7-18-16; Ord. No. 4924, § 2(2.02), 12-11-17) 
Sec. 28.28. - UD-Urban Development District. 
28.28.1.   General purpose and description:
This district is intended primarily for new single-family residential development west of Highway 75. This district established minimum development standards that will ensure that development occurs in a manner that is sensitive to the natural environment and natural topography. Development standards address environmental issues and provide incentives to preserve significant natural features such as stands of trees, maintenance of riparian corridors, stormwater management, and the natural topography. The maximum density to be allowed within the UD District would be five (5.0) dwelling units per acre. Site plans would be mandatory within this district. Specific objectives are as follows: 
A.  To maintain and protect the natural environment of the city's undeveloped areas by preserving important landscape elements, including those areas containing unique and environmentally sensitive natural features such as woodlands, hedgerows, stream corridors, wetlands, floodplains, ridge tops, steep slopes, critical species habitats, and natural areas by setting them aside from development. Such areas designated for Type B by the City of Denison Future Land Use Plan, are of particular significance for conservation. 
B.  To preserve scenic views of existing natural areas and to minimize views of new development from existing streets. 
C.  To provide for the unified and planned development of parcels fifty (50) acres or larger in size for clustered, single-family, low density residential uses, incorporating large areas of permanently protected common open space. 
D.  To provide for greater design flexibility in the siting of dwellings and other development features than would be permitted by the application of standard district regulations in order to minimize the disturbance of rural landscape elements, scenic quality, and overall aesthetic value of the landscape. 
E.  To create groups of dwellings with direct visual and physical access to common open space. 
F.  To permit active and passive recreational use of common open space by residents of a cluster development or by the public. 
G.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by retaining existing vegetation and minimizing development on steep slopes. 
H.  To permit various means for owning common open space and for protecting it from development in perpetuity. 
I.  To create an attitude of stewardship, or caring, for the land within common open space by requiring a land management, or stewardship, plan for the common open space. 
J.  To implement the objectives of the adopted city comprehensive plan, or elements thereof. 
28.28.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the UD District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.28.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: 
A.  Two and one-half (21/2) stories, but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet for the main building/house. 
B.  One story, or twelve (12) feet for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, accessory dwelling units, gazebo, etc. 
C.  Other requirements (see article V). 
28.28.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Minimum standards: 
Criteria Standard/Non-Clustered Development Clustered Development Minimum Site Area Not Specified Two Acres Maximum Density a 1 Dwelling Unit/2 Gross Acres 5 Dwelling Units/Net Buildable Acre Minimum Lot Area;sup\sup; 43,560 Square Feet 6,500 Square Feet Minimum Lot Width 
 Measured @ Bldg. Setback 
 Measured @ Front Lot Line   
150' 
100'   
55' 
35' Minimum Lot Depth 300' 115' Average Lot Depth 2 Times Lot Width None Specified Minimum Front Yard 50' 25' Minimum Rear Yard 50' 15' Minimum Side Yard Ten (10) percent of the lot width but need not exceed twenty (20) feet; fifteen (15) feet from a street right-of-way line for a corner lot Ten (10) percent of the lot width but need not exceed five (5) feet; fifteen (15) feet from a street right-of-way line for a corner lot Accessory Building Setback c 
 From Side Lot Lines 
 From Rear Lot Line   
10' 
10'   
5' 
5' Minimum Common Open Space 
(Percentage of Gross Acres) Not Specified 20% Maximum Building Coverage Per 10% 50%  
a Existing dwellings that will remain on the site shall be included in the calculation of maximum density. 
;sz=8q en;For an existing farmstead on a parcel used for cluster development, the minimum lot area shall be two (2) acres or a lot large enough to accommodate all structures within a building envelope created by a one-hundred-foot setback from all sides of the lot, whichever is larger. For farmsteads with livestock, the setback shall be increased to two hundred (200) feet. 
;sz=8q 
en;Accessory buildings shall not be permitted within the front yard. 
B.  Garages: Garage entries for automobiles shall not be located nearer than twenty-four (24) feet to a street right-of-way or the minimum side yard or rear yard setbacks, whichever is greater. 
C.  Parking regulations: 
1.  Single-family dwelling unit -A minimum of two (2) enclosed parking spaces behind the front building line on the same lot as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces on a paved driveway having a minimum length of twenty-five (25) feet as measured from the street right-of-way line. 
2.  Other -See section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
D.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: One thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet. 
E.  Minimum exterior construction standards: Seventy-five (75) percent standard masonry construction (see article V). 
28.28.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
B.  Electrical fencing and barbed wire is prohibited unless otherwise allowed by the Denison Code of Ordinances or any other rule, regulation or requirement of the city. 
C.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption such as firewood, garden materials, farm equipment, etc., which cannot be stored in any required setback and which shall be screened from view of public streets and neighboring properties). 
D.  Single-family homes with side-entry garages where lot frontage is only to one (1) street (not a corner lot) shall have a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet from the door face of the garage or carport to the side property line for maneuvering. The minimum setback from any garage door to a street or alley right-of-way line shall also be twenty-four (24) feet. 
E.  The elimination of a garage space by enclosing the garage with a stationary building wall shall be prohibited. 
F.  Swimming pools (see article V). 
G.  Site plan approval (see section 28.13) shall be required for any nonresidential use (e.g., school, church, child care center, private recreation facility, etc.) in the UD District. Any nonresidential land use which may be permitted in this district shall conform to the "NS"-Neighborhood Service District standards with respect to building setbacks, landscaping, exterior building construction, screening requirements, lighting, signage, etc. 
H.  Cluster developments: An application for a clustered development in the UD District shall be prepared and processed as a cluster development plan in accordance with section 28.12 and shall be consistent with the standards specified in subsection 28.28.4.A. 
I.  Other regulations: As established by article V. 
Sec. 28.29. - 2F-Two-Family (duplex) Residential District. 
28.29.1.   General purpose and description:
The 2F District, Two-Family Residential, is intended to promote stable, quality multiple-occupancy residential development at slightly increased densities. Individual ownership of each of the two-family or duplex units is encouraged. This district may provide a "buffer" or transition district between lower density residential areas and higher density or nonresidential areas or major thoroughfares. Areas zoned for the 2F District shall have, or shall make provision for, municipal water or wastewater service. They shall be designed to adequately accommodate storm drainage; they shall have paved concrete streets with logical and efficient vehicular circulation patterns that discourage non-local traffic; they shall be properly buffered from nonresidential uses; and they shall be protected from pollution and undesirable environmental and noise impacts. 
28.29.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the 2F District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses (i.e., SUP), respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.29.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: 
1.  Two and one-half (21/2) stories but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet for the main building/house. 
2.  One (1) story, but not to exceed eighteen (18) feet for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, gazebo, etc. 
3.  Other regulations: In addition to other applicable ordinance regulations, article V regulations shall apply. 
28.29.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lots for two-family/duplex homes: 
1.  Minimum lot area -Ten thousand (10,000) square feet per duplex lot (five thousand (5,000) square feet per dwelling unit.) 
2.  Minimum lot width -One hundred (100) feet for each duplex lot (fifty (50) feet of lot width per dwelling unit). 
3.  Minimum lot depth -One hundred (100) feet. 
B.  Size of lots for single-family detached homes: 
1.  Minimum lot area -Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet; 
2.  Minimum lot width -Seventy-five (75) feet. 
3.  Minimum lot depth -One hundred (100) feet. 
C.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum Front Yard -Twenty-five (25) feet. 
2.  Minimum side yard -One side yard may be reduced to zero feet where the duplex units join; the other side yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet required to the side property line and with fifteen (15) feet required on corner lots adjacent to a residential or collector street, twenty (20) feet shall be required on corner lots adjacent to an arterial street; and twenty-five (25) feet minimum shall be required for a key corner lot. The required side yards shall be designated upon a plat approved by the council. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: 
a.  No main residential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet to the rear property line. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one (1) side lot line with the opposite side lot line. 
c.  Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lots, except for accessory buildings allowed pursuant to this chapter and the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs, and other architectural features projecting a maximum of four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
4.  Garages -Garage entries for automobiles shall not be located nearer than eighteen (18) feet to a street right-of-way or the distance of the minimum side yard or rear yard setback, whichever is greater. 
5.  Maximum lot coverage -Fifty (50) percent by main buildings and accessory buildings. 
D.  Parking regulations: 
1.  Two-family/duplex homes or single-family detached homes -A minimum of two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit behind the front building line and on the same lot as each dwelling unit, located on a paved driveway (all concrete or a similar paved surface such as turf pavers, brick pavers or asphalt). 
2.  Single-family detached homes -Parking requirements shall comply with the Single-Family 7.5 zoning district. 
3.  Other -See section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
E.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: Six hundred fifty (650) square feet. 
F.  Minimum exterior construction standards: See section 28.54 for exterior construction standards. 
28.29.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Single-family lots and detached dwellings constructed in this district shall conform to the standards as set forth in the SF-7.5 Zoning District. 
B.  The elimination of a garage space by enclosing or converting any portion of the garage space with a stationary building wall shall be prohibited unless another garage of the same size (i.e., that has the same number of parking spaces) is built on the lot within the proper setbacks, not exceeding the maximum lot coverage, etc. 
C.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers, or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
D.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption such as firewood, garden materials, etc., which cannot be stored in any required setback and which shall be screened from view of public streets and neighboring properties). 
E.  Single-family and two-family homes with side-entry garages where lot frontage is only to one (1) street (not a corner lot) shall have a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet from the door face of the garage or carport to the side property line for maneuvering. The minimum setback from any garage door to a street or alley right-of-way line shall be eighteen (18) feet. 
F.  Swimming pools (see the city's Code of Ordinances). 
G.  Site plan approval (see section 28.13) shall be required for any nonresidential use (e.g., school, church, child care center, private recreation facility, etc.) in the 2F District. Any nonresidential land use which may be permitted in this district shall conform to the "NS"-Neighborhood Service District standards with respect to building setbacks, landscaping, exterior building construction, screening requirements, lighting, signage, etc. Said site plan approval shall not be required for home occupations uses that conform to the city's standards. 
H.  Roofs: As established by article V, stone coated steel roofing systems equivalent to Decra or Gerard with a minimum of 26 gauge and/or standing seam or equivalent interlocking metal roof panels that do not have exposed screws or grommets with painted factory finish guaranteed for a minimum of twenty (20) years in a color compatible with the surrounding residential roofs-Colors shall include Galvalume (matte finish/non-reflective), pewter, burnished slate, ivy green, light stone and copper (matte finish/non-reflective) are allowed. Roofs with bright colors such as bright red, neon or similar colors or reflective or shiny finishes are prohibited. 
I.  Accessory dwellings: An accessory dwelling shall only be allowed by CUP, floor area shall be equal to or less than thirty-five (35) percent of the total floor area of the main residence, shall meet all minimum setback and other requirements of the district in which it is located, shall meet all requirements set forth in the CUP, and shall only be allowed in conjunction with a single family residence. An accessory dwelling shall not be allowed in conjunction with a duplex or other multi-family use. 
J.  Other regulations: In addition to other applicable ordinance regulations, article V regulations shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 4820, § 2(2.12-2.14), 7-18-16; Ord. No. 4868, § 3, 5-1-17) 
Sec. 28.30. - MF-1-Multi-Family Residential District. 
28.30.1.   General purpose and description:
This district would allow for lower intensity multi-family development. The maximum allowable density is twelve (12.0) dwelling units per acre. Specific design standards would specify mandatory open space and appropriate architectural design. A site plan would be required for development within this district. 
28.30.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the MF-1 District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.30.3.   Height regulations:
A.  Maximum height: 
1.  Three (3) stories, or forty-five (45) feet for the main building(s). 
2.  One (1) story, or twelve (12) feet for other accessory buildings, including detached garages, carports, clubhouse, gazebo, mail kiosks, laundry rooms, etc. 
3.  Other requirements (see article V). 
28.30.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lots: 
1.  Minimum lot area -Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet minimum plus one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for each dwelling unit. The minimum project size shall be ten (10) acres. 
2.  Minimum lot width -Sixty (60) feet. 
3.  Minimum lot depth -One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Special exception -If a property was platted or zoned for MF-1 prior to the effective date of this chapter, then it can remain its original size and configuration and does not have to meet the minimum project size, lot width or lot depth stated above. The property shall conform to all other MF-1 development standards herein, unless the building setbacks shown on a recorded plat vary from those contained herein, in which case the platted setbacks shall prevail unless a replat modifies same. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Twenty-five (25) feet. All areas adjacent to a street shall be deemed front yards. See section 28.44 for additional setback requirements. 
2.  Minimum side and rear yard -Ten (10) percent of the lot width not to be less than five (5) feet but need not exceed fifteen (15) feet; twenty (20) feet from a street right-of-way line for a corner lot; unless adjacent to a single-family, duplex, patio home or single-family attached district then side and rear setbacks shall be according to the height of the multi-family building, as follows: 
a.  One-story building -Twenty-five (25) feet. 
b.  Two-story building -Fifty (50) feet. 
c.  Over two-story building -Seventy-five (75) feet. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: 
a.  No main residential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one (1) side lot line with the opposite side lot line. 
c.  Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lots, except for accessory buildings allowed pursuant to this chapter and the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs, and other architectural features projecting a maximum of four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
4.  Building separation: 
a.  Between residential structures -Ten (10) feet for buildings without openings; fifteen (15) feet for buildings with openings. 
b.  Between a main building and an accessory building -Ten (10) feet. 
C.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 
1.  Efficiency unit -Four hundred fifty (450) square feet per unit. 
2.  One-bedroom unit -Six hundred fifty (650) square feet per unit. 
3.  Two- or more bedroom unit -Eight hundred seventy-five (875) square feet for the first two (2) bedrooms, plus an additional one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet for every bedroom over two (e.g., three-bedroom unit must have one thousand (1,000) square feet, etc.). 
D.  Maximum lot coverage: Fifty (50) percent total, including main and accessory buildings. 
E.  Parking regulations: 
1.  One and one-half (1.5) spaces for each efficiency or one-bedroom unit. 
2.  Two (2) spaces for each two-bedroom unit. 
3.  Two and one-half (2.5) spaces for each three-bedroom unit. 
4.  Three (3) spaces for each four- or more-bedroom unit. 
5.  The average number of parking spaces for the total development shall be no less than two (2) spaces per dwelling unit. 
6.  No parking space may be located closer than six (6) feet from any building, nor closer than two (2) from any side or rear lot line. 
7.  All parking areas adjacent to public streets shall be screened from view. Screening may be in the form of live plant materials, berms, low masonry walls that match the exterior finish of main buildings, or any combination of the above. 
8.  See section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements, for additional requirements. 
F.  Minimum exterior construction standards: One hundred (100) percent masonry (Stucco, cementious composition fiberboard, concrete masonry units or materials of similar characteristics will not be allowed). 
28.30.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Usable open space requirements: Except as provided below, any multi-family development shall provide useable open space which equals or exceeds fifteen (15) percent of the total lot area. 
B.  Maximum density: Projects shall not exceed a density of twelve (12) dwelling units per gross acre. 
C.  Landscape area requirements: A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the total lot area shall be devoted to a combination of landscaping (i.e., pervious surface area) and usable open space (see above). See article V for landscaping requirements. 
D.  Refuse facilities: Every multi-family dwelling unit shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of a refuse facility, measured along the designated pedestrian travel way. A refuse facility shall be a dumpster or other similar container designed for receiving garbage in bulk for more than one (1) dwelling, and all refuse containers shall be maintained in accordance with local public health and sanitary regulations. Refuse containers shall be located no closer than thirty (30) feet to any adjacent single-family property, shall be located so as to provide safe and convenient pickup by refuse collection agencies, and shall be screened in accordance with article V of this chapter. (See Illustration 1 for refuse container enclosure diagrams). 
E.  Screening requirements: See article V for screening requirements. 
F.  A swimming pool shall be provided in multi-family developments of fifty (50) or more units. See article V for additional pool requirements. 
G.  One (1) playground area containing at least five (5) pieces of play equipment shall be provided for every one hundred (100) dwelling units, or fraction thereof. The playground equipment shall be of heavy-duty construction, such as is normally used in public parks or on public school playgrounds. 
H.  Single-family, duplex, patio home, or townhouse residential units constructed in this district shall conform to SF-5, SF-PH, SF-TH, and 2-F District standards, respectively. 
I.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
J.  Open storage is prohibited. 
K.  All points on the exterior facades of all buildings shall be within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a dedicated fire lane easement (as measured by an unobstructed pathway, or route, for fire hoses). 
L.  A four-foot wide paved walkway shall connect the front door of each ground floor unit to a parking area. The minimum width of any sidewalk adjacent to head-in parking spaces shall be six (6) feet to accommodate a two-foot bumper overhang for vehicles. 
M.  Boats, campers, trailers and other recreational vehicles shall be prohibited unless oversize parking areas are provided as part of the approved site plan. This parking area shall not be used to meet the minimum parking requirements and shall not be visible from a public street. 
N.  All buildings containing residential units shall provide signage that clearly identifies the numbers (i.e., addresses) of the units within each building. Signage shall be visible from entrances into the complex and/or from vehicular drive aisles within the complex such that each individual unit is easy to locate by visitors, delivery persons, and/or emergency personnel. 
O.  All parking areas shall have appropriate lighting and shall be positioned such that no light adversely impacts adjacent residential areas. 
P.  Site plan approval (see section 28.13) shall be required for any multi-family or nonresidential use (e.g., school, church, child care center, private recreation facility, etc.) in the MF-1 District. Any nonresidential land use which may be permitted in this district shall conform to the "NS"-Neighborhood Service District standards with respect to building setbacks, landscaping, exterior building construction, screening requirements, lighting, signage, etc. 
Q.  Efficiency units shall be limited in number to twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of units per development and each development phase. Any fractional number of units resulting from the twenty-five (25) percent allowable formula will be permitted to be rounded to the next highest full number. 
R.  Each multi-family unit shall have sidewalk access to the parking area designed to accommodate that unit. 
S.  Other regulations: As established by article V. 
(Ord. No. 4733, § 1, 2-17-14) 
Sec. 28.31. - MF-2-Multi-Family Residential District. 
28.31.1.   General purpose and description:
This district would allow for higher intensity multi-family development. The maximum allowable density would be twenty (20.0) dwelling units per acre. Specific design standards would specify mandatory open space, and appropriate architectural design. A site plan would be required for development within this district. 
28.31.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the MF-2 District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.31.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: 
A.  Three (3) stories, or forty-five (45) feet for the main building(s). 
B.  One (1) story, or twelve (12) feet for other accessory buildings, including detached garages, carports, clubhouse, gazebo, mail kiosks, laundry rooms, etc. 
C.  Other requirements (see article V). 
28.31.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lots: 
1.  Minimum lot area -Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet minimum plus one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for each dwelling unit. The minimum project size shall be ten (10) acres. 
2.  Minimum lot width -Sixty (60) feet. 
3.  Minimum lot depth -One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Special exception -If a property was platted or zoned for MF-2 prior to the effective date of this chapter, then it can remain its original size and configuration and does not have to meet the minimum project size, lot width or lot depth stated above. The property shall conform to all other MF-2 development standards herein, unless the building setbacks shown on a recorded plat vary from those contained herein, in which case the platted setbacks shall prevail unless a replat modifies same. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Twenty-five (25) feet. All areas adjacent to a street shall be deemed front yards. See section 28.44 for additional setback requirements. 
2.  Minimum side and rear yard -Ten (10) percent of the lot width not to be less than five (5) feet but need not exceed fifteen (15) feet; twenty (20) feet from a street right-of-way line for a corner lot; unless adjacent to a single-family, duplex, patio home or single-family attached district then side and rear setbacks shall be according to the height of the multifamily building, as follows: 
a.  One-story building -twenty-five (25) feet. 
b.  Two-story building -fifty (50) feet. 
c.  Over two-story building -seventy-five (75) feet. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: 
a.  No main residential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one (1) side lot line with the opposite side lot line. 
c.  Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lots, except for accessory buildings allowed pursuant to this chapter and the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs, and other architectural features projecting a maximum of four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
4.  Building separation: 
a.  Between residential structures -Ten (10) feet for buildings without openings; fifteen (15) feet for buildings with openings. 
b.  Between a main building and an accessory building -ten (10) feet. 
C.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 
1.  Efficiency unit -Four hundred fifty (450) square feet per unit. 
2.  One-bedroom unit -Six hundred fifty (650) square feet per unit. 
3.  Two- or more bedroom unit -Eight hundred seventy-five (875) square feet for the first two bedrooms, plus an additional one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet for every bedroom over two (e.g., three-bedroom unit must have one thousand (1,000) square feet, etc.). 
D.  Maximum lot coverage: Fifty (50) percent total, including main and accessory buildings. 
E.  Parking regulations: 
1.  One and one-half (1.5) spaces for each efficiency or one-bedroom unit. 
2.  Two (2) spaces for each two-bedroom unit. 
3.  Two and one-half (2.5) spaces for each three-bedroom unit. 
4.  Three (3) spaces for each four- or more-bedroom unit. 
5.  The average number of parking spaces for the total development shall be no less than two (2) spaces per dwelling unit. 
6.  No parking space may be located closer than six (6) feet from any building, nor closer than two (2) feet from any side or rear lot line. 
7.  All parking areas adjacent to public streets shall be screened from view. Screening may be in the form of live plant materials, berms, low masonry walls that match the exterior finish of main buildings, or any combination of the above. 
8.  See section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements, for additional requirements. 
F.  Minimum exterior construction standards: One hundred (100) percent masonry (Stucco, cementious composition fiberboard, concrete masonry units or materials of similar characteristics will not be allowed). 
28.31.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Usable open space requirements: Except as provided below, any multi-family development shall provide useable open space which equals or exceeds fifteen (15) percent of the total lot area. 
B.  Maximum density: Projects shall not exceed a density of twenty (20) dwelling units per gross acre. 
C.  Landscape area requirements: A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the total lot area shall be devoted to a combination of landscaping (i.e., pervious surface area) and usable open space (see above). See article V for landscaping requirements. 
D.  Refuse facilities: Every multi-family dwelling unit shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of a refuse facility, measured along the designated pedestrian travel way. A refuse facility shall be a dumpster or other similar container designed for receiving garbage in bulk for more than one (1) dwelling, and all refuse containers shall be maintained in accordance with local public health and sanitary regulations. Refuse containers shall be located no closer than thirty (30) feet to any adjacent single-family property, shall be located so as to provide safe and convenient pickup by refuse collection agencies, and shall be screened in accordance with article V of this chapter. (See Illustration 1 for refuse container enclosure diagrams). 
E.  Screening requirements: See article V for screening requirements. 
F.  A swimming pool shall be provided in multi-family developments of fifty (50) or more units. See article V for additional pool requirements. 
G.  One (1) playground area containing at least five (5) pieces of play equipment shall be provided for every one hundred (100) dwelling units, or fraction thereof. The playground equipment shall be of heavy-duty construction, such as is normally used in public parks or on public school playgrounds. 
H.  Single-family, duplex, patio home, or townhouse residential units constructed in this district shall conform to SF-5, SF-PH, SF-TH, and 2-F District standards, respectively. 
I.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
J.  Open storage is prohibited. 
K.  All points on the exterior facades of all buildings shall be within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a dedicated fire lane easement (as measured by an unobstructed pathway, or route, for fire hoses). 
L.  A four-foot wide paved walkway shall connect the front door of each ground floor unit to a parking area. The minimum width of any sidewalk adjacent to head-in parking spaces shall be six (6) feet to accommodate a two-foot bumper overhang for vehicles. 
M.  Boats, campers, trailers and other recreational vehicles shall be prohibited unless oversize parking areas are provided as part of the approved site plan. This parking area shall not be used to meet the minimum parking requirements and shall not be visible from a public street. 
N.  All buildings containing residential units shall provide signage that clearly identifies the numbers (i.e., addresses) of the units within each building. Signage shall be visible from entrances into the complex and/or from vehicular drive aisles within the complex such that each individual unit is easy to locate by visitors, delivery persons, and/or emergency personnel. 
O.  All parking areas shall have appropriate lighting and shall be positioned such that no light adversely impacts adjacent residential areas. 
P.  Site plan approval (see section 28.13) shall be required for any multi-family or nonresidential use (e.g., school, church, child care center, private recreation facility, etc.) in the MF-2 District. Any nonresidential land use which may be permitted in this district shall conform to the "NS"-Neighborhood Service District standards with respect to building setbacks, landscaping, exterior building construction, screening requirements, lighting, signage, etc. 
Q.  Efficiency units shall be limited in number to twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of units per development and each development phase. Any fractional number of units resulting from the twenty-five (25) percent allowable formula will be permitted to be rounded to the next highest full number. 
R.  Each multi-family unit shall have sidewalk access to the parking area designed to accommodate that unit. 
S.  Other regulations: As established by article V. 
(Ord. No. 4733, § 1, 2-17-14) 
Sec. 28.32. - MH-Manufactured Home District. 
28.32.1.   General purpose and description:
The MH District, manufactured home, is a detached residential district establishing standards for the development of manufactured, HUD-Code manufactured home parks and subdivisions including undeveloped lots. Manufactured home subdivisions include individually platted lots for sale within the subdivision, for the placement of manufactured home units. A manufactured home park offers spaces for the placement of manufactured home units on a lease or rental basis. The Manufactured Home District establishes area and design requirements for parks and subdivisions. Both parks and subdivisions provide open space and recreational areas appropriate for the acreage and number of units contained. Areas zoned for the MH District shall have, or shall make provision for, municipal utility services. They shall be designed to adequately accommodate storm drainage; they shall have paved concrete streets with logical and efficient vehicular circulation patterns which discourage non-local traffic; they shall be properly buffered from nonresidential uses; and they shall be protected from pollution and undesirable environmental and noise impacts. 
28.32.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the MH District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses (i.e., CUP), respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.32.3.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of yards (for each space within manufactured/mobile home park or subdivision): 
1.  Minimum front yard -Twenty-five (25) feet from a dedicated street; fifteen (15) feet from any private street or drive. See section 28.55 for additional setback requirements. 
2.  Minimum side yard -Ten (10) feet; twenty (20) feet between units; twenty (20) feet from zoning district boundary line; fifteen (15) feet for a corner lot on a residential or collector street, and twenty-five (25) feet for a corner lot on an arterial street. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: 
a.  No main residential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one (1) side lot line with the opposite side lot line. 
c.  Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lots, except for accessory buildings allowed pursuant to this chapter and the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs, and other architectural features projecting a maximum of four (4) into the required rear yard. 
4.  [Garage setback]: If a garage is provided, the entry (i.e., door) feet side of the garage shall have a twenty-four-foot setback as measured from any property or street right-of-way line. 
B.  Size of space (for each space within a manufactured/mobile home park): 
1.  Minimum lot area -Three thousand (3,000) square feet per unit. 
2.  Minimum lot width -Thirty-five (35) feet in a manufactured home park, fifty (50) feet for individual lots. 
3.  Minimum lot depth -Eighty (80) feet. 
C.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: Four hundred (400) square feet, no HUD-Code manufactured home of a width less than twenty (20) feet may be permitted, nor used as a replacement home under the terms of this chapter. 
D.  Maximum lot coverage: Forty (40) percent for main building/unit plus any accessory buildings. 
E.  Parking regulations: Two (2) covered spaces (i.e., carport or garage) per unit located on the same lot as the unit served (see section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading); all driveways and parking areas shall be concrete. 
F.  Reserved. 
G.  Area for manufactured home subdivision/park: Minimum project area three (3) acres; maximum project area thirty-five (35) acres. 
H.  Maximum height limit: 
1.  Two and one-half (21/2) stories but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet for the main building/house. 
2.  One (1) story, or twelve (12) feet for other accessory buildings, including detached garages, carports, management office, clubhouse, gazebo, mail kiosks, etc. 
3.  Other requirements (see section 28.55). 
I.  Minimum exterior construction standards: None. 
28.32.4.   Special requirements for manufactured/mobile home parks:
A.  Tenant parking: Each parking space shall be an approved paved surface (i.e., concrete or a similar paved surface such as turf pavers, brick pavers or asphalt), in accordance with city standards, and shall be located to eliminate interference with access to parking areas provided for other manufactured/mobile homes and for public parking in the park (see section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements). 
B.  Visitor and supplemental parking: In addition to parking spaces required for each manufactured home unit, there shall be paved parking provided for the manufactured/mobile home community in general (see section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements): 
1.  Two (2) visitor parking spaces for every three (3) manufactured home spaces. 
2.  One (1) supplemental parking or vehicle storage space for the parking or storage of boats, campers and similar vehicles or equipment for every four (4) manufactured home spaces. 
3.  Supplemental spaces may be located anywhere within the manufactured home community provided that no manufactured home space shall be situated further than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a visitor space. 
4.  Each parking space will be not less than nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet, which is not to be included in the lot size. 
C.  Access: Each manufactured home community shall have direct access from an improved public street or an internal street. Where an internal private street provides access, the same shall be paved in accordance with city standards for a public street, and it shall be dedicated to the public as an emergency access/fire lane easement to allow for the rapid and safe movement of vehicles used in providing emergency health or public safety services. Each emergency access/fire lane easement shall have a clear unobstructed width of twenty-four (24) feet, shall connect to a dedicated public street, and shall have a turning area and radii of a minimum of fifty (50) feet to permit free movement of emergency vehicles. Dead end streets are not allowed. Cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed four hundred (400) feet in length. Fire lane easements shall be maintained by the manufactured/mobile home park. 
D.  Walkways: Designated concrete walkways four (4) feet in width will be provided on both sides of roadways or streets. 
E.  Street names and signs: Within each manufactured home park, all streets shall be named, and manufactured homes numbered in a logical and orderly fashion. Street signs shall be of a color and size contrasting with those on public streets and roadways so that there is no confusion regarding which are private and which are public streets. These signs and numbers shall be of standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles. Street names shall be submitted to the planning director (or his/her designee) along with the construction plat application, reviewed by the appropriate city staff with respect to street naming procedures set forth within the subdivision ordinance and/or the City's Code of Ordinances, and approved by the planning and zoning commission and the city council on the construction plat for the subdivision. The street names shall be set with construction plat approval, and shall not be changed on the final plat without city approval. All dwelling unit numbering and/or addressing shall be assigned by the planning director or his/her designee and placed on each dwelling with three-inch high numbers. 
F.  Other signs: Along all sections of emergency access easements, the owner or agent shall erect metal signs prohibiting parking. The sign type, size, height and location shall be in accordance with the manual of uniform traffic control devices and approved by the city. 
G.  Intersections: Internal streets shall intersect adjoining public streets at approximately ninety (90) degrees and at locations that will eliminate or minimize interference with traffic on those public streets. 
H.  Street lighting: Street lighting within the manufactured home park shall be provided and maintained by the owners of the manufactured/mobile home park. 
I.  Electric and telephone service: All electrical distribution lines and all telephone/utility lines shall be underground. 
J.  Drainage and soil protection: The ground surface in all parts of the park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner. Each manufactured home space shall provide adequate drainage for the placement of a manufactured home. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured home park shall be paved and/or covered with stone, brick paving, or other similar solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth (such as grass) capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating dust. 
K.  Firefighting: 
1.  Approaches to all manufactured homes shall be kept clear for firefighting. 
2.  The owner or agent of a manufactured home park shall be responsible for the instruction of any staff in the use of the park fire protection equipment and in their specific duties in the event of a fire. Owner shall supply standard city fire hydrants located within three hundred (300) feet of all manufactured home spaces, measured along the drive or street. 
3.  The owner or agent of a manufactured home park shall be responsible for maintaining the entire area of the park free of dry brush, leaves and weeds in excess of six (6) inches in height. 
L.  Refuse facilities: Every manufactured home dwelling unit shall be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a refuse facility, measured along the designated pedestrian travel way. A refuse facility shall be a dumpster or other similar container designed for receiving garbage in bulk for more than one (1) dwelling, and all refuse containers shall be maintained in accordance with local public health and sanitary regulations. Refuse containers shall be located no closer than thirty (30) feet to any adjacent single-family property, shall be located so as to provide safe and convenient pickup by refuse collection agencies, and shall be screened in accordance with section 28.53 of this chapter. (See Illustration 1 for refuse container enclosure diagrams) 
M.  Anchorage of manufactured homes: To ensure against natural hazards such as tornados, high winds and electrical storms, anchorage for each manufactured home shall be provided according to the City of Denison Building Code and state law. 
N.  Skirting: 
1.  All manufactured home units not attached to a permanent foundation shall provide skirting from the top of the unit's frame to grade. Skirting shall totally enclosed (except for two (2) access points not to exceed nine (9) square feet in each area) and secure from view the unit's axles and all required anchors, footings, and piers. 
2.  All required skirting shall be masonry or concrete board, and shall be of a color similar to the materials used in the construction of the manufactured/mobile home unit such that it blends with the overall appearance of the unit. 
3.  Towing tongues and all axles must be removed. 
O.  Maintenance requirements for common areas: A property owners association is required for continued maintenance of any common land and facilities provided within the manufactured home park/subdivision (see the subdivision ordinance for property owner association/home owner association requirements). 
P.  [Conformance:] Single-family, duplex, patio home or townhouse residential units constructed in this district shall conform to SF-7.5, 2F or SF-TH District standards, respectively. 
Q.  [Open storage:] Open storage is prohibited. 
R.  Usable open space requirements: Except as provided below, any manufactured home development shall provide useable open space that equals or exceeds fifteen (15) percent of the total land area within the development. Usable open space areas shall be in conformance with the following standards: 
1.  Specific criteria for usable open space -Areas provided as usable open space shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  All residential lots must be located within six hundred (600) feet of a usable open space area as measured along a street. The planning and zoning commission may recommend, and city council may allow, this distance to be increased to up to one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet if the shape of the subdivision is irregular or if existing trees or other natural features on the site can be preserved by increasing the distance. 
b.  Individual usable open space areas shall be at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size. Useable open space must be a minimum of fifty (50) feet wide, and must have no slope greater than ten (10) percent. At the time of site plan and subdivision plat approval, the city council may allow, full or partial credit for open areas that exceed the ten (10) percent maximum slope if it is determined that such areas are environmentally or aesthetically significant and that their existence enhances the development and the surrounding area. 
c.  Pools, tennis courts, walkways, patios and similar outdoor amenities may be located within areas designated as useable open space. Areas occupied by enclosed buildings (except for gazebos and pavilions), driveways, parking lots, overhead electrical transmission lines, drainage channels, and antennas may not be included in calculating useable open space. 
d.  Within useable open space areas, there shall be at least one (1) large shade tree for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of space. New trees planted to meet this requirement shall be a minimum three-inch caliper, and at least twenty-five (25) percent of the trees shall be non-deciduous (for qualifying tree species, see appendix C of this chapter for the city's recommended plant list). 
e.  A useable open space area must have street frontage on at least thirty-three (33) percent of the area's perimeter to ensure that the area is accessible to residents of the subdivision. 
f.  Useable open space areas must be easily viewed from adjacent streets and homes. Side or rear yard fences along common open space areas shall be of open, wrought iron design, and shall not exceed four (4) feet in height adjacent to the open space and for a distance of ten (10) feet perpendicular or radial to the open space area. 
2.  Landscaped areas -Additional common open space and landscaped areas that do not qualify as usable open space may be provided, but shall not be counted toward the usable open space requirement. 
3.  Credit for off-site open space -At the time of site plan and subdivision plat approval, the planning director may allow, up to one-third of the required open space to be credited for off-site dedicated open space (e.g., park land) that meets the development's needs in terms of adjacency, accessibility, usability, and design integration. The guidelines below shall assist in considering if credit is appropriate: 
a.  Adjacency -Is at least fifteen (15) percent of the development's boundary adjacent to park land? 
b.  Accessibility -Are there defined pedestrian connections between the development and the park land? 
c.  Usability -Is the park land immediately adjacent to the development suitable for use and accessible by residents? 
d.  Design integration -Does the design of the development provide a significant visual and pedestrian connection to the park or other open space land? 
S.  [Swimming pool requirement:] A swimming pool shall be provided in manufactured home developments of fifty (50) or more units. See the city's Code of Ordinances for additional requirements for swimming pools. 
T.  [Playground requirement:] One playground area containing at least five (5) pieces of play equipment shall be provided for every one hundred (100) dwelling units, or fraction thereof. The playground equipment shall be of heavy-duty construction, such as is normally used in public parks or on public school playgrounds. 
28.32.5.   Special requirements for all manufactured homes:
A.  Site plan approval (see section 28.13) shall be required for any mobile home park or nonresidential use (e.g., school, church, child care center, private recreation facility, etc.) in the MH District. Any nonresidential land use which may be permitted in this district shall conform to the "NS"-Neighborhood Service Retail District standards with respect to building setbacks, landscaping, exterior building construction, screening requirements, lighting, signage, etc. Said site plan approval shall not be required for home occupations uses that conform to the city's standards. 
B.  In the MH District all site plans must be approved by the planning and zoning commission and city council. All site plans shall include building elevations (front, side and rear). 
C.  No HUD-Code manufactured home may be located and used in the city that has a year of manufacture earlier than four (4) years prior to the year in which application to locate or use the home in the city is made. For the purpose of calculating compliance with this requirement, the year of manufacture shall be counted, but not the year in which the application contemplated herein is made. 
D.  The 28.32.4. N. skirting requirement shall also apply. 
E.  Other regulations: As established by article V. 
28.32.6.   Industrialized housing:
A.  Industrialized homes in any single-family or duplex zoning district shall meet all of the requirements of the district in which the industrialized home is located and shall: 
1.  Have a value equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each single-family dwelling located within five hundred (500) feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for each county in which the properties are located; 
2.  Have exterior siding, roofing, roofing pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with the single-family dwelling located within five hundred (500) feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located; 
3.  Comply with aesthetic standards, building setbacks, side and rear yard offsets, subdivision standards, architectural landscaping, square footage, and other site requirements applicable to single-family dwellings; and 
4.  Be securely affixed to a permanent foundation. 
B.  For the purposes of subsection A. above, "value" means the taxable value of the industrialized housing and the lot after the installation of the housing. 
(Ord. No. 4697, §§ 2, 3, 5-20-13) 
Sec. 28.33. - O-Office District. 
28.33.1.   General purpose and description:
The O-Office District is intended to provide for a mixture of office and residential uses in close proximity to enable people to live, work and purchase necessities in a single location. Bed-and-breakfast establishments could also be located in this district. Additionally, pedestrian walkways and open areas are desired in order to promote a pedestrian-friendly environment. The following are key concepts that should be acknowledged through development practices within [the] Office District: 
A.  Residential uses in conjunction with nonresidential activities, possibly located above or next to office establishments; 
B.  All types of residential uses, including single-family homes, townhouses, and loft-style multiple-family units; 
C.  Offices are compatible with residential not exceeding three (3) stories in height; 
D.  Traffic flows that enable people to move freely without the use of an automobile by emphasizing the pedestrian. 
28.33.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the O District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses (i.e., CUP), respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.33.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: 
A.  Three (3) stories. 
B.  One (1) story, or twelve (12) feet for other accessory buildings, including detached garages, carports, clubhouse, gazebo, mail kiosks, laundry rooms, etc. 
C.  Other requirements (see article V). 
28.33.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lots: 
1.  Minimum lot area -Six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum lot width -Sixty (60) feet. 
3.  Minimum lot depth -One hundred (100) feet. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Twenty-five (25) feet. All areas adjacent to a street shall be deemed front yards. 
2.  Minimum side: 
a.  Nonresidential use -Twenty-five (25) feet. 
b.  Multi-family or duplex uses -Ten (10) percent of the lot width not to be less than five (5) feet but need not exceed fifteen (15) feet; twenty (20) feet from a street right-of-way line for a corner lot; unless adjacent to a single-family, duplex, patio home or single-family attached district then side and rear setbacks shall be according to the height of the multi-family building, as follows: 
1.  One-story building -twenty-five (25) feet. 
2.  Two-story building -fifty feet (50). 
c.  Single-family detached uses -Ten (10) percent of the lot width not to be less than five (5) feet but need not exceed fifteen (15) feet; fifteen (15) feet on corner lots adjacent to a street right-of-way line; and twenty (20) feet from a street right-of-way line for a key corner lot. 
d.  Single-family attached uses -One side yard reduced to zero feet where the units join; other side yard a minimum of ten (10) feet required with fifteen (15) feet required on corner lots adjacent to a residential or collector street, twenty (20) feet required on corner lots adjacent to an arterial street; and twenty-five (25) feet required for a key corner lot. 
3.  Minimum rear yard: 
a.  No main residential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one (1) side lot line with the opposite side lot line. 
c.  Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lots, except for accessory buildings allowed pursuant to this chapter and the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs, and other architectural features projecting a maximum of four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
4.  Building separation: 
a.  Between residential structures -Ten (10) feet for buildings without openings; fifteen (15) feet for buildings with openings. 
b.  Between a main building and an accessory building -ten (10) feet. 
C.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 
1.  Efficiency unit -Four hundred fifty (450) square feet per unit. 
2.  One-bedroom unit -Six hundred fifty (650) square feet per unit. 
3.  Two (2) or more bedroom unit -Eight hundred seventy-five (875) square feet for the first two (2) bedrooms, plus an additional one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet for every bedroom over two (2) (e.g., three-bedroom unit must have one thousand (1,000) square feet, etc.). 
D.  Maximum lot coverage: Forty (40) percent total, including main and accessory buildings. 
E.  Parking regulations (see section 28.50): 
1.  One and one-half (1.5) spaces for each efficiency or one-bedroom unit. 
2.  Two (2) spaces for each two-bedroom unit. 
3.  Two and one-half (2.5) spaces for each three-bedroom unit. 
4.  Three (3) spaces for each four- or more-bedroom unit. 
5.  The average number of parking spaces for the total development shall be no less than two (2) spaces per dwelling unit. 
6.  No parking space may be located closer than six (6) feet from any building or closer than two (2) feet from any side or rear lot line. 
7.  All parking areas adjacent to public streets shall be screened from view. Screening may be in the form of live plant materials, berms, and low masonry walls that match the exterior finish of main buildings, or any combination of the above. 
E.  Minimum exterior construction standards: Seventy-five (75) percent standard masonry construction (see article V). 
28.33.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Landscaping requirements: Refer to article V. 
B.  Open storage: Open storage in nonresidential areas is prohibited. 
C.  On-site dwellings: Recreational vehicles, manufactured homes, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling or nonresidential purposes. 
D.  Temporary facilities: There shall be no permanent use of temporary facilities or buildings. 
E.  Other regulations: As established by article V. 
Sec. 28.34. - NS-Neighborhood Services District. 
28.34.1.   General purpose and description:
The NS-Neighborhood Services District, is established to provide areas for limited low intensity retail, office, and service uses that provide services to immediately adjacent residential neighborhoods. Automotive repair and automotive service businesses are not appropriate to the NS District. NS developments should integrate landscaping and buffering in order to ensure compatibility with immediately adjacent residential uses. The NS District can also serve as a land use transition to residential areas from nonresidential areas. 
28.34.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the NS District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.34.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: 
A.  Two (2) stories but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet for the main building(s); an additional twenty (20) percent in height is allowable for architectural features (i.e. domes, clocks, steeples). 
B.  One (1) story for accessory buildings. 
C.  Other (article V). 
28.34.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lot: 
1.  Minimum lot area -Six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum lot width (lots fronting onto a collector, arterial or higher order street as designated on the thoroughfare plan, as amended) -One hundred (100) feet at the front property line with shared access; three hundred (300) feet at the front property line without shared access. 
3.  Minimum lot width (lots other than those specified in 2. above) -One hundred (100) feet at the front building line with shared access; Two hundred (200) feet at the front building line without shared access. 
4.  Minimum lot depth (lots fronting onto a collector, arterial or higher order street as designated on the thoroughfare plan, as amended) -One hundred (100) feet. 
5.  Minimum lot depth (lots other than those specified in 4. above) -None. 
6.  Minimum lot frontage for cul-de-sac lots -Lots with frontage onto a cul-de-sac end shall provide for a minimum lot frontage of seventy-five (75) feet at the front property line. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Maximum front yard -Seventy (70) feet from ultimate right-of-way line of roadway; all yards adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard (see section 28.42 for additional setback requirements). 
2.  Minimum front yard -Fifteen (15) feet from ultimate right-of-way line of roadway; all yards adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard (see section 28.42 for additional setback requirements). 
3.  Minimum rear yard adjacent to a residential zoning district: 
a.  No main residential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one side lot line with the opposite side lot line. 
c.  Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lots, except for accessory buildings allowed pursuant to this chapter and the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs, and other architectural features projecting a maximum of four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
4.  Minimum side and rear yards not adjacent to a residential zoning district -When nonresidential uses are platted adjacent to other nonresidential uses and integrated into an overall development with lots or lease spaces abutting one another, no side yard is required provided that the city's building code requirements have been met. 
5.  Minimum side yard adjacent to a residential district -Ten (10) percent of the lot width as measured along the front property line but need not to exceed fifty (50) feet. 
C.  Maximum lot coverage: Forty (40) percent including main and accessory buildings; maximum eighty (80) percent impervious coverage, including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc. 
D.  Floor to area ratio (F.A.R.): The gross square footage of all structures, including primary and all accessory structures, shall not exceed an amount equal to one-half (1/2) the square footage of the lot or tract in which they are located (0.5:1). 
E.  Parking requirements: 
1.  As established by section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
2.  No more than ten (10) percent of the mandatory parking spaces required pursuant to section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements may be located between the primary structure or building and the front property line. Said parking shall be limited to a single row of parking stalls oriented toward the primary structure or building. 
28.34.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Driveway spacing (distance between driveways, measured edge-to-edge): 
1.  Highway -One (1) driveway per three hundred (300) linear feet of frontage or TxDOT regulations, if applicable. 
2.  Arterial street -One (1) driveway per one hundred fifty (150) linear feet of frontage. 
3.  Collector street -One (1) driveway per one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage. 
4.  Local street -One (1) driveway per fifty (50) linear feet of frontage. 
5.  Minimum distance from driveway to street corner -Fifty (50) feet, as measured from the street corner radius point of tangency. 
B.  Driveway separation from intersections (distance measured from the centerline of the rights-of-way to the pavement edge of the driveway): 
1.  Highway intersection with another street -Three hundred (300) feet or TxDOT regulations, if applicable. 
2.  Arterial street intersection with another street -Two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
3.  Collector street intersection with another street -One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Residential street intersection with another street -Fifty (50) feet. 
C.  Site plan review: No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all construction and development conforms to the site plan as approved by the city. 
D.  Landscaping requirements: See section 28.51. 
E.  Screening requirements: See section 28.53. 
F.  Outside display of merchandise and seasonal items shall be limited to the following: 
1.  Shall not be placed/located more than thirty (30) feet from the main building. 
2.  Shall not occupy any of the parking spaces that are required by this chapter for the primary use(s) of the property (except on a temporary basis only, which is a maximum of thirty (30) days per display and a maximum of two (2) displays per calendar year). 
3.  Shall not pose a safety or visibility hazard, nor impede public vehicular or pedestrian circulation, either on-site or off-site, in any way. 
4.  Shall not extend into public right-of-way or onto adjacent property. 
5.  All outside display items shall be removed at the end of business each day (except for large seasonal items such as Christmas trees). 
6.  All merchandise shall be displayed in a neat, orderly manner, and the display area shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free manner. 
G.  [Permanent open storage]: Permanent open storage is prohibited. 
H.  [Prohibited:] Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling or nonresidential purposes. 
I.  Other regulations: As established in the development standards, article V. 
Sec. 28.35. - LR-Local Retail District. 
28.35.1.   General purpose and description:
The LR-Local Retail District is established to provide areas for smaller-scale retail, office, and service uses that are sized and oriented toward serving several neighborhoods within the City of Denison. LR developments should integrate landscaping and buffering in order to ensure compatibility with immediately adjacent residential uses. The LR District provides for an increased intensity of uses that generate increased traffic volumes and they should be located at the intersection of major collectors or thoroughfares and in locations that afford adequate roadway capacities. 
28.35.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the LR District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses (i.e., SUP), respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.35.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: 
A.  Two (2) stories but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet for the main building(s); an additional twenty (20) percent in height is allowable for architectural features (i.e. domes, clocks, steeples). 
B.  One (1) story for accessory buildings. 
C.  Other (article V). 
28.35.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lot: 
1.  Minimum lot area -None. 
2.  Minimum lot width (lots fronting onto a collector, arterial or higher order street as designated on the thoroughfare plan, as amended) -One hundred fifty (150) feet at the front property line with shared access; two hundred (200) feet at the front property line without shared access. 
3.  Minimum lot width (lots other than those specified in 2. above) -One hundred (100) feet at the front building line. 
4.  Minimum lot depth (lots fronting onto a collector, arterial or higher order street as designated on the thoroughfare plan, as amended) -One hundred and fifty (150) feet. 
5.  Minimum lot depth (lots other than those specified in 4. above) -None. 
6.  Minimum lot frontage for cul-de-sac lots -Lots with frontage onto a cul-de-sac end shall provide for a minimum lot frontage of one hundred (100) feet at the front property line. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Fifteen (15) feet from ultimate right-of-way line or roadway; all yards adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard (see article V for additional setback requirements). 
2.  Minimum rear yard adjacent to a residential zoning district: 
a.  No main residential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one (1) side lot line with the opposite side lot line. 
c.  Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lots, except for accessory buildings allowed pursuant to this chapter and the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs, and other architectural features projecting a maximum of four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
4.  Minimum side and rear yards not adjacent to a residential zoning district -When nonresidential uses are platted adjacent to other nonresidential uses and integrated into an overall development with lots or lease spaces abutting one another, no side yard is required provided that the city's building code requirements have been met. 
5.  Minimum side yard adjacent to a residential district -Ten (10) percent of the lot width as measured along the front property line but need not to exceed fifty (50) feet. 
C.  Maximum lot coverage: Sixty (60) percent including main and accessory buildings; maximum eighty-five (85) percent impervious coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.). 
D.  Floor to area ratio (F.A.R.): The gross square footage of all structures, including primary and all accessory structures, shall not exceed an amount equal to six tenths (0.6) of a square foot for every square foot of the lot or tract in which they are located (0.6:1). 
E.  Parking requirements: 
1.  As established by section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
28.35.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Driveway spacing (distance between driveways, measured edge-to-edge): 
1.  Highway -One (1) driveway per three hundred (300) linear feet of frontage or TxDOT regulations, whichever is applicable. 
2.  Arterial street -One (1) driveway per one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage. 
3.  Collector street -One (1) driveway per one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage. 
4.  Local street -One (1) driveway per fifty (50) linear feet of frontage 
5.  Minimum distance from driveway to street corner -Fifty (50) feet, as measured from the street corner radius point of tangency. 
B.  Driveway separation from intersections (distance measured from the centerline of the rights-of-way to the pavement edge of the driveway): 
1.  Highway intersection with another street -Three hundred (300) feet or TxDOT regulations, whichever is applicable. 
2.  Arterial street intersection with another street -Two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
3.  Collector street intersection with another street -One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Residential street intersection with another street -Fifty (50) feet. 
C.  Site plan review: No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all construction and development conforms to the site plan as approved by the city. 
D.  Landscaping requirements: See section 28.51. 
E.  Screening requirements: See section 28.53. 
F.  Outside display of merchandise and seasonal items shall be limited to the following: 
1.  Shall not be placed/located more than thirty (30) feet from the main building. 
2.  Shall not occupy any of the parking spaces that are required by this chapter for the primary use(s) of the property (except on a temporary basis only, which is a maximum of sixty (60) days per display and a maximum of two (2) displays per calendar year). 
3.  Shall not pose a safety or visibility hazard, nor impede public vehicular or pedestrian circulation, either on-site or off-site, in any way. 
4.  Shall not extend into public right-of-way or onto adjacent property. 
5.  All outside display items shall be removed at the end of business each day (except for large seasonal items such as living plants, Christmas trees). 
6.  All merchandise shall be displayed in a neat, orderly manner, and the display area shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free manner. 
G.  [Permanent open storage:] Permanent open storage is prohibited. 
H.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling or nonresidential purposes. 
I.  Other regulations: As established in the development standards, article V. 
Sec. 28.36. - CR-Community Retail District. 
28.36.1.   General purpose and description:
This district is for moderate to medium-sized office, retail and commercial uses that serve a large section of the community. These uses should be located along the city's major thoroughfares since they will generate large amounts of traffic, glare, light, odor, and noise that are not generally considered compatible within the interior of residential areas. Multiple tenant facilities are appropriate within the CR Zoning District. 
28.36.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the CR District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.36.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: 
A.  Three (3) stories but not to exceed fifty (50) feet for the main building(s), except maximum height shall be twenty-five (25) feet for any portion of a building that is located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential zoning district. 
B.  One (1) story for accessory buildings. 
C.  Other (article V). 
28.36.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lot: 
1.  Minimum lot area -None. 
2.  Minimum lot width (lots fronting onto a collector, arterial or higher order street as designated on the thoroughfare plan, as amended) -One hundred fifty (150) feet at the front property line with shared access; two hundred (200) feet at the front property line without shared access. 
3.  Minimum lot width (lots other than those specified in 2. above) -One hundred (100) feet at the front building line. 
4.  Minimum lot depth (lots fronting onto a collector, arterial or higher order street as designated on the thoroughfare plan, as amended) -Three hundred (300) feet. 
5.  Minimum lot depth (lots other than those specified in 4. above) -None. 
6.  Minimum lot frontage for cul-de-sac lots -Lots with frontage onto a cul-de-sac end shall provide for a minimum lot frontage of one hundred (100) feet at the front property line. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Fifteen (15) feet from ultimate right-of-way line of roadway; all yards adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard (see article V for additional setback requirements). 
2.  Minimum rear yard adjacent to a residential zoning district: 
a.  No main residential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one (1) side lot line with the opposite side lot line. 
c.  Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lots, except for accessory buildings allowed pursuant to this chapter and the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs, and other architectural features projecting a maximum of four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
3.  Minimum side and rear yards not adjacent to a residential zoning district -When nonresidential uses are platted adjacent to other nonresidential uses and integrated into an overall development with lots or lease spaces abutting one another, no side yard is required provided that the city's building code requirements have been met. 
4.  Minimum side yard adjacent to a residential district -Ten (10) percent of the lot width as measured along the front property line but need not to exceed fifty (50) feet. 
C.  Maximum lot coverage: Sixty (60) percent including main and accessory buildings; maximum eighty-five (85) percent impervious coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.). 
D.  Floor to area ratio (F.A.R.): The gross square footage of all structures, including primary and all accessory structures, shall not exceed an amount equal to the square footage of the lot or tract in which they are located (1:1). 
E.  Parking requirements: As established by section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
F.  Minimum design criteria: 
1.  Orientation and scale of primary structure(s): 
a.  Buildings located within thirty (30) feet of a street right-of-way shall have their primary orientation toward a front yard. 
b.  Primary entrances: 
1.  Primary entrances shall have a clearly defined, highly visible customer entrance with distinguishing features such as a canopy, portico or other prominent element of the architectural design. 
2.  Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass, surface or finish to give emphasis to primary entrances. 
c.  Loading docks or loading areas shall be screened or not be visible from the street and may not be accessed directly from the street. 
2.  Building materials for primary structures: 
a.  Seventy-five (75) percent of any exposed exterior wall that is visible from a public street of main buildings, parking structures, and accessory buildings shall consist of exterior materials as required in section 28.54. Other finishes and materials may be used at the sole discretion of the city council if adopted as a condition of the site plan and if permitted by the City of Denison building and fire codes. 
b.  Any finish permitted by the City of Denison, building and fire codes may be used on the remaining twenty-five (25) percent of any exposed exterior wall. 
c.  The city council may allow, at its sole discretion, the use of concrete or concrete block on exterior walls that are not visible from a public right-of-way. These finishes must be consistent in color with the remainder of the building. These would include the walls of service courts and other facilities that are secluded from view by the specific design of a building or group of buildings. 
d.  Glass: 
1.  All exterior building materials comprised of glass shall have a maximum exterior visible reflectance of twenty (20) percent. 
2.  Glass shall not comprise more than seventy (70) percent of the building skin. 
3.  Parking lots with two hundred (200) spaces or more shall be divided into separate areas divided by landscaped areas or walkways measuring a minimum of ten (10) feet in width or by a building or group of buildings. 
a.  Pedestrian walkways shall be directly linked to entrances and the internal circulation of the building. 
b.  Connections shall be made when feasible to any streets adjacent to the property and to any pedestrian facilities that connect to the property unless pedestrian and/or traffic hazards prohibit such connections. 
c.  Adjacent nonresidential sites shall provide cross vehicular access between nonresidential lots. 
28.36.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Driveway spacing (distance between driveways, measured edge-to-edge): 
1.  Highway -One (1) driveway per three hundred (300) linear feet of frontage or TxDOT regulations if applicable. 
2.  Arterial street -One (1) driveway per one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage. 
3.  Collector street -One (1) driveway per one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage. 
4.  Local street -One (1) driveway per fifty (50) linear feet of frontage. 
5.  Minimum distance from driveway to street corner -Fifty (50) feet, as measured from the street corner radius point of tangency. 
B.  Driveway separation from intersections (distance measured from the centerline of the rights-of-way to the pavement edge of the driveway). 
1.  Highway intersection with another street -Three hundred (300) feet or TxDOT regulations if applicable. 
2.  Arterial street intersection with another street -Two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
3.  Collector street intersection with another street -One hundred (100) feet. 
4  Residential street intersection with another street -Fifty (50) feet. 
C.  Landscaping requirements: See section 28.51. 
D.  Screening requirements: See section 28.53. 
E.  Outside display of merchandise and seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins, etc.) shall be limited to the following: 
1.  Shall not be placed/located more than one hundred (100) feet from the main building. 
2.  Shall not occupy any of the parking spaces that are required by this chapter for the primary use(s) of the property (except on a temporary basis only, which is a maximum of sixty (60) days per display and a maximum of two (2) displays per calendar year). 
3.  Shall not pose a safety or visibility hazard, nor impede public vehicular or pedestrian circulation, either on-site or off-site, in any way. 
4.  Shall not extend into public right-of-way or onto adjacent property. 
5.  All merchandise shall be displayed in a neat, orderly manner, and the display area shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free manner. 
F.  [Permanent open storage:] Permanent open storage is prohibited. 
G.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling or nonresidential purposes. 
H.  Other regulations: As established in the development standards, article V. 
Sec. 28.37. - RR-Regional Retail District. 
28.37.1.   General purpose and description:
This district is for regional office, retail and commercial uses that serve a regional client base. These uses should be located at the city's major intersections since they will generate large amounts of traffic, glare, light, odor, and noise that are not generally considered compatible within the interior of residential areas. Multiple tenant facilities are appropriate within the RR Zoning District. 
28.37.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the RR District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.37.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: 
A.  Eight (8) stories. 
B.  One (1) story for accessory buildings. 
C.  Other (article V). 
28.37.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lot: 
1.  Minimum lot area -None. 
2.  Minimum lot width (lots fronting onto a collector, arterial or higher order street as designated on the thoroughfare plan, as amended) -One hundred fifty (150) feet at the front property line. 
3.  Minimum lot width (lots other than those specified in 2. above) -One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Minimum lot depth (lots fronting onto a collector, arterial or higher order street as designated on the thoroughfare plan, as amended) -One hundred and fifty (150) feet. 
5.  Minimum lot depth (lots other than those specified in 4. above) -None. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Twenty-five (25) feet from ultimate right-of-way line of roadway; all yards adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard (see article V for additional setback requirements). 
2.  Minimum rear yard adjacent to a residential zoning district: 
a.  No main residential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one (1) side lot line with the opposite side lot line. 
c.  Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lots, except for accessory buildings allowed pursuant to this chapter and the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs, and other architectural features projecting a maximum of four (4) feet into the required rear yard. 
3.  Minimum Side and rear yards not adjacent to a residential zoning district -When nonresidential uses are platted adjacent to other nonresidential uses and integrated into an overall development with lots or lease spaces abutting one another, no side yard is required provided that the city's building code requirements have been met. 
4.  Minimum side yard adjacent to a residential district -Ten (10) percent of the lot width as measured along the front property line but need not to exceed fifty (50) feet. 
C.  Maximum lot coverage: Sixty (60) percent including main and accessory buildings; maximum ninety (90) percent impervious coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.). 
D.  Floor to area ratio (F.A.R.): The gross square footage of all structures, including primary and all accessory structures, shall not exceed an amount equal to two (2) times the square footage of the lot or tract in which they are located (2:1). 
E.  Parking requirements: As established by section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
F.  Minimum design criteria: 
1.  Orientation and scale of primary structure(s): 
a.  Buildings located within thirty (30) feet of a street right-of-way shall have their primary orientation toward a front yard. 
b.  Primary entrances: 
1.  Primary entrances shall have a clearly defined, highly visible customer entrance with distinguishing features such as a canopy, portico or other prominent element of the architectural design. 
2.  Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass, surface or finish to give emphasis to primary entrances. 
c.  Loading docks or loading areas are not permitted to be visible from the street and may not be accessed directly from the street. 
2.  Building materials for primary structures: 
a.  Seventy-five (75) percent of any exposed exterior wall that is visible from a public street of main buildings, parking structures, and accessory buildings shall consist of exterior materials as required in section 28.54. Other finishes and materials may be used at the sole discretion of the city council if adopted as a condition of the site plan and if permitted by the City of Denison building and fire codes. 
b.  Any finish permitted by the City of Denison building and fire codes may be used on the remaining twenty-five (25) percent of any exposed exterior wall. 
c.  The city council may allow, at its sole discretion, the use of concrete or concrete block on exterior walls that are not visible from a public right-of-way. These finishes must be consistent in color with the remainder of the building. These would include the walls of service courts and other facilities that are secluded from view by the specific design of a building or group of buildings. 
d.  Glass: 
1.  All exterior building materials comprised of glass shall have a maximum exterior visible reflectance of twenty (20) percent. 
2.  Glass shall not comprise more than seventy (70) percent of the building skin. 
3.  On-site circulation: 
a.  Parking lots with two hundred (200) spaces or more shall be divided into separate areas divided by landscaped areas or walkways measuring a minimum of ten (10) feet in width or by a building or group of buildings. 
b.  Developments of one (1) acre or more must provide a pedestrian circulation plan for the site. Pedestrian walkways shall be directly linked to entrances and the internal circulation of the building. 
c.  Connections shall be made when feasible to any streets adjacent to the property and to any pedestrian facilities that connect to the property unless pedestrian and/or traffic hazards prohibit such connections. 
28.37.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Driveway spacing (distance between driveways, measured edge-to-edge): 
1.  Highway -One (1) driveway per three hundred (300) linear feet of frontage or TX DOT regulations if applicable. 
2.  Arterial street -One (1) driveway per one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage. 
3.  Collector street -One (1) driveway per one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage. 
4.  Local street -One (1) driveway per fifty (50) linear feet of frontage. 
5.  Minimum distance from driveway to street corner -Fifty (50) feet, as measured from the street corner radius point of tangency. 
B.  Driveway separation from intersections (distance measured from the centerline of the rights-of-way to the pavement edge of the driveway). 
1.  Highway intersection with another street -Three hundred (300) feet or TxDOT regulations if applicable. 
2.  Arterial street intersection with another street -Two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
3.  Collector street intersection with another street -One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Residential street intersection with another street -Fifty (50) feet. 
C.  Landscaping requirements: See section 28.51. 
D.  Screening requirements: See section 28.53. 
E.  Outside display of merchandise and seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins, etc.) shall be limited to the following: 
1.  Shall not be placed/located more than two hundred (200) feet from the main building. 
2.  Shall not occupy any of the parking spaces that are required by this chapter for the primary use(s) of the property. 
3.  Shall not pose a safety or visibility hazard, nor impede public vehicular or pedestrian circulation, either on-site or off-site, in any way. 
4.  Shall not extend into public right-of-way or onto adjacent property. 
5.  All merchandise shall be displayed in a neat, orderly manner, and the display area shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free manner. 
F.  [Permanent open storage:] Permanent open storage is prohibited. 
G.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling or nonresidential purposes. 
H.  Other regulations: As established in the development standards, article V. 
Sec. 28.38. - C-Commercial District. 
28.38.1.   General purpose and description:
The C-Commercial District is intended to provide a location for commercial and service-related establishments, such as wholesale product sales, welding and contractor shops, plumbing shops, automotive repair services, upholstery shops, and other similar commercial uses. Uses in this district may utilize open storage areas that are screened from public view. The uses envisioned for the district will typically utilize small sites and have operational characteristics that are generally not compatible with residential uses and most other types of nonresidential uses within the city. 
28.38.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the C District in section 28.50 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.13. 
28.38.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: 
A.  Eight (8) stories. 
B.  One (1) story for accessory buildings. 
C.  Other (article V). 
28.38.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lot: 
1.  Minimum lot area -None. 
2.  Minimum lot width (lots fronting onto a collector, arterial or higher order street as designated on the thoroughfare plan, as amended) -One hundred (100) feet at the front property line. 
3.  Minimum lot width (lots other than those specified in 2. above) -None. 
4.  Minimum Lot depth (lots fronting onto a collector, arterial or higher order street as designated on the thoroughfare plan, as amended) -One hundred fifty (150) feet. 
5.  Minimum lot depth (lots other than those specified in 4. above) -None. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Twenty-five (25) feet from ultimate right-of-way line of roadway; all yards adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard (see article V for additional setback requirements). 
2.  Minimum rear yard adjacent to a residential zoning district: 
a.  No main residential building shall be located nearer than ten (10) feet. 
b.  The main residential building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one (1) side lot line with the opposite side lot line. 
3.  Minimum side and rear yards not adjacent to a residential zoning district -When nonresidential uses are platted adjacent to other nonresidential uses and integrated into an overall development with lots or lease spaces abutting one another, no side yard is required provided that the city's building code requirements have been met. 
4.  Minimum side yard adjacent to a residential district -Ten (10) percent of the lot width as measured along the front property line but need not to exceed fifty (50) feet. 
C.  Maximum lot coverage: Seventy (70) percent including main and accessory buildings; maximum ninety (90) percent impervious coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.). 
D.  Maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.): The gross square footage of all structures, including primary and all accessory structures, shall not exceed an amount equal to two (2) times the square footage of the lot or tract in which they are located (2:1). 
E.  Parking requirements: As established by section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
28.38.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Driveway spacing (i.e., distance between driveways, measured edge-to-edge): 
1.  Arterial street -One (1) driveway per one hundred (100) linear of frontage or TxDOT regulations, whichever is applicable. 
2.  Collector street -One (1) driveway per one hundred (100) feet linear feet of frontage. 
3.  Local street -One (1) driveway per fifty (50) linear feet of frontage. 
4.  Minimum distance from driveway to street corner -Fifty (50) feet, as measured from the street corner radius point of tangency. 
B.  Landscaping requirements: See section 28.51. 
C.  Screening requirements: See section 28.53. 
D.  [Open storage limitations]: Open storage is limited to a maximum of five (5) percent of the total lot area, shall not be located in front of (i.e., on the street side of) or on top of the building, and must be screened in accordance with the provisions of section 53 (i.e., cannot be visible from any public street or adjacent property). 
E.  [Prohibited purposes]: Recreational vehicles, travel trailers, motor homes or temporary buildings may not be used for on-site dwelling or permanent nonresidential purposes. 
F.  Other regulations: As established in the development standards, article V. 
Sec. 28.39. - CA-Central Area District. 
28.39.1.   General purpose and description:
The CA-Central Area District is intended to be used only in the historic central business district of the City of Denison. The uses in this district are generally retail or office in nature and often rely on off-site parking. Uses also have minimal setback requirements due to the compact nature of the downtown area. Residential uses in conjunction with permitted nonresidential uses are also appropriate. Residential uses in the district shall be prohibited on the ground floor of buildings. 
28.39.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the CA District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.39.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height-None. 
28.39.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lot: 
1.  Minimum lot area -None. 
2.  Minimum lot width -Twenty-five (25) feet. 
3.  Minimum lot depth -One hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
B.  Size of Yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -None. 
2.  Minimum side yard -None. 
3.  Minimum rear yard -None. 
C.  Maximum lot coverage: One hundred (100) percent for the main structure and accessory buildings. 
D.  Parking regulations: As established by section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
E.  Maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.): The gross square footage of all structures, including primary and all accessory structures, shall not exceed an amount equal to ten (10) times the square footage of the lot or tract in which they are located (10:1). 
F.  Parking requirements: 
1.  No off-street parking shall be required. Every effort shall be made to establish off-street parking for all new structures within two hundred (200) feet of the site. 
28.39.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Design standards for the CA District: 
1.  False fronts or parapets may be added to existing buildings in order to add character and detail to simple facades. 
2.  Predominant exterior finish colors shall be of fired brick, similar to that which is present on adjacent existing buildings (other masonry materials may also be considered during site plan review). Trim (i.e., lintels, sills, door jambs, cornices and other similar items) shall be brick, cast stone, stone, cast or wrought iron, or concrete, and colors shall be complementary to the predominant facade colors. Accent colors for friezes, doors and door frames, window frames and mullions, signage, awnings, moldings and other similar features shall be colors that are complementary to, and compatible with, the spirit and intent of the downtown streetscape (bright or fluorescent colors which were not typically used in early Texas downtowns shall not be used). Buildings with the primary exterior finish as metal are prohibited. 
3.  Reflective glass shall not be used for windows; detailing for windows, doors and other openings shall be of wood, glass or a metal material that is complementary to the period or building style. 
4.  Awnings/Canopies: 
a.  Ratios-Awnings shall be at an appropriate scale to the building size and configuration. They shall not extend above the roofline of any single-story structure, or above the top of the second floor of any multi-story structure at the awnings' highest points. Awnings shall not completely obstruct any windows on the building. 
b.  Projection-Since awnings must extend beyond the building face, a reasonable amount of projection shall be allowed. No awning shall extend more than five (5) feet outward from the building face/surface. 
5.  Pedestrian streetscape-Pedestrian spaces shall be treated with amenities that are selected based upon their ability to unify the streetscape with the area's historic past. It is important that elements such as construction materials, colors, textures and fixture design complement the area's historic qualities. These features shall be repeated throughout the streetscape so as to unify the district as a whole. 
B.  Storage: Open storage, mini-warehouses, and warehousing in general are prohibited in the CA District. 
C.  Architectural design: The architectural design of buildings and sites shall strive to achieve the following objectives: 
Architectural compatibility; 
Integration of uses; 
Encouragement of pedestrian activity; 
Buildings that relate to, and are oriented toward, the pedestrian areas and surrounding buildings; and 
Buildings that contain special architectural features to signify entrances; 
All building materials shall be established on architectural elevations and supporting information. 
D.  Other regulations: As established in the development standards, article V. 
(Ord. No. 4610, §§ 1, 2, 8-15-11) 
Sec. 28.40. - BP-Business Park District. 
28.40.1.   General purpose and description:
The BP-Business Park District is intended primarily for the conduct of light manufacturing, assembling and fabrication activities, and for warehousing, research and development, wholesaling and service operations. Such uses do require accessibility to major thoroughfares, major highways, and/or other means of transportation such as rail service. 
28.40.2.   Permitted uses:
Those uses listed for the BP District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses (i.e., CUP), respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
28.40.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: 
A.  Two (2) stories but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet for the main building(s), except maximum height shall be twenty-five (25) feet for any portion of a building that is located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential zoning district. 
B.  Other (article V). 
28.40.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lot: 
1.  Minimum lot area -Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, except one (1) acre (43,560 square feet) for any site having frontage along any highway or arterial as designated on the City of Denison Thoroughfare Plan, as amended. 
2.  Minimum lot width -One hundred feet (100), except one hundred twenty (120) feet for any site having frontage along any highway or arterial as designated on the City of Denison Thoroughfare Plan, as amended. 
3.  Minimum lot depth -One hundred fifty (150) feet. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Forty (40) feet from ultimate right-of-way line of roadway; all yards adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard (see article V for additional setback requirements). 
2.  Minimum side and rear yard -Twenty (20) feet unless adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see below). 
3.  Minimum side or rear yard adjacent to a residential district -One hundred fifty (150) feet. 
C.  Maximum lot coverage: Fifty (50) percent including main and accessory buildings; maximum eighty (80) percent impervious coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.). 
D.  Maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.): One to one (1:1). 
E.  Parking requirements: As established by section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
28.40.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Driveway spacing (i.e., distance between driveways, measured edge-to-edge): 
1.  Highway -One (1) driveway per two hundred fifty (250) linear feet of frontage or TX DOT regulations if applicable. 
2.  Arterial street -One (1) driveway per two hundred (200) linear feet of frontage. 
3.  Collector street -One (1) driveway per one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage. 
4.  Local street -One (1) driveway per fifty (50) linear feet of frontage. 
5.  Minimum distance from driveway to street corner -Fifty (50) feet, as measured from the street corner radius point of tangency. 
B.  Site plan review: Review and approval of a site plan by the city (in accordance with section 28.13) shall be required for any tract/lot within the BP District. 
C.  Landscaping requirements: See section 28.51. 
D.  Screening requirements: See section 28.53. 
E.  [Open storage:] Open storage is limited to a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the total lot area, shall not be located in front of (i.e., on the street side of) or on top of the building, and must be screened in accordance with the provisions of section 28.53 (i.e., cannot be visible from any public street or adjacent property). 
F.  [Prohibited purposes:] Recreational vehicles, travel trailers, motor homes or temporary buildings may not be used for on-site dwelling or permanent nonresidential purposes. 
G.  Maintenance requirements for common areas: A property owners association is required for continued maintenance of any common land and facilities provided within the development. 
H.  Other regulations: As established in the development standards, article V. 
Sec. 28.41. - LI-Light Industrial District. 
28.41.1.   General purpose and description:
The LI-Light Industrial District is intended primarily for the conduct of light manufacturing, assembling and fabrication, and for warehousing, wholesaling and service operations that do not depend upon frequent customer or client visits. Such uses do require accessibility to major thoroughfares, major highways, or other means of transportation. 
28.41.2.   Permitted uses:
The following uses are permitted in the LI District, provided that such manufacturing or industrial operation shall not disseminate dust, fumes, gas, noxious odor, smoke, glare, or other atmospheric influence beyond the boundaries of the property on which such use is located and which produces no noise exceeding the average intensity of noise of street traffic at that point and provided that such use does not create fire hazards on surrounding property: 
A.  Those uses listed for the LI District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
B.  Industrial and manufacturing plants including the processing or assembling of parts for production of finished equipment where the process of manufacturing or treatment of materials is such that no dust, odor, gas or smoke is emitted and not more than fifty (50) percent of the lot or tract is used for the open storage of products, materials, or equipment (see section 28.53 for additional screening requirements). 
C.  A "high risk or hazardous industrial use" is permitted by specific use permit only. In this section, "high risk or hazardous industrial use" means any industrial use whose operation, in the opinion of the fire marshal, involves a much higher than average risk to public health and safety. These uses include but are not limited to facilities where significant amounts of radiation, radioactive materials, highly toxic chemicals or substances, or highly combustible or explosive materials are present, used, produced, stored, or disposed of as defined in the Uniform Fire Code. 
28.41.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: Six (6) stories. 
28.41.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lot: 
1.  Minimum lot area -None. 
2.  Minimum lot width -None. 
3.  Minimum lot depth -None. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Twenty-five (25) feet; all yards adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard (see section 28.42 for additional setback requirements). 
2.  Minimum side and rear yard -None unless adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see below). 
3.  Minimum side or rear yard adjacent to a residential district -One and one-half foot (11/2) for every foot of building height as measured from the finished grade to the tallest point of the structure. 
C.  Maximum lot coverage: None specified. 
D.  Maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.): One to one (1:1). 
E.  Parking regulations: As established by section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
28.41.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Driveway spacing (i.e., distance between driveways, measured edge-to-edge): 
1.  Highway -One (1) driveway per two hundred fifty (250) linear feet of frontage or TX DOT regulations if applicable. 
2.  Arterial street -One (1) driveway per one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage. 
3.  Collector street -One (1) driveway per one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage. 
4.  Local street -One (1) driveway per fifty (50) linear feet of frontage. 
5.  Minimum distance from driveway to street corner -Fifty (50) feet, as measured from the street corner radius point of tangency. 
B.  Site plan review: Review and approval of a site plan by the city (in accordance with section 28.13) shall be required for any tract/lot within the LI District. 
C.  Landscaping requirements: See article V. 
D.  Screening requirements: See article V. 
E.  [Open storage limitations:] Open storage is limited to a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the total lot area, shall not be located in front of (i.e., on the street side of) or on top of the building, and must be screened in accordance with the provisions of article V (i.e., cannot be visible from any public street or adjacent property). 
F.  [Prohibited uses:] Recreational vehicles, travel trailers, motor homes or temporary buildings may not be used for on-site dwelling or permanent nonresidential purposes. 
G.  Impound lots to be used as vehicle storage facilities: Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6687-9a defines a vehicle storage facility as a garage, parking lot, or any type of facility owned by a person other than a governmental entity for storing or parking ten (10) or more vehicles. The operator of a vehicle storage facility shall possess a permit issued by the state department of labor and standards, and all regulations of that department shall apply to the operation of such a facility. A visual screening fence shall be required on all sides of any property used as a vehicle storage facility. Impound lots are permitted only by CUP in the LI District. 
H.  Other regulations: As established in the development standards, article V. 
28.41.6.   Compliance with state law and federal laws:
No uses shall be allowed which are prohibited by state law or which operate in excess of state or national environmental or pollution standards as determined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Texas Air Control Board, Texas State Department of Health, or The Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission, as the case may be. 
Sec. 28.42. - HI-Heavy Industrial District. 
28.42.1.   General purpose and description:
The HI-Heavy Industrial District is intended primarily for the conduct of heavy manufacturing, assembling and fabrication, and for warehousing, wholesaling and service operations that do not depend upon frequent customer or client visits. Such uses do require accessibility to major thoroughfares, major highways, or other means of transportation. 
28.42.2.   Permitted uses:
The following uses are permitted in the HI District, provided that such manufacturing or industrial operation shall not disseminate dust, fumes, gas, noxious odor, smoke, glare, or other atmospheric influence beyond the boundaries of the property on which such use is located and which produces no noise exceeding the average intensity of noise of street traffic at that point and provided that such use does not create fire hazards on surrounding property. 
A.  Those uses listed for the HI District in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11. 
B.  Industrial and manufacturing plants including the processing or assembling of parts for production of finished equipment where the process of manufacturing or treatment of materials is such that no dust, odor, gas or smoke is emitted. 
C.  A "high risk or hazardous industrial use" is permitted by specific use permit only. In this section, "high risk or hazardous industrial use" means any industrial use whose operation, in the opinion of the fire marshal, involves a much higher than average risk to public health and safety. These uses include but are not limited to facilities where significant amounts of radiation, radioactive materials, highly toxic chemicals or substances, or highly combustible or explosive materials are present, used, produced, stored, or disposed of as defined in the Uniform Fire Code. 
28.42.3.   Height regulations:
Maximum height: None specified. 
28.42.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Size of lot: 
1.  Minimum lot area -None. 
2.  Minimum lot width -None. 
3.  Minimum lot depth -None. 
B.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Twenty-five (25) feet; all yards adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard (see section 28.55 for additional setback requirements). 
2.  Minimum side and rear yard -None unless adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see below). 
3.  Minimum side or rear yard adjacent to a residential district -Two (2) for every foot of building height as measured from the finished grade to the tallest point of the structure. 
C.  Maximum lot coverage: None specified. 
D.  Maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.) feet: One to two (1:2). 
E.  Parking regulations: As established by section 28.50, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
28.42.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Driveway spacing (i.e., distance between driveways, measured edge-to-edge): 
1.  Highway -One (1) driveway per two hundred and fifty (250) linear feet of frontage or TX DOT regulations if applicable. 
2.  Arterial street -One (1) driveway per two hundred (200) linear feet of frontage. 
3.  Collector street -One (1) driveway per one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage. 
4.  Local street -One (1) driveway per fifty (50) linear feet of frontage. 
5.  Minimum distance from driveway to street corner -Fifty (50) feet, as measured from the street corner radius point of tangency. 
B.  Site plan review: Review and approval of a site plan by the city (in accordance with section 28.13) shall be required for any tract/lot within the HI District. 
C.  Landscaping requirements: See article V. 
D.  Screening requirements: See article V. 
E.  [Open storage limitations:] Open storage is limited to a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the total lot area, shall not be located in front of (i.e., on the street side of) or on top of the building, and must be screened in accordance with the provisions of article V (i.e., cannot be visible from any public street or adjacent property). 
F.  [Prohibited uses:] Recreational vehicles, travel trailers, motor homes or temporary buildings may not be used for on-site dwelling or permanent nonresidential purposes. 
G.  Impound lots to be used as vehicle storage facilities. Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6687-9a defines a vehicle storage facility as a garage, parking lot, or any type of facility owned by a person other than a governmental entity for storing or parking ten (10) or more vehicles. The operator of a vehicle storage facility shall possess a permit issued by the state department of labor and standards, and all regulations of that department shall apply to the operation of such a facility. A visual screening fence shall be required on all sides of any property used as a vehicle storage facility. Impound lots are permitted only by CUP in the HI District. 
H.  Other regulations: As established in the development standards, article V. 
28.42.6.   Compliance with state law and federal laws:
No uses shall be allowed which are prohibited by state law or which operate in excess of state or national environmental or pollution standards as determined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Texas Air Control Board, Texas State Department of Health, or The Texas Natural Resource Conservation commission, as the case may be. 
OVERLAY DISTRICTS 
Sec. 28.43. - PD-Planned Development Overlay District. 
28.43.1.   Purpose, applicability, nature and size of district:
Purpose. The purpose of a Planned Development Zoning District ("PD District") is to provide for the development of land as an integral unit for single or mixed use in accordance with a PD concept plan that may include uses, regulations and other requirements that vary from the provisions of other zoning districts. PD Districts are intended to implement generally the goals and objectives of the city's comprehensive plan. PD Districts are also intended to encourage flexible and creative planning, to ensure the compatibility of land uses, to allow for the adjustment of changing demands to meet the current needs of the community, and to result in a higher quality development for the community than would result from the use of conventional zoning districts. In most circumstances, a PD District will be approved as an overlay zoning district. In circumstances, however, where newly annexed land is subject to an agreement that includes an integrated development plan and development standards that do not fit the purpose statement and standards of a base zoning district(s), the project may be approved as a freestanding PD District. 
28.43.2.   Applicability:
A PD District may only be established if one (1) or more of the following circumstances apply: 
A.  The land is located in close proximity to established residential neighborhoods where conventional zoning classifications may not adequately address neighborhood concerns regarding the quality or compatibility of the adjacent development, and where it may be desirable to the neighborhood, the developer or the city to develop and implement mutually agreed, enforceable development standards; 
B.  The land, or adjacent property that would be impacted by the development of the land, has sensitive or unique environmental features requiring a more flexible approach to zoning and clustering of uses, or special design standards, in order to afford the best possible protection of the unique qualities of the site or the adjacent property; 
C.  The land is proposed for development as a mixed-use development or a traditional neighborhood development requiring more flexible and innovative design standards; 
D.  The land consists of areas that are proposed for redevelopment or infill development, and special design considerations are deemed desirable; 
E.  The land serves as transition between different and seemingly incompatible land uses; 
F.  The land is proposed for development as a major office, retail, commercial or industrial employment center, and special design standards may be warranted; 
G.  The land is of such a character that it is in the community's best interest to encourage high quality development through flexible development standards to further the goals and objectives of the city's comprehensive plan; 
H.  The land consists of unusually configured parcels that cannot be developed efficiently under the base district standards; or 
I.  Primarily vacant land has been annexed that is subject to an agreement that includes an integrated development plan and development standards that do not fit the purpose statement and standards of a base zoning district(s). 
J.  Primarily vacant land has been annexed that is subject to a development agreement requiring use of lakeside development district standards to govern development. 
28.43.3.   Nature of the district:
Each PD District shall be established as an overlay zoning district that combines with one (1) or more base zoning districts, or as a freestanding district in the circumstances described in section 28.43.1. Development in a PD District must be consistent with a concept plan that is incorporated as part of the district by the adopting ordinance for the PD. The maximum density for any residential use within an overlay PD District shall not exceed the maximum density allowed in the base zoning district. 
28.43.4.   Minimum district size:
No PD District shall be established for a gross contiguous area less than the following: 
A.  Single-family detached, attached and duplex uses: five (5) acres; 
B.  Multiple family uses: five (5) acres; 
C.  Nonresidential uses: two (2) acres; 
D.  Mixed residential and nonresidential uses: three (3) acres. 
28.43.5.   Authorized uses:
A.  Base zoning district uses. Any use permitted outright or conditionally in the base district shall be permitted in the PD District, unless the use is prohibited or otherwise conditioned in the regulations adopted for the PD District. Uses designated as conditional uses in the land use chart in section 28.49 of this chapter may be authorized in the PD District only if designated on the concept plan adopted as part of the PD District, in which case the use does not require a separate conditional use permit under this chapter. In the case of freestanding PD Districts, any use authorized under this zoning chapter that is permitted in an approved development agreement may be established in the district. 
B.  Overlay zoning district uses. The PD District may provide for uses not allowed in the base zoning district, provided that the uses are compatible with the stated purposes of the district and do not conflict with policies in the comprehensive plan, considering the arrangement, combination and design features of the uses within the PD District, as depicted on the concept plan. 
C.  Location and arrangement of uses. The location and arrangement of all authorized uses in the PD District shall be consistent with the concept plan approved with the district. 
D.  Limitations on residential uses in overlay districts. Proposed residential density in a PD Overlay District shall not exceed that permitted for the base district. Proposed lot sizes for residential uses in the PD District shall be no smaller than the lot sizes allowed in the base zoning district for each type of housing (e.g., single-family, duplex, etc.), unless specified within the planned development requirements. 
E.  Deviations from the concept plan. Refer to subsection 28.43.9 for regulations related to deviations from the concept plan. 
28.43.6.   Development standards:
A.  Base district and supplemental standards. In a PD Overlay District, uses shall conform to the standards in the base zoning district governing area, building and height requirements in this chapter, and any applicable supplemental standards, unless specifically excepted in the ordinance establishing the PD District. 
B.  Zoning district standards. In a PD Overlay District, standards otherwise applicable to authorized uses in the base zoning district or pursuant to this chapter may be varied, and thereafter shall be applied to the uses established in the PD District, only if approved in the ordinance establishing the PD District. Standards that may be varied include, but may not be limited to, residential density (28.43.5.D. above), lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths, building height and size, building exterior construction, lot coverage, floor area ratio, parking, access, screening, landscaping, accessory buildings, signage, sidewalks, and lighting. Varied standards may increase or decrease the requirements otherwise applicable to particular uses. Any graphic depictions used to illustrate such standards, unless otherwise provided in the PD District regulations, shall be considered standards that apply to subsequent development applications. In a freestanding PD District, zoning district standards shall be incorporated in the ordinance establishing the PD District for each proposed use consistent with an approved development agreement. The adopting ordinance may reference the standards in a base zoning district for a particular use, or other development standards of this zoning chapter. 
C.  Public facilities standards. In order to implement the plan of development depicted in the concept plan and to assure that the purposes of the district are realized, public facilities standards in subdivision regulations (as applicable) may be varied, provided that such exceptions are expressly identified in the PD District regulations and illustrated where necessary on the concept plan incorporated as part of the district regulations. Thereafter, standards applicable to plat applications and applications for site plans shall conform to the variations approved in the ordinance establishing the PD District. 
D.  Public facilities studies. In order to justify variations from public facilities standards pertaining to provision of roadway and drainage facilities and to demonstrate compliance with the adequate public facilities policies in this chapter, a traffic impact study or drainage study may be required as a pre-requisite for approving a petition for a PD District. 
28.43.7.   Application requirements:
Specific items required. No application for a PD shall be accepted by the city until the following items have been submitted to the city by the applicant: 
A.  A completed application form, including all requirements as stated on the application form; 
B.  A deed or contract on the property or similar document indicating ownership; 
C.  A concept plan, prepared in accordance with section 28.13 and section 28.43.8. 
D.  A description of any development standards or requirements that are different from those in the base zoning district; or, in the case of a freestanding PD District, a complete set of development standards for each proposed use; 
E.  A description of how any development standards or requirements that are different from those in the base district fulfill the ideals, goals, objectives, and/or concepts of the city's adopted comprehensive plan or any other formally adopted city planning document, such as the parks plan or public facility plan. 
F.  A description of how any development standards or requirements that are different from those in the base district fulfill the items listed in A. through I. of 28.43.2. 
28.43.8.   Concept plan:
A.  Requirement for concept plan. No PD District may be established without approval of a concept plan that illustrates the proposed location and arrangement of uses, the relationship of such uses to base zoning districts, development phasing, planned public improvements, open space, proposed amenities and the overall design of the development. Detailed requirements for the contents of a concept plan are as prescribed in section 28.13. The concept plan shall be incorporated as a component part of the PD District regulations, and shall be construed in conjunction with the authorized uses and development standards set forth in such regulations. 
1.  Mixed use development: A concept plan may combine single-family residential components with nonresidential or multiple-family components. 
2.  Open space plan: A concept plan for a freestanding PD District shall incorporate an open space plan including a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the gross land area of the district as open space. 
B.  Consistency required. All development applications within the PD District shall be consistent with the incorporated concept plan; however, minor amendments in accordance with section 28.13 may be approved by the planning department. Failure of a subsequent development application to conform to the approved concept plan for the PD District shall result in denial of the application, unless the PD District regulations first are amended through incorporation of a concept plan with which the development application is consistent. All major deviations from the concept plan shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission and city council for approval as an amendment of the PD District. 
28.43.9.   Approval criteria for a planned development district:
A.  Factors. The following criteria will be used by the city in deciding whether to approve, approve with modifications, or deny a petition for a PD District: 
1.  The extent to which the land covered by the proposed PD District fits one (1) or more of the special circumstances in subsection 28.43.2 warranting a PD District classification. 
2.  The extent to which the proposed PD District furthers the policies of the city's adopted comprehensive plan (as amended). 
3.  The extent to which the proposed PD District will result in a superior development than could be achieved through conventional zoning classifications. 
4.  The extent to which the proposed PD District will resolve or mitigate any compatibility issues with surrounding development. 
5.  The extent to which proposed uses and the configuration of uses depicted in the concept plan are compatible with existing and planned adjoining uses; 
6.  The extent to which the proposed development is consistent with adopted public facilities plans, including those related to water, wastewater, transportation, drainage and other public facilities; and 
7.  The extent to which the proposed open space and recreational amenities within the development provide a superior living environment and enhanced recreational opportunities for residents of the district and for the public generally; in the case of a freestanding PD District, the extent to which the proposed open space plan meets the standards of subsection 28.27.5.F., Open Space. 
B.  Conditions. The city council may impose such conditions to the PD District regulations and concept plan as are necessary to assure that the purpose of the PD District is implemented. 
28.43.10.   Adopting ordinance:
    Items specific to the ordinance. The ordinance establishing a PD District shall incorporate the approved concept plan as part of the district regulations and shall set forth the following: 
A.  The base zoning district(s) (where applicable) to be overlaid, together with the boundaries of the district(s); 
B.  A statement as to the purpose and intent of the PD District established therein; 
C.  The permitted, conditional and accessory uses authorized in the district, the location of such uses, the residential densities or other measurements of development intensity associated with base districts or phases of the development in conformance with the approved concept plan; 
D.  The general standards applicable to development within the district, with or without reference to a base district, including but not limited to: Density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths, building height, building elevations, coverage, floor area ratio, parking, access, accessory buildings, signs, lighting, project phasing or scheduling, management associations, and such other requirements as the city council may deem necessary in order to implement the comprehensive plan, and the purposes of the PD District; 
E.  Provisions stating that all zoning standards not expressly set forth for the district in the adopting ordinance shall be as provided in one (1) or more expressly referenced base zoning district(s), and that any standard in this chapter that has not been expressly varied in the adopting ordinance shall be applicable to subsequent development permits for land within the PD District; 
F.  Design standards applicable to the development; 
G.  For overlay PD Districts, a specific list of deviations from standards in the base zoning district(s), together with any standards in the ordinance which are to be varied for development within the PD District; 
H.  Required dedications of land or public improvements and requirements for open space; 
I.  A phasing schedule for the project, where applicable, setting forth the dates for submittal of site development plans and the timing of performance by the developer for dedications of land or public improvements and satisfaction of any conditions in relation to the phasing of development, where applicable; and 
J.  Such additional conditions as are established by the council to assure that the PD District and concept plan are consistent with the stated purposes of the district. 
(Ord. No. 4728, § 2, 2-3-14; Ord. No. 4870, § 3, 5-1-17; Ord. No. 4924, § 2(2.02), 12-11-17) 
Sec. 28.44. - NGB-Native Greenbelt Overlay District. 
28.44.1.   General purpose and description:
The purpose of this overlay district is to protect native vegetation and topography to serve as a buffer between residential and nonresidential uses. 
28.44.2.   Authorized uses:
There are no allowed uses in the NGB Overlay District. Save and except for such drainage improvements as may be dictated by the topography of the surrounding area, no alterations, improvements, buildings, walls, contouring or additions may be made by the owner of such area. It is the intent and purpose in creating such districts that the area within the district be undisturbed from its natural, vegetative state that exists at the time the district is proposed. The area serves as a screen and buffer between uses that might otherwise be incompatible. 
28.44.3.   Requirements for adjacent properties:
A.  Setback. No building or structure, except for a fence as hereinafter required, may be situated within twenty-five (25) feet of a Native Greenbelt District line. 
B.  Fencing. At the time of development of tracts sharing a common district line with a Native Greenbelt District a solid screening fence of not less than six (6) feet in height shall be constructed wholly upon the property contiguous to such Native Greenbelt District. Fences constructed pursuant to the requirement of this subsection shall be of materials approved by the city for use in a residential district. 
Sec. 28.45. - MO-Morton Street Overlay boundary. 
28.45.1.   General purpose and description:
The intent of the MO-Morton Street Overlay Boundary is to exercise greater control over the aesthetic, functional, and safety characteristics of development along the Morton Street Overlay Boundary where higher standards can effectively enhance the city's image as a desirable place to live, work, and shop. 
28.45.2.   Authorized uses:
A.  Those uses listed for the underlying zoning district in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses (i.e., CUP), respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11 except for the uses as follows, which shall be expressly prohibited within the MO District: 
B.  The following uses shall be prohibited in the Morton Street Overlay Boundary: 
1.  Used car sales. 
2.  Portable building/carport display and sales. 
3.  Manufactured home sales. 
4.  Sand/gravel/caliche/stone sales or storage. 
28.45.3.   District boundaries:
The MO boundary applies to the future development, improvement or redevelopment of all land within the depth of a lot to a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) feet or to the entirety of any lot that has frontage on either side of the Morton Street right-of-way from F.M. 120/Morton Street at its intersection with York Ave., east to its intersection with Eddy Ave. 
28.45.4.   Application:
A.  The MO District standards apply to the following: 
1.  Development of any land for which there is not improvement at the time of construction; 
2.  An increase in any existing structure that is equal to or greater than fifty (50) percent of the existing square footage; or 
3.  Any new construction on a lot that provides for an increase that is equal to or greater than fifty (50) percent of the lot or tract that is covered by a permanent structure(s). 
B.  Unless otherwise specified by this section, the standards of the base district shall apply. Where there is a conflict between the standards of this subsection and those of the base district, the standards of this subsection shall apply. 
28.45.5.   Special requirements:
Minimum design criteria: 
A.  Orientation and scale of primary structure(s): 
1.  [Primary orientation:] Buildings shall have their primary orientation toward a front yard. Said primary orientation shall include a main or primary entrance that shall be designed to be attractive and functional, unless otherwise approved by the city council after recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. 
2.  Primary entrances: Primary entrances shall have a clearly defined, highly visible customer entrance with distinguishing features such as a canopy, portico or other prominent element of the architectural design. 
B.  Building materials for primary structures. Shall consist of seventy-five (75) percent exterior cladding to include brick, split face concrete block, glass, stone, cast stone, glass block, tile, cast metal or a combination of those materials for each side of a primary structure that is visible from a public street or an adjacent residentially zoned property. Said exterior cladding shall be exclusive of doors, windows, glass, and entryway treatments and atriums of glass and metal construction. 
1.  Brick masonry is preferred for one hundred (100) percent of the exterior cladding; however, a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the exterior cladding of primary structures shall consist of stone masonry with the remaining fifty (50) percent of a primary structure being clad in brick, cast stone, cast metal, cementations composite fiberboard, decorative or split face concrete block. 
2.  Metal siding shall be prohibited. 
3.  A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the wall area facing a public street shall contain windows or doorways. 
4.  Glass: 
a.  Use of nonreflective glass for displays and to allow visual access to interior space is permitted. 
b.  Glass shall not comprise more than fifty (50) percent of the building skin. 
c.  Reflective glass shall be prohibited. 
5.  The design of a development shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Relationship of the structure(s) to the site: 
1.  The site shall be designed to achieve a desirable transition with the streetscape and to provide for adequate planting, safe pedestrian movement, and parking areas. 
2.  Site planning in which setbacks and yards are in excess of zoning restrictions is encouraged to provide an interesting relationship between buildings. 
3.  Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable zoning district, the height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings. 
b.  Relationship of buildings and site to adjoining area: 
1.  Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles shall be made compatible by such means as screens, sight breaks, and materials. 
2.  Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties shall be provided. 
3.  Harmony in texture, lines, and masses is required. 
4.  Monotony shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form, and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. In multiple building projects, variable siting or individual buildings shall be used to prevent monotonous appearance. 
c.  Building design: 
1.  Architectural style is not restricted. Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall be based on the quality of its design and relationship to surrounding buildings. 
2.  Buildings shall be harmonious and consistent with permanent, neighboring development. 
3.  Design features-A minimum of two (2) of the following design features must be incorporated into the building elevation located immediately adjacent to a public street or roadway right-of-way: 
a.  Decorative masonry course integrated into the top edge of the masonry facade of a parapet wall; 
b.  Secondary cornice separating the ground floor from the second floor; 
c.  Quoins located at the building corners; 
d.  Canopies meeting the following standards: 
1. Canopies shall be constructed of a permanent metal material; and 
2. Canopies shall extend along seventy-five (75) percent of the total building frontage for each portion of a wall facing a public street or roadway right-of-way. 
4.  Roofs: 
a.  On flat roofs mechanical equipment shall be screened on all sides from public view. 
b.  Pitched or gabled roofs shall contain a minimum 7:12 pitch (seven (7) feet of rise for every twelve (12) feet of run). 
c.  Installed roofing shingles must consist of dimensional shingles with a minimum manufacturers rating of twenty (20) years. Roofing systems or materials exceeding the standards established herein may be used pursuant to approval by the building official or designee. 
Sec. 28.46. - HO-Highway Oriented and Corridor District. 
28.46.1.   General purpose and description:
The intent of the HO District is to exercise greater control over the aesthetic, functional, and safety characteristics of development along U.S. Highway 75, Spur 503, F.M. 120 and F.M. 691 where higher standards can effectively enhance the city's image as a desirable place to live, work, and shop. This emphasis on how uses are designed and developed is the focus of the standards in this district. 
28.46.2.   Authorized uses:
A.  Those uses listed for the underlying zoning district in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses (i.e., CUP), respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11 except for the uses as follows, which shall be expressly prohibited within the HO District: 
B.  The following uses shall be prohibited in the HO Overlay District: 
1.  Kennels. 
2.  Livestock sales. 
3.  Stables of any kind. 
4.  Used merchandise sales. 
5.  Used vehicle sales (including motorcycles) as a primary use. 
6.  Manufactured home display, storage or sales. 
7.  Sand, gravel, caliche, stone sales or storage. 
8.  Any use listed under manufacturing and industrial in section 28.49, Use Charts. 
9.  Auto dealer-used primary use. 
10.  Portable building sales (outdoor display). 
11.  Landscaping business except if not part of a home improvement center. 
28.46.3.   District boundaries:
The HO District applies to the future development, improvement or redevelopment of all land within the depth of a lot to a maximum of one thousand (1,000) feet or to the entirety of any lot that has frontage on either side of the highway right-of-way along U.S. Highway 75, Spur 503, F.M. 120 and F.M. 691, whichever is greater. Boundaries for the HO District are as follows: U.S. Hwy. 75 from the city limits at F.M. 691 on the south, north to the city limits at the Red River; Spur 503 with its intersection of U.S. Hwy. 75 on the west, east to the railroad overpass at its intersection with Texoma Parkway (S.H. 91) and Eisenhower Parkway; F.M. 120 at its intersection with F.M. 1417 on the west, east to the intersection of F.M. 120 (Morton St) and York Ave.; F.M. 691 at its intersection with F.M. 1417 on the west, east to its intersection with Texoma Parkway (S.H. 91). 
28.46.4.   Application:
A.  The HO District standards apply to the following: 
1.  Development of any land; 
2.  An increase in any existing structure that is equal to or greater than thirty (30) percent of the existing square footage; or 
3.  Any new construction on a lot that provides for an increase that is equal to or greater than thirty (30) percent of the lot or tract that is covered by a permanent structure(s). 
B.  Unless otherwise specified by this section, the standards of the base district shall apply. Where there is a conflict between the standards of this subsection and those of the base District, the standards of this subsection shall apply. 
C.  A site plan shall be required for all development in the HO District. In addition to the site plan requirements set forth in section 28.13, a complete set of architectural elevations shall be submitted for review. 
28.46.5.   Special area and design standards:
A.  Size of yards: 
1.  Minimum front yard -Thirty (30) feet from ultimate right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 75, Spur 503, F.M. 120 or F.M. 691 all yards adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard (see article V for additional setback requirements). 
2.  Side yards -Forty (40) feet from any residential single-family dwelling. 
B.  Minimum design criteria: 
1.  Orientation and scale of primary structure(s) . 
a.  The design, color, materials and basic proportions of structures shall be harmonious with and complement the character and design of existing buildings, if appropriate. 
b.  Primary entrances: 
1.  Primary entrances should be emphasized by a dominant, recognizable feature through projecting or recessed forms, details, color, or material. 
2.  Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass, surface or finish to give emphasis to primary entrances. 
3.  Loading docks or loading areas are not permitted to be visible from the street and may not be accessed directly from the street. 
4.  These requirements may be waived if the building is not accessed by pedestrians, such as warehouses, industrial buildings without attached offices. 
2.  Building materials for primary structures. 
a.  These standards do not apply to those uses where the building or structure is fully screened from Highway 75, Spur 503, F.M. 120, F.M. 691 or any other roadway(s) designated on the Denison Thoroughfare Plan, as amended, by another building or structure. 
b.  Shall consist of one hundred (100) percent exterior cladding to include brick, split face concrete block or panels, glass, stone, cast stone, glass block, tile, cementitious composite fiberboard, EFIS, or stucco, or a combination of those materials for each side of a primary structure that is visible from a public street or an adjacent residentially zoned property. Said exterior cladding shall be exclusive of doors, windows, glass, and entryway treatments and atriums of glass and metal construction. 
c.  Metal siding shall be prohibited. 
3.  Color -Establish a palette if options for exterior building colors for use throughout the project (or component in large scale mixed-use developments). The range should be wide enough to allow for variety, yet narrow enough to unify all buildings. The use of light tints and bright accents should be encouraged in lieu of earthtones. 
4.  Architectural design . 
a.  All facades of an individual building, multiple buildings in a shopping center, or integrated business development, and all roofing in a shopping center or integrated business development shall have similar architectural design. 
b.  Review of the architectural design of a proposed development shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Consistency of scale and proportion with any immediately adjacent buildings or structures; 
2.  Design in relation to surrounding buildings; 
3.  Design in relation to topography of the site; 
4.  Design in relation to proposed landscaping; and 
5.  Aesthetics of the proposed building, including color. 
5.  The design of a development shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Roofs: 
1.  Flat roofs shall be screened on all sides by parapet or mansard walls. 
2.  Pitched or gabled roofs shall contain a minimum 7:12 pitch (seven (7) feet of rise for every twelve (12) feet of run). 
3.  Installed roofing shingles must consist of dimensional shingles with a minimum manufacturers rating of twenty (20) years. Roofing systems or materials exceeding the standards established herein may be used pursuant to approval by the building official or designee. 
b.  Glare and illumination. Site lighting is to provide safety and security and enhance the architectural and natural features of this site. Glare and illumination standards shall ensure that the mechanisms providing light do not negatively impact on the appearance of the site and ensure that light is contained to the extent that adjacent uses are not detrimentally affected (See section 28.57). 
c.  Landscaping. Landscaping standards are used to promote a flexible framework of planting and green areas that enhance and safeguard property values while aiding in erosion control, noise abatement, glare and reflection control, buffering between land uses of different character and atmospheric purification (see section 28.51). 
d.  Screening. Required screening shall accomplish visual screening of the site, noise attenuation, and barrier to vehicular traffic between nonresidential and residential uses, and serve as a psychological separation between uses which encourages the peace and repose of residents. Toward this goal, landscaping shall be used to break up the view and to aesthetically enhance screening devices (see section 28.53). 
28.46.6.   Special requirements:
A.  Screening walls and fences: All screening walls and fences, including residential subdivision fences, shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from a property line immediately adjacent to the right-of-way for any highway, arterial or collector as designated on the City of Denison Thoroughfare Plan, as amended. 
B.  Open storage areas: All open storage areas, where permitted by the underlying zoning district, shall be set back a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from the right-of-way for any highway, arterial or collector as designated on the City of Denison Thoroughfare Plan, as amended. 
C.  Floodways/Creeks/Drainageways: No buildings, parking areas, or other impervious structures (except as noted herein) are permitted within the recognized floodway, as identified by the city engineer, or within fifty (50) feet of the high bank, whichever is greater, of a creek or other drainage way. Permitted exceptions include drainage-related structures and pavement, paved pedestrian or bike trails, picnic tables, and paved surfaces beneath picnic tables. 
D.  Cross access required: Each lot must provide a "cross access and fire lane" easement that provides for access to immediately adjacent tracts. Said easement shall meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Newly-dedicated easements shall align appropriately with previously dedicated or existing "cross access and fire lane" easements. Where no existing easement controls, the newly-dedicated easement may be located appropriately to the plans for development of the site. 
2.  "Cross access and fire lane" easements shall contain a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet or other such minimum width as required by the city. 
3.  "Cross access and fire lane" easements shall contain minimum inside turning radii of twenty-five (25) feet. 
E.  Utilities: Definitions. 
1.  For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
a.  Feeder line -Any line, wire or cable which distributes, transmits or delivers a utility service to a general area and not to a specific end user. 
b.  Lateral line -Any line, wire or cable used to distribute, transmit or deliver a utility service from a feeder line to two (2) or more sites or end users of the utility service. 
c.  Service line -Any line, wire or cable used to distribute, transmit or deliver a utility service from a feeder or lateral line to an end user. 
d.  Transmission line -Any line, wire or cable which distributes, transmits or delivers a utility service from a substation or generating plant to a feeder system. 
2.  Placement requirements. 
a.  Except as herein provided, all utilities within the HO District, which are within three hundred (300) feet of U. S. Highway, Spur 503, F.M. 120 or F. M. 691 the highway right-of-way, shall be placed underground. 
b.  Transmission lines may be placed overhead no matter where they are located within the corridor. 
c.  Location of feeder lines may be overhead, subject to the approval of such location by the planning and zoning commission. Feeder lines which cross the highway may be placed overhead, provided that they cross at plus or minus ten (10) degrees perpendicular to the centerline of the highway and that crossings are made at locations shown on an approved site plan. 
d.  The planning and zoning commission may, through the standard review process, approve overhead placement of lateral lines, if it can be demonstrated that placement underground would be an undue financial hardship and that measures will be taken to minimize the visual impact of overhead utilities. Such measures shall include: 
1.  Construction alternatives. 
2.  Coordination and sharing of facilities and easements among all utilities with overhead lines. 
3.  Placement of overhead lines behind structures in alleys and easements rather than in the highway right-of-way. 
4.  Auxiliary equipment for underground utility service, such as transformers, connection enclosures, switching devices and amplifiers, may be pads-mounted on grade or placed underground. 
3.  Additional requirements. 
a.  All electrical distribution service lines shall be placed underground. 
b.  All utility companies and city departments which provide utility service within the planned parkway development area shall share facilities and easements where possible to minimize the visual impact of overhead utilities. 
c.  Any utility lines in place prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived that are contrary to same are nonresidential conforming. However, relocation or substantial improvement of existing utility lines shall occur in accordance with the standards set forth herein. Substantial improvement shall mean any improvement which results in an increase in the capacity of existing lines, such as the addition of lines or upgrading the size of lines. 
d.  The owner/developer is responsible for all costs involved in the location of utilities underground. 
e.  The utility companies shall coordinate with the planning director on all site plans submitted. 
F.  [Site plan:] A site plan prepared in accordance with section 28.15 must be submitted for approval by the planning and zoning commission. 
1.  The planning and zoning commission shall review the specific elements of site and building plans for development within the HO development area for compliance with these standards and shall make a determination of approval or disapproval of the site plan as submitted. 
2.  The planning and zoning commission shall review all exceptions and requests for variations to the development standards to determine compliance with the intent of the standards or to determine the necessity and appropriateness of the requested exception or variation. 
3.  If the planning and zoning commission denies any site plan, the same application may not be filed for a period of six (6) months from the date of such denial. 
4.  Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the planning and zoning commission may appeal the commission's action to the city council by filing a request for appeal with the city secretary within ten (10) days of the commission's decision. Such appeal shall be heard within thirty (30) calendar days. 
Sec. 28.47. - CH-Commercial Historic Overlay District. 
28.47.1.   General purpose and description:
The CH-Commercial Historic Overlay District is intended to further the purposes set forth in chapter 30, specifically with regards to the authority of the historic preservation board and the historic preservation officer to review applications for certificates of appropriateness for compliance with the guidelines set forth therein. 
28.47.2.   Permitted uses:
The CH-Commercial Historic Overlay District shall not modify the uses allowed in the base zoning district of any property within the overlay. The permitted uses of the property will be determined and controlled by the use regulations set forth for the primary zoning district classification for the property. 
28.47.3.   Commercial Historic Overlay District:
Commercial Historic Overlay District: Areas and structures designated as falling within the "CH-Commercial Historic Overlay District" as provided by this section 28.47.3 and shown accordingly on the zoning map for the City of Denison, shall be subject to the regulations of chapter 30. 
Boundary: The Commercial Historic Overlay District includes the Downtown Historic District as recognized by the National Register of Historic Places and is more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the common point of the east right-of-way line of North Barrett Avenue and the south right-of-way line of West Gandy Street; 
Thence in an easterly direction with the south right-of-way line of West Gandy Avenue, across Houston Avenue, and along the south right-of-way line of East Gandy Avenue to the point where such line intersects the railroad right-of-way of the Union Pacific Railroad; 
Thence in southerly direction with such railroad right-of-way to the point that intersects the north right-of-way line with East Main Street; 
Thence in an easterly direction along the north right-of-way line of East Main Street to its intersection with the northerly projection of the east boundary line of Lot 14, Block 56, Original Town Plat of the city; 
Thence in a southerly direction across East Main Street with a line that is the extension of the east boundary of said Lot 14, Block 56, (OTP) to a point for a corner being the southeast corner of The Travelers Hotel property that is also the southeast corner of said Lot 14; 
Thence in a westerly direction along the south line of The Travelers Hotel Property being the southern boundary of Lots 14, 15, and 16, Block 56, OTP to the point of intersection with the east right-of-way line with South Crockett Avenue; 
Thence in a northerly direction along the east right-of-way line of South Crocket Avenue to the point of intersection with the south right-of-way line of East Main Street; 
Thence in a westerly direction along the south right-of-way line of East Main Street to a point of intersect with the western boundary of the railroad right-of-way of the Union Pacific Railroad; 
Thence in a southerly direction along the western boundary of the railroad right-of-way of the Union Pacific Railroad to a point intersecting the easterly projection of the north right-of-way line of East Crawford Street; 
Thence in a westerly direction along the north right-of-way line of East Crawford Street, across Houston Avenue, along the north right-of-way line of West Crawford Street to its intersection with the east right-of-way line of South Barrett Avenue; 
Thence in a northerly direction along the east right-of-way line of South Barrett Avenue to a point of intersection with the easterly extension of the centerline of the alley separating the 700 blocks of West Main Street and West Chestnut Street; 
Thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of such alley to a point of intersection with the east right-of-way line of South Armstrong Avenue; 
Thence in a northerly direction along the east right-of-way line of South Armstrong Avenue, across West Main Street, then along the east right-of-way line of North Armstrong Avenue to a point of intersection with the south right-of-way line of West Woodard Street; 
Thence in an easterly direction along the south right-of-way line of West Woodard Street to a point of intersection with the east right-of-way line of North Barrett Avenue; 
Thence in a northerly direction along the east right-of-way line of North Barrett Avenue to the point of intersection with the south right-of-way line of West Gandy Street, said point being also the point of beginning. 
The Commercial Historic Overlay District is shown on the zoning map, which is attached hereto and incorporated herein for all intents and purposes. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 4, 3-19-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4937, § 4, adopted March 19, 2018, repealed § 28.47 and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former § 28.47 pertained to the H-Historic Overlay District, and derived from Ord. No. 4650, §§ 1-3, adopted April 16, 2012. 
Sec. 28.48. - AO-Austin Avenue Overlay District. 
28.48.1.   General purpose and description:
The intent of the AO-Austin Avenue District is to exercise greater control over the aesthetic, functional, and safety characteristics of development along the Austin Avenue corridor where higher standards can effectively enhance the city's image as a desirable place to live, work, and shop. 
28.48.2.   Authorized uses:
A.  Those uses listed for the underlying zoning district in section 28.49 as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses (i.e., CUP), respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in section 28.11 except for the uses as follows, which shall be expressly prohibited within the AO District: 
B.  The following uses shall be prohibited in the Austin Street Corridor District: 
1.  Manufactured home sales or storage. 
2.  Sand/Gravel/Caliche/Stone sales or storage. 
3.  Portable building/carport display and sales. 
28.48.3.   District boundaries:
The AO District applies to the future development, improvement or redevelopment of all land within the depth of a lot to a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) feet or to the entirety of any lot that has frontage on either side of the Austin Avenue right-of-way from Eisenhower Parkway on the south at the rail road overpass at the intersection of Spur 503/Texoma Parkway (S.H. 91)/Eisenhower Parkway north along Austin Ave./U.S. Hwy. 69 north to the intersection with the HO District at the intersection of U.S. Hwy. 69/75 on the north, whichever is greater. 
28.48.4.   Application:
A.  The AO District standards apply to the following: 
1.  Development of any land for which there is not improvement at the time of construction; 
2.  An increase in any existing structure that is equal to or greater than fifty (50) percent of the existing square footage; or 
3.  Any new construction on a lot that provides for an increase that is equal to or greater than fifty (50) percent of the lot or tract that is covered by a permanent structure(s). 
B.  Unless otherwise specified by this section, the standards of the base district shall apply. Where there is a conflict between the standards of this subsection and those of the base district, the standards of this subsection shall apply. 
28.48.5.   Special requirements:
Minimum design criteria: 
A.  Orientation and scale of primary structure(s): 
1.  Buildings shall have their primary orientation toward a front yard. Said primary orientation shall include a main or primary entrance that shall be designed to be attractive and functional, unless otherwise approved by the city council after recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. 
2.  Primary entrances: Primary entrances shall have a clearly defined, highly visible customer entrance with distinguishing features such as a canopy, portico or other prominent element of the architectural design. 
B.  Building materials for primary structures. 
1.  Shall consist of seventy-five (75) percent exterior cladding to include brick, split face concrete block, glass, stone, cast stone, glass block, tile, cast metal or a combination of those materials for each side of a primary structure that is visible from a public street or an adjacent residentially zoned property. Said exterior cladding shall be exclusive of doors, windows, glass, and entryway treatments and atriums of glass and metal construction. 
a.  Brick masonry is preferred for one hundred (100) percent of the exterior cladding; however, a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the exterior cladding of primary structures shall consist of stone masonry with the remaining fifty (50) percent of a primary structure being clad in brick, cast stone, cast metal, cementitious composite fiberboard, decorative or split face concrete block. 
b.  Metal siding shall be prohibited. 
c.  A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the wall area facing a public street shall contain windows or doorways. 
d.  Glass: 
i.  Use of nonreflective glass for displays and to allow visual access to interior space is permitted. 
ii.  Glass shall not comprise more than fifty (50) percent of the building skin. 
iii.  Reflective glass shall be prohibited. 
C.  The design of a development shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Relationship of the structure(s) to the site: 
a.  The site shall be designed to achieve a desirable transition with the streetscape and to provide for adequate planting, safe pedestrian movement, and parking areas. 
b.  Site planning in which setbacks and yards are in excess of zoning restrictions is encouraged to provide an interesting relationship between buildings. 
c.  Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable zoning district, the height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings. 
2.  Relationship of buildings and site to adjoining area: 
a.  Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles shall be made compatible by such means as screens, sight breaks, and materials. 
b.  Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties shall be provided. 
c.  Harmony in texture, lines, and masses is required. 
d.  Monotony shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form, and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. In multiple building projects, variable siting or individual buildings shall be used to prevent monotonous appearance. 
3.  Building design: 
a.  Architectural style is not restricted. Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall be based on the quality of its design and relationship to surrounding buildings. 
b.  Buildings shall be harmonious and consistent with permanent, neighboring development. 
c.  Design features. A minimum of two (2) of the following design features must be incorporated into the building elevation located immediately adjacent to a public street or roadway right-of-way: 
i.  Decorative masonry course integrated into the top edge of the masonry facade of a parapet wall; 
ii.  Secondary cornice separating the ground floor from the second floor; 
iii.  Quoins located at the building corners; 
iv.  Canopies meeting the following standards: (a.) Canopies shall be constructed of a permanent metal material; and (b.) Canopies shall extend along seventy-five (75) percent of the total building frontage for each portion of a wall facing a public street or roadway right-of-way. 
4.  Roofs: 
a.  On flat roofs mechanical equipment shall be screened on all sides from public view. Pitched or gabled roofs shall contain a minimum 7:12 pitch (seven (7) feet of rise for every twelve (12) feet of run). 
b.  Installed roofing shingles must consist of dimensional shingles with a minimum manufacturers rating of twenty (20) years. Roofing systems or materials exceeding the standards established herein may be used pursuant to approval by the building official or designee. 
Sec. 28.48A. - RI-Residential Infill Overlay District. 
28.48A.1.   General purpose and description:
The City of Denison has an abundance of vacant lots located in older developed neighborhoods. These lots have become vacant due to fire, demolition or other causes. The lots normally have water and sewer availability and paved street frontage. The intent of this ordinance is to encourage development and redevelopment of these areas though the modification of development standards. 
Residential infill target area includes the developed areas of Denison as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of Perry Avenue and Bond Street; 
Thence west along Bond Street (including properties along Bond Street) to the intersection of Bond Street and Derby Avenue; 
Thence west along the southern Bond Street to its intersection with Juanita Drive; 
Thence north along Juanita Drive to its intersection with Bond Street; 
Thence west along Bond Street to its intersection with Mauk Street; 
Thence north along Mauk Street to its intersection with Walker Street; 
Thence west along Walker Street to its intersection with Layne Drive; 
Thence north along Layne Drive to its intersection with Walker Street; 
Thence west along Walker Street to its intersection with Morton Street; 
Thence north along Morton Street to its intersection with Ray Drive; 
Thence east along Ray Drive following its path south to its intersection with Walker Street; 
Thence west along Walker Street to its intersection with Vick Avenue; 
Thence west along a line that is the extension of Walker Street to its intersection with Juanita Drive, to include those properties located on the south side of Walker Street west of its intersection with Juanita Drive; 
Thence south along Juanita Drive to its intersection with the northern Bond Street; 
Thence east along the northern Bond Street to its intersection with Derby Avenue; 
Thence north along Derby Avenue to its intersection with Johnson Street; 
Thence east along Johnson Street to its intersection with Eddy Avenue; 
Thence north along Eddy Avenue to its intersection with Martin Luther King Street; 
Thence east along Martin Luther King Street to its intersection with Armstrong Avenue; 
Thence north along Armstrong Avenue to its intersection with Parnell Street; 
Thence east along Parnell Street and a line that is the extension of Parnell Street to its intersection with Sixth Avenue; 
Thence south along Sixth Avenue to its intersection with Washington Street; 
Thence east along a line that is the extension of Washington Street to its intersection with a line that is the extension of the west line of the 20-foot alley dedicated by the plat of the Veteran's Heights Addition in Volume 1, Page 25 P.R.G.C.T.; 
Thence south along said line to its intersection with the north line of said Veteran's Heights Addition as recorded in Volume 1, Page 25 P.R.G.C.T.; 
Thence east along said north line to its intersection with Ninth Avenue; 
Thence south along Ninth Avenue to its intersection with Maple Row; 
Thence east along a line that is the extension of Maple Row to its intersection with the city limits line (as of April 1, 2018); 
Thence south along said city limits line to its intersection with Main Street; 
Thence east along Main Street to its intersection with Center Avenue; 
Thence south along Center Avenue to its intersection with Morgan Street; 
Thence west along Morgan Street to its intersection with End Street; 
Thence south along End Street to its intersection with the city limits line (as of April 1, 2018); 
Thence generally south along said city limits line to its intersection with US Highway 69, Eighth Avenue, and Desvoignes Road; 
Thence generally west along said city limits line to the southeast corner of the South Highlands Addition as recorded in Volume 162, Page 179, D.R.G.C.T.; 
Thence west along the extension of said south line to its intersection with Spur 503; 
Thence south and west along Spur 503 to its intersection with State Highway 91; 
Thence north along State Highway 91 to Scullin Avenue; 
Thence north along Scullin Avenue to its intersection with Hanna Street; 
Thence west along Hanna Street to its intersection with the line that is the extension of Perry Avenue; 
Thence north along said line to its point of connection with Perry Avenue; 
Thence north along Perry Avenue to the point of beginning at the intersection of Perry Avenue and Bond Street. 
28.48A.2.   Permitted uses:
The RI-Residential Infill Overlay District shall not modify the uses allowed in the base zoning district of any property within the overlay. The permitted uses of the property shall be determined and controlled by the use regulations set forth for the primary zoning district classification for the property. 
28.48A.3.   Height regulations:
A.  Maximum height (single-family and two-family): 
1.  Two and one-half (21/2) stories, but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet for main building. 
2.  One story - twelve (12) feet for accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, gazebo, etc. 
28.48A.4.   Area regulations:
A.  Single-family detached. 
1.  Size of lots: 
a)  Minimum lot area - five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
b)  Minimum lot width - fifty (50) feet. 
c)  Minimum lot depth - one hundred (100) feet. 
2.  Size of yards: 
a)  Minimum front yard setback - twenty-five (25) feet. If both adjacent lots (one (1) adjacent lot for corner lots) are developed with front yard setbacks of less than twenty-five (25) feet, the minimum front yard setback may be reduced to twenty (20) feet. 
b)  Minimum side yard setback - ten (10) percent of the lot width, not to exceed five (5) feet, including interior and corner lots. 
c)  Rear yard setback - ten (10) feet. 
d)  Setbacks for accessory structures shall be in accordance with section 28.52.4.A. 
3.  Maximum lot coverage: Fifty (50) percent including main buildings and accessory buildings. 
4.  Parking regulations: A minimum of two (2) parking spaces on a paved driveway (all concrete or a similar paved surface such as asphalt or turf pavers, brick pavers) shall be provided on the same lot as the main structure. 
5.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit - Nine hundred fifty (950) square feet. 
6.  Minimum exterior construction standards - Residential structures shall be exempt from the requirements of section 28.54.2.A.1. Acceptable building materials include stone, brick, cementitious composition fiber board, and engineered wood siding. Metal and vinyl siding are prohibited. 
B.  Two-family (duplex). 
1.  Size of lots: 
a)  Minimum lot area - seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
b)  Minimum lot width - seventy-five (75) feet. 
c)  Minimum lot depth - one hundred (100) feet. 
2.  Size of yards: 
a)  Minimum front yard setback - twenty-five (25) feet. If both adjacent lots (one (1) adjacent lot for corner lots) are developed with front yard setbacks of less than twenty-five (25) feet, the minimum front yard setback may be reduced to twenty (20) feet. 
b)  Minimum side yard setback - ten (10) percent of the lot width, not to exceed seven and one half (71/2) feet, including interior and corner lots. 
c)  Minimum rear yard setback - ten (10) feet. 
d)  Setbacks for accessory structures shall be in accordance with section 28.52.4.A. 
3.  Maximum lot coverage: Fifty (50) percent including main buildings and accessory buildings. 
4.  Parking regulations: A minimum of two (2) parking spaces per unit on a paved driveway (all concrete or a similar paved surface such as asphalt or turf pavers, brick pavers) shall be provided on the same lot as the main structure. 
5.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit - Six hundred fifty (650) square feet. 
6.  Minimum exterior construction standards - Structures shall be exempt from the requirements of section 28.54.2.A.1. Acceptable building materials include stone, brick, cementitious composition fiber board, and engineered wood siding. Metal and vinyl siding are prohibited. 
28.48A.5.   Special requirements:
A.  Metal carports are allowed in the rear yard up to four hundred (400) square feet in size and metal sheds up to two hundred forty (240) square feet. 
B.  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
C.  Open storage is prohibited (except for material for the resident's personal use or consumption such as fire wood, garden materials, etc., which cannot be stored in any required setback and which shall be screened from view of public streets and neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 4946, § 3, 5-7-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4946, § 3, adopted May 7, 2018, repealed § 28.48A and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former § 28.48A pertained to the RI-Residential Infill Development-Single Family Home, and derived from Ord. No. 4717, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 2013; Ord. No. 4869, § 3, adopted May 1, 2017; and Ord. No. 4890, § 3, adopted Aug. 7, 2017. 
ARTICLE IV. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 28.49. - Use regulations (charts). 
A.  The use of land and/or buildings shall be in accordance with those listed in the following use charts. No land or building shall hereafter be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered, or converted other than for those uses specified in the zoning district in which it is located. The legend for interpreting the permitted uses in the use charts is: 

See definitions in section 28.63 of the zoning chapter for further description of uses. An asterisk (*) indicates a definition in section 28.63. 
B.  If a use is not listed (or blank) in the use charts, it is not allowed in any zoning district (see subsection D. below). 
C.  Use chart organization: The following use categories are listed in the use charts: 
1.  Agricultural uses. 
2.  Residential uses. 
3.  Office uses. 
4.  Personal and business service uses. 
5.  Retail uses. 
6.  Transportation and auto service uses. 
7.  Amusement and recreational service uses. 
8.  Institutional/Governmental uses. 
9.  Commercial and wholesale trade uses. 
10.  Manufacturing and industrial uses. 
D.  Classification of new/unlisted uses: It is recognized that new types of land use will develop, and forms of land use not presently anticipated may seek to locate in the City of Denison. In order to provide for such changes and contingencies, a determination as to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use in the use charts shall be made as follows: 
1.  Initiation: 
a.  A person, city department, the planning and zoning commission, or the city council may propose zoning amendments to regulate new and previously unlisted uses. 
b.  A person requesting the addition of a new or unlisted use shall submit to the planning director (or his/her designee) all information necessary for the classification of the use, including but not limited to: 
1.  The nature of the use and whether the use involves dwelling activity, sales, services, or processing; 
2.  The type of product sold or produced under the use; 
3.  Whether the use has enclosed or open storage and the amount and nature of the storage; 
4.  Anticipated employment typically anticipated with the use; 
5.  Transportation requirements; 
6.  The nature and time of occupancy and operation of the premises; 
7.  The off-street parking and loading requirements; 
8.  The amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic materials and vibration likely to be generated; 
9.  The requirements for public utilities such as sanitary sewer and water and any special public services that may be required; and 
10.  Impervious coverage. 
2.  The planning director shall refer the question concerning any new or unlisted use to the planning and zoning commission requesting a recommendation as to the zoning classification into which such use should be placed. The referral of the use interpretation question shall be accompanied by the statement of facts in subsection b. above. An amendment to this chapter shall be required as prescribed by section 28.10. 
3.  The planning and zoning commission shall consider the nature and described performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts and determine the zoning district or districts within which such use is most similar and should be permitted. 
4.  The planning and zoning commission shall transmit its findings and recommendations to the city council as to the classification proposed for any new or unlisted use. The city council shall approve or disapprove the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission or make such determination concerning the classification of such use as is determined appropriate based upon its findings. If approved, the new or unlisted use shall be amended in the use charts of the zoning chapter according to section 28.10 (i.e., following notification and public hearing, etc.). 
5.  Standards for new and unlisted uses may be interpreted by the planning director (or his/her designee) as those of a similar use. When a determination of the appropriate zoning district cannot be readily ascertained, the same criteria outlined above 1.b. shall be followed for determination of the appropriate district. The decision of the planning director (or his/her designee) may be appealed according to the process outlined in subsections 2. through 4. above. 
Legend 
P -Designated use permitted in district indicated. 
 -Designated use prohibited in district indicated 
C -Indicated use may be approved as conditional use permit 
Asterisk (*) indicates a definition in section 28.63 A RD SF-20 SF-10 SF-7.5 SF-5 SF-PH SF-TH LD UD MH 2F MF-1 MF-2 O NS LR CR RR C CA BP LI HI Agricultural Accessory Building or Barn (Farm)* P P Bulk Grain and/or Feed Storage P P Farms, General (Crops)* P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Farms, General (Livestock/Ranch)* P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Farms, General (Orchard)* P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Greenhouse (Non-Retail/Hobby) P P P P P P P P P P P P Hatchery P P P Kennel (No Outside Pens) P P P P P Kennel (Outside Pens) P P P Livestock Sales P P P Plant Nursery (Growing for Commercial 
Purposes)* P P P P Stables (Public or Community)* P P P P Stables (Private, Accessory Use)* P P P Stables (Private, Principal Use) P P P P Residential Accessory Building/Structure (Residential)* P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Accessory Building/Structure (Nonresidential)* P P P P P P Accessory Dwelling P C Caretaker's/Guard's Residence P P P P P P P P Duplex/Two-Family P P P P P P Family Home Child Care* C C C C C C Four-Family (Quadraplex) P P P P Home Occupation P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Multi-Family (Apartments) P P P P P Rooming/Boarding House* P P P HUD Code-Manufactured Home* P HUD Code-Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision* P Single-Family Industrialized Home* P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Single-Family Detached P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Single-Family Attached P P P P P P Swimming Pool (Private) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Three-Family (Triplex) P P P Note: For residential uses permitted in CA District see section 28.39.1. Office Accessory Building (Nonresidential) P P P P P P P P P P Armed Services Recruiting Center P P P P P P P P Bank, Savings & Loan or Credit Union* P P P P P P P P Check Cashing Service P P P Credit Agency P P P P P P P P Insurance Agency Offices P P P P P P P P Offices (Brokerage Services) P P P P P P P P Offices (Health Services) P P P P P P P P Offices (Legal Services) P P P P P P P P Offices (Medical Office)* P P P P P P P P Offices (Professional)* P P P P P P P P Offices (Parole-Probation) P Real Estate Offices P P P P P P P P Telemarketing Agency* C P P P P Security Monitoring Company (No Outside Storage) C P P P P Office Showroom* C C C C C P C P P Personal and Business Services Appliance Repair (Small)* C P P P P P Appliance Repair (Large) P P P C Artist Studio P P P P P P P P Ambulance Service (Private) P P P P P C P P P Automobile Driving School P P P P P P Automatic Teller Machines (ATM's) P P P P P P P P P P Barber Shop (Non-College) P P P P P P P Beauty Shop, (Non-College) P P P P P P P Beauty Shop, One Chair-One Operator C P P P P P P P Bed and Breakfast Inn* P P P P P P P P P Communication Equipment (Installation and/or Repair-No outdoor sales or storage) P P P Computer Sales P P P P P P P Dance/Drama/Music Schools/Gymnastics (Performing Arts) P P P P P P P Extended Stay Hotels/Motels (Residence Hotels)* P P P P P Exterminator Service (No outdoor sales or storage) P P P P Financial Services (Advice/Invest) P P P P P P P P Hotel/Motel* C C P P P P P Kiosk (Providing a Service)* P P P P P P P P P P Laundry/Dry Cleaning (Drop Off/Pick Up) P P P P P P P Locksmith P P P P P P Martial Arts School P P P P P P P P Massage Establishment* P P P P P P P Photo Studio P P P P P P P P Photocopying/Duplicating C P P P P P P P P P Security Quarters as Associated with a Business (Live-In) C C C C Sexually Oriented Business See section 29 of the City Code of Ordinances Shoe Repair P P P P P P P Studio for Radio or Television (without tower)* P P P P C P P Tailor Shop P P P P P P P Tool Rental (Indoor Storage)* P P P P P Tool Rental (Outdoor Storage)* C P P P Travel Agency P P P P P P P P Retail Alcoholic Beverage Off-Premises Retail (See section 28.60) Outlet * P P P P P P Antique Shop* P P P P P P P Art Dealer/Gallery* P P P P P P P P Art Supply Store P P P P P P Bakery (Retail)* P P P P P P P Bike Sales and/or Repair (No outside storage) P P P P P P Book Store P P P P P P P Bowling Alley C P P P P Brew Pub/Micro-Brewery* C C C C P C P P Brewery or Distillery* C C C P P Building Material Sales * C P P P P P Cabinet or Upholstery Shop (Manufacturing) P P Cafeteria P P P P P P P Candy or Cake Shop P P P P P P P Cleaning, Small Plant or Shop* P P P P P P P Confectionery Store (Retail) P P P P P P P Consignment Shop P P P P P P Convenience Store without gas sales* P P P P P P P Convenience Store with gas sales* C P P P P P P P P Custom Personal Service Shop* P P P P P P Department Store P P P P Drapery Shop/Blind Shop* P P P P P P Florist Shop* P P P P P P Food or Grocery Store* P P P P P P Food Truck Park* C C C C C Furniture Sales (Indoor)* P P P P P P Furniture Sales (Outdoor) P P Garden Shop (Inside Storage)* P P P P P P Gravestone/Tombstone Sales (outdoor display) P P P P Gravestone/Tombstone Sales (no outdoor display/showroom only) C P P P P Handicraft Shop P P P P P P P Hardware Store* P P P P P P Home Improvement Center P P Laundry and Cleaning, Self-Service Automatic* P P P P P P Lawnmower Sales and/or Repair/Small Engines* P P P P Major Appliance Sales (Indoor) P P P P Market (Public) Farmers P P P P P P Mortuary and Funeral Parlor C P P P Needlework Shop P P P P P P P Pet Shop/Supplies/Grooming* P P P P Pharmacy P P P P P P P Plant Nursery (Retail Sales)* P P P P P P P P P Recycling Kiosk P P P P P P P P P Restaurant (Without Drive-Thru)* C P P P P P P Restaurant (With Drive-Thru)* P C P P P C P Restaurant (Drive-In) C P P P C C Retail Shop (Misc.)* P P P P P P Security Systems Installation Company P P P P Shopping Center* C P P P P Stained Glass Construction/Display and Sales P P P P P Studio Tattoo or Body Piercing* P Temporary Outdoor Retail Sales/Commercial Promotion C C C P P P Trade Center* C P Used Merchandise (Large) P P P Used Merchandise (Small) P P P P P Vacuum Cleaner Sales and Repair P P P P P Woodworking Shop (Ornamental) P P P P P P Transportation and Auto Services Auto Accessory Installation* C C P C P P Auto Auction C P Auto Body Repair/Paint Shop* C P P Auto Dealer (Classic and Performance) C Auto Dealer (New)* P P P C P Auto Dealer (Used)* C P Auto Gasoline or Motor Fuel Service Station* P P P P P P P P Auto Glass Repair/Tinting* P P P Auto Muffler Shop C P P Auto Repair (Minor)* C P P Auto Rental* C P P P Auto Repair (Major)* C C P P Auto Repair as an Associated w/Use to Retail Sales P P P P Auto Supply Store for New and Rebuilt Parts* P P P P P Auto Tire Repair/Sales (Indoor)* C P P P P Auto Wrecker Service P P P P Boat Sales/Rental/Repair C P P C P Bus or Passenger Railroad Station/Terminal* P P P P Car Wash (Self-Service)* P P P P P P P Full-Service Car Wash (Detail Shop)* P P P P P P Go-Cart Track C C C Impound Lots C C Limousine/Taxi Service P P Motorcycle ATV Dealer (New)* P P P C Motorcycle Dealer(Used)* P P P Parking, Commercial Lot P P P P P P P P Parking, Truck Lot C C P P Personal Watercraft Sales (New) P P P C Personal Watercraft Sales (Used) C C P Public Garage/Parking Structure C P P P P P Quick Lube/Oil Change/Minor Inspection C P P P P P P P Racing, Commercial Drag Strip C C Tire Sales (Outdoor Storage)* C P P Tire Sales (No Outdoor Storage) C C P P P P P P Truck and Trailer, Rental and Sales* P P P Truck Stop* P P Wrecking or Salvage Yard* C Amusement and Recreation Service Amusement Devices/Arcade (Four (4) or More Devices)* P P P P Amusement Services (Indoors)* C P P P P P Amusement Services (Outdoors)* C P P P Ballroom Dancing Facility* C C C P C Bar C C C C C Billiard/Pool Facility (Three (3) or More Tables) C P P P P Bingo Facility C P P P C Bowling Center C P P P P Broadcast Station (with Tower) C C P P Country Club (Private)* C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P P P P Dance Hall or Nightclub C C C C C Day Camp* C C C C P Dinner Theatre C P P P Driving Range C P P P P Exhibition Areas, Fair Grounds* C P P P P Exhibition Hall C P P P P P Golf Course (Miniature) C P P P P Golf Course (Public/Private)* C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P P P Gun Range, Indoor C C Health Club (Physical Fitness) C P P C P Membership Sports C P P C P Motion Picture Theater (Indoors) P P P P Motion Picture Studio, Commercial Film C P P P Museum P P P P P P P P Park and/or Playground P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Private Club C C C C C C C Private Recreation Facility (Private Park)* C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P P P P P C C Recreation Center* C C C C P P P P C P Travel Trailers/R.V.s (Short-Term Stays) R.V. Park* C P P Rodeo grounds P P P Skating Rink C P P P P Swimming Pool (Public/Community/Accessory Use)* P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Swimming Pool (Private/For Profit)* C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P Stadium (Public)* C C C C C P C C Stadium (Private)* C C C C C Tennis Court (Public/Community/Accessory Use) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Tennis Court (Private/For Profit) C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P Theater (Non-Motion Picture)* C P P P P Video Rental/Sales C P P P P P Institutional and Governmental Adult Day Care P P P P Airport, Heliport or Landing Field* C C C C C C C P P P Antenna (Non-Commercial) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Antenna (Commercial) See section 28.55.5 Assisted Living Facility* P P P P P P P P P Broadcast Towers (Commercial) See section 28.55.5 Cellular Communications Tower/CCT See section 28.55.5 Cemetery and/or Mausoleum* C C C C C C C C C C C C C Child Day Care (Business)* C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P P P P P Church/Place of Worship* P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Clinic (Medical) C C P P P P P College or University* C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P P P P P P P Community Center (Municipal/Civic Center)* P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Convent, Monastery C C C C C C C C C C C C P P P P P P P P P Electrical Generating Plant C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P P Electrical Substation* C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P P P P P P P Electrical Transmission Line P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Emergency Care Clinic P P P P Event Venue/Meeting Hall P P P P P P P P P P Family Home* C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P Fire Station P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Franchised Private Utility (not listed)* C C C Fraternal Organization, Sorority, Lodge, Civic Club* C C C C P P P P P P P P Gas Transmission Line (Regulating Station) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Governmental Building (Municipal, State or Federal) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Group Day Care Home* P P C Hospice C P P P P P Hospital (Acute Care)* C C P P P Household Care Facility* P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Library (Public) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Mailing Service (Private) P P P Newspaper Printing P P P P P P Nursing/Convalescent or Skilled Home* C C C P P P P P P P Philanthropic organization P P P P P P P P P P Phone Exchange/Switching Station P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Police Station P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Post Office (Governmental) P P P P P P P P P P Railroad Track and Right-of-Way P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Rehabilitation Care Facility* C C C P P C C School, Driving/Defensive Driving P P P P P School, Kindergarten* P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P School, K through 12 (Private) C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C School, K through 12 (Public) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P School, Vocational (Business/Comm. Trade)* P P P Sewage Pumping Station P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Utility Distribution Line/Transmission* P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Utility Shops and Storage Area C C C P P P Wastewater Treatment Plant (Public) C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C Water Reservoir, Pumping Station P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Water Supply Facility (Private) C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C Water Supply Facility (Elevated Water Storage) C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C Water Treatment Plant (Public) P C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P P Commercial and Wholesale Trade Air Conditioning/Refrigeration Shop P P P P Alcoholic Beverage Wholesale (No Retail Sales) P P P P Bakery and Confectionery, Commercial* P C P P Wholesale Bottling Works P P P P Book Binding P P P P Breeding laboratory animals C P P P Cemetery, Animal or Pet* C P P Cleaning and Dyeing Plant, Comm.* P P P P Cleaning Plant, Carpet and Bags (w/special equip.)* P P P P Commercial Printing P C P P Contractors Shop and Storage Yard (with outside storage)* C P P Distribution Center* C P P P Feed and Grain Store* C P P P Funeral Home* C C C P P C C Furniture Manufacture P P P Furniture and Major Appliance, Repair/Used* P P P P P Heating and Air-Conditioning Sales/Services P P P P Landscaping Use* C C P P P Laundry Plant* P P P Livestock-Wholesale C P P P Machinery (heavy), sales and storage* P P P Manufactured Home, Display sales* C P P P Offices, Temporary Field* (Authorized by the Chief Building Officer) Paint Shop* C P P P Pawn Shop* P P P P Plumbing Shop P P P Portable Building Sales/Display* P Propane Sales (Retail)* P P P P Riding School P P P P Riding School, Enclosed P P P P Scientific Research Laboratory* P C P Taxidermist P P P P Trailer, rental or RV sales* P P P P Transfer Station (Refuse/Pickup) P P Veterinarian (Indoor Kennels or Pens only)* P P P Warehouse/Office* C P P P Warehouse (Mini)/Self-Storage* C P P P Warehouse, storage P P Welding Shop P P P Wholesale office, sampling room P P P P Manufacturing and Industrial Asphalt Paving Batching Plant* C P Concrete Batching Plant* C P Concrete Products Manufacturer P Contractor's Office/Sales, No Outside Storage including Vehicles C C C C C C C C C C Electronic Assembly P P P Engine Repair/Motor Manufacturing Re-Manufacturing and/or Repair P P Exploration and Extraction of Hydrocarbons C C P P Food Processing* C P P Garment Construction Facility C P P P Laboratory Equipment Manufacturing* P P P Machine Shop C P P P Maintenance and Repair Service for Buildings P P P P Manufacturing, Light, Processes P P P Manufacturing or Assembly Processes other than Those Listed Elsewhere C C C Manufacturing, any industrial or storage process not prohibited by law* C Meat Packing Under State/Federal Regulations P Motor Freight Co.* C C P P Milk Depot and Dairy or Ice Cream Plant P P Petroleum Distribution/Storage C P Railroad Team Track, Freight Depot, Docks C C P Recycling Centers or Facilities* C P Recycling, Glass and Aluminum* C P Research Lab (Non-Hazardous)* P P P Sand/Gravel/Stone Extraction* C P Sand/Gravel/Caliche/Stone Sales (Storage)* C P Sign Manufacturing C P P P Smelter or Foundry C Stone/Clay/Glass Manufacturing P Tire Re-treading & Capping C P P Window and Door Frame Manufacturing C P P P  
(Ord. No. 4610, § 3, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 4740, § 1, 4-21-14; Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 6-2-14; Ord. No. 4820, § 2(2.15), 7-18-16; Ord. No. 4697, § 1, 5-20-13; Ord. No. 4891, § 3, 8-7-17; Ord. No. 4892, § 3(3.01), 8-7-17; Ord. No. 4893, § 3(3.01), 8-7-17; Ord. No. 4901, § 3(3.01), 9-5-17; Ord. No. 4911, § 3, 10-2-17) 
ARTICLE V. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 28.50. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
28.50.1.   Purpose:
To secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to lessen congestion on public streets; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation; to conserve the value of buildings; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land. Minimum off-street parking and loading shall be provided as set forth in the following schedules and provisions. 
28.50.2.   Residential districts-Special off-street parking provisions:
A.  Required off-street parking shall be provided on the same site as the use it is to serve. 
B.  All vehicle parking shall be on a paved parking surface. For single-family houses, duplexes, patio homes and townhouses, concrete, asphalt, turf pavers or brick pavers are approved paving materials. All driveways and approaches to parking spaces, garages and carports shall be continuous and shall be similarly paved, except in the A and RD Districts. 
C.  No required parking space, garage, carport, or other automobile storage space shall be used for the storage of any heavy load vehicle (see definitions for heavy load vehicle). 
D.  Carports shall not be constructed of canvas, fabric or similar materials. Support poles shall not be PVC, plastic or similar material. 
E.  1.  ;hg;Any owner of a recreational vehicle may park one (1) such vehicle in the rear yard only of a lot in a residentially zoned district so long as the owner is the owner or occupant of such lot. Where there is no reasonable access to the rear yard, the recreational vehicle may be parked in the side yard, subject to the limitations provided by this section; and where there is not reasonable access to or insufficient space in the side yard, the recreational vehicle may be parked in the front yard of the lot, subject to the limitation provided by this section. 
2.  Where side yard parking is permitted pursuant to the preceding paragraph, no person shall park a recreational vehicle so as to encroach upon the area of the side yard setback requirement of the lot. No person shall park a recreational vehicle in the side yard except upon an asphaltic or concrete pad which shall not encroach upon the area of the side yard setback requirement. 
3.  Where front yard parking is permitted pursuant to E.1. above, the owner shall park the recreational vehicle as follows: 
a.  In the driveway of the residence or upon an asphaltic or concrete pad adjacent to the driveway; 
b.  At an angle perpendicular to the street upon which the residence faces; and 
c.  In a manner in which the area of the publicly-owned parkway is maintained without encroachment. 
4.  The following requirements are applicable to all parking of recreational vehicles in residentially zoned areas: 
a.  A vehicle in excess of forty (40) feet in length shall not be parked in a residentially zoned district. 
b.  Stock and utility trailers may be parked only within the rear yard area of a lot within a residentially zoned area. 
c.  A corner lot shall be deemed to have reasonable access to the rear yard. 
d.  When no permanent improvements exist on a lot, in addition to all other requirements provided in this article, the recreational vehicle shall be parked within the area defined by the applicable building lines of the lot. 
e.  At no time shall such parked recreational vehicle be occupied or used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes, except as hereinafter permitted for visiting, nonpaying guests of the owner. 
f.  A person shall not park a recreational vehicle within a public street except for the purpose of loading or unloading of the recreational vehicle, and then not for a period beyond forty-eight (48) hours. 
g.  A person shall not connect the recreational vehicle to any utilities, except for a temporary connection to electricity for the purpose of charging batteries. 
h.  No person shall operate an auxiliary power unit or generator while the recreational vehicle is parked within a residentially zoned district. 
i.  No person may store any accessory or paraphernalia of the recreational vehicle outside the recreational vehicle in the immediate area of a parked recreational vehicle. 
5.  The owner's recreational vehicle or the recreational vehicle of a nonpaying, visiting guest of the owner when parked in conformity with this article may be used for sleeping purposes only by the visiting guests for a maximum of fourteen (14) days in any calendar year. The recreational vehicle shall not be connected to any utility, other than temporary electrical hookups. 
F.  Certain residential off-street parking regulations. 
1.  Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply unless otherwise stated: 
Additional residential parking space shall mean an area not to exceed one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet that is situated between residence's existing driveway and the nearest side lot line. 
Circular driveway shall mean a driveway serving a residential lot that enters and exits the residential lot from separate driveway approaches situated on the residential lot. 
Double driveway shall mean a driveway of sufficient width to accommodate two (2) vehicles parked side by side. 
Driveway shall mean a path giving access from a public right-of-way to a building on the abutting private property that is situated perpendicular to the public right-of-way. 
Vehicle shall mean automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, boat, motor home, truck camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, camping trailer, motorized dwelling, fifth wheel, mobile home, house trailer, trailer, semi-trailer, horse trailer, airplane glider, off-highway motor vehicle, snowmobile, sand buggy, dune buggy, all-terrain vehicle, tractor, implement of husbandry, special mobile equipment, or any other major recreational equipment or motorized equipment. 
2.  Prohibition. No person shall park or allow any parking of a vehicle on any part of a front or side residential yard other than on a paved or other hard-surfaced, impervious area driveway, double driveway, circular driveway or additional residential parking space, provided that the driveway or parking space meets the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable law. 
3.  Exception. This section shall not apply to driveway, double driveway, circular driveway or additional residential parking area existing on the residential property on the effective date of this section, but this section shall be effective against all other pre-existing driveways or parking areas on a residential lot. 
4.  Medical hardship exception. In the event that the foregoing parking restrictions create a hardship upon a permanent, full-time resident and such hardship is created by the medical incapacity of such resident, the city manager may grant a specific exception to this section. Such request shall be made in writing and shall include such medical documentation as is necessary, in the judgment of the city manager, for the making of an informed decision. The city manager's decision shall be made in writing, addressed to the applicant, shall specify the condition under which the exception is granted and shall return all medical documentation submitted to the applicant. 
28.50.3.   Nonresidential and MF Districts-Special off-street parking provisions:
A.  To prevent nuisance situations, all parking area lighting shall be designed and operated so as not to reflect or shine on adjacent properties and in accordance with the standards established in section 28.57. 
B.  For safety and firefighting purposes, free access through to adjacent nonresidential parking areas shall be provided in accordance with subsection 28.50.10, Fire Lanes. 
C.  All off-street parking, maneuvering, loading and storage areas shall be paved in accordance with the parking lot paving requirements in the city's Code of Ordinances (i.e., no parking shall be permitted on grass, within landscaped areas, or on other unimproved surfaces). 
  
Parking spaces shall be permanently and clearly identified by stripes, buttons, tiles, curbs, barriers, or other approved methods. Nonpermanent-type marking, such as paint, shall be regularly maintained to ensure continuous clear identification of the space. 
D.  Each standard off-street surface parking space size shall be in accordance with the design standards as shown on Illustration 2 for space size and design. Specific parking space sizes, exclusive of aisles, driveways and maneuvering areas shall be in accordance with the following minimum sizes: 
1.  Standard: Nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet. 
2.  Compact: Nine (9) feet by sixteen (16) feet; limited to a maximum of ten (10) percent of the required number of parking spaces; must be clearly designated with appropriate signage (see subsection 28.50.7.H.). 
3.  Parallel: Eight (8) feet by twenty-two (22) feet. 
E.  All parking and loading spaces, and vehicle sales areas on private property shall have a vehicle stopping device (e.g., curb, wheel stop, etc.) installed so as to prevent parking of motor vehicles in any required landscaped areas, to prevent vehicles from hitting buildings, to protect public and/or private utility structures/facilities, and to prevent parked vehicles from overhanging a public right-of-way line, public sidewalk, or adjacent private property (see Illustration 3). An extra-wide walkway on private property may be permitted so as to allow encroachment of vehicle overhang while maintaining an unobstructed four-foot minimum walkway width. The requirement shall apply only where spaces are adjacent to the walks, right-of-way, and required landscaping. Parking shall not be permitted to encroach upon the public right-of-way in any case. For new construction only, all vehicle maneuvering shall take place on-site. No public right-of-way shall be used for backing or maneuvering into or from a parking space, or for circulation within the parking lot. 
F.  In all nonresidential and multi-family zoning districts, the perimeter of all parking lots and driveways shall be provided with concrete curbs or other means to control traffic. 
G.  Refuse storage facilities placed in a parking lot shall not be located in a designated parking or loading space. Each refuse facility shall be located so as to facilitate pickup by refuse collection agencies. 
H.  Handicap parking space(s) and other associated provisions (e.g., clear and unobstructed pathways into building, crosswalks across parking lots, etc.) shall be provided according to building codes, State laws, and requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
I.  In all nonresidential and multi-family zoning categories, designated parking and loading areas shall not be used for the repair, storage, dismantling or servicing (except for normal maintenance of a private vehicle) of vehicles or equipment, or for the storage of materials or supplies, or for any other use in conflict with the designated parking and loading areas (i.e., advertising or open storage of raw materials). 
J.  To ensure that all requirements set forth in this section are carried forward, it will be the responsibility of the owner of the parking area to adequately maintain the facility. All off-street parking areas shall be kept free of trash, debris, vehicle repair operation or display and advertising uses. At no time after initial approval of the parking area layout can changes be made in the location and number of provided spaces without approval of the planning director, or his/her designee. 
K.  Off-street stacking requirements for drive-through facilities: 
1.  A stacking space shall be an area on a site measuring eight (8) feet by twenty (20) feet with direct forward access to a service window or station of a drive-through facility which does not constitute space for any other circulation driveway, parking space, or maneuvering area. An escape lane, of at least eight (8) feet in width and with negotiable geometric design, must be provided to allow vehicles to get out of stacking lane in the event of a stalled vehicle, emergency, accidental entry, etc. (see Illustration 7). 
2.  For financial institutions with drive-through facilities, each teller window or station, human or mechanical, shall be provided with a minimum of five (5) stacking spaces. One (1) escape lane shall be provided. 
3.  For each service window of a drive-through restaurant, a minimum of six (6) spaces shall be provided for the first vehicle stop (usually the menu/order board), and two (2) spaces shall be provided for each additional vehicle stop (order/pickup windows, etc.). One (1) escape lane shall be provided from the beginning of the stacking lane to the first stop (e.g., menu/order board). 
4.  For retail operations (other than restaurants, banks, etc.) and kiosks that provide drive-up service (e.g., pharmacy, dry cleaners, etc.), a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces for each service window shall be provided. 
5.  For a full-service car wash, each vacuum or gas pump lane shall be provided with a minimum of four (4) stacking spaces. For the finish/drying area, adequate vehicle stacking and storage space must be provided to keep finished vehicles out of circulation aisles, access easements, fire lanes, streets, etc. 
6.  For each automated self-service (drive-through/rollover) car wash bay, a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces, in addition to the wash bay itself shall be provided. One (1) stacking space shall be provided at the exit end of each wash bay for window-drying and other detailing. 
7.  For each wand-type self-service (open) car wash bay, a minimum of two (2) stacking spaces, in addition to the wash bay itself shall be provided. One (1) stacking space shall be provided at the exit end of each wash bay for window drying and other detailing, unless a separate area/shade structure is provided (outside of circulation aisles) for these activities. 
8.  For automobile quick-lube type facilities, a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces shall be provided for each service bay in addition to the service bay(s) itself. 
28.50.4.   Off-Street loading space-All districts:
A.  All retail and similar nonresidential structures shall provide and maintain off-street facilities for receiving and loading merchandise, supplies and materials within a building or on the lot or tract. All drives and approaches shall provide adequate space and clearances to allow for the maneuvering of trucks off-street. Each site shall provide a designated on-site maneuvering area for trucks (see Illustration 3). Such off-street loading space may be adjacent to (but not any portion of) a public alley or private service drive, or it may consist of a truck berth within the structure. Such off-street loading space or truck berth shall consist of a minimum area of ten (10) feet by forty-five (45) feet, and such spaces or berths shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule: 
 Total Square Feet of 

  Gross Floor Area in Structure Minimum Required 
Spaces or Berths 0 to  10,000 square feet None 10,001 to  50,000 square feet 1 50,001 to 100,000 square feet 2 Each additional 100,000 square feet 1 additional  
B.  In all nonresidential zoning districts, loading docks or service/delivery entrances shall be screened or not be constructed facing any public street, and shall not be visible from any public street. 
C.  Loading docks for any establishment which customarily receives goods between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and is adjacent to a residential use or district shall be designed and constructed so as to enclose the loading operation on three (3) sides, in order to reduce the effects of the noise of the operation on adjacent residences. 
D.  Kindergartens, elementary schools, day schools, and similar child training and care establishments shall provide one (1) paved off-street pedestrian loading and unloading space for an automobile on a through, "circular" drive for each ten (10) students cared for (excluding child care in a residence). An additional lane shall also be required to allow pass by or through traffic to move while automobiles waiting or parked to pick up children occupy loading/unloading areas. 
28.50.5.   Parking access from a public street-All districts:
A.  In the approval of a site plan, design consideration shall be given to providing entrance/exit drives that extend into the site to provide adequate queuing of vehicles on the site. 
B.  In all districts (except single-family and duplex zoning districts) building plans shall provide for entrance/exit drive(s) appropriately designed and located to minimize traffic congestion or conflict within the site and with adjoining public streets as approved by the planning director, or his/her designee. 
1.  Based upon analysis by the city, if projected volumes of traffic entering or leaving a development are likely to interfere with the projected peak traffic flow volumes on adjoining streets, additional right-of-way and paving in the form of a deceleration lane or turn lane may be required of a developer in order to reduce such interference. 
2.  The determination of additional right-of-way or paving requirements shall be made at the time the final site plan is submitted for approval. 
C.  Vehicular access to nonresidential uses shall not be permitted from alleys serving residential areas, and shall not be configured as "head-in" parking spaces that are accessed directly from the street. 
D.  Parking space configuration, location, arrangement, size and circulation in all districts shall be constructed according to Illustration 2. 
28.50.6.   Parking requirements based upon use:
A.  In all districts except the Central Business District (CBD), there shall be provided at the time any building or structure is erected or structurally altered, or change of use, off-street parking spaces in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Assisted living: One (1) space per six (6) beds; plus one (1) parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area devoted to offices, dining rooms, exercise/therapy rooms and other similar ancillary uses, plus one (1) space for every (2) employees at full occupancy. 
2.  Automobile parts sales (indoors): One (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of indoor floor area, plus one (1) space for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of outside sales area. 
3.  Automobile sales or service: See Motor Vehicle Sales. 
4.  Bank, savings and loan, or similar institution: One (1) space per two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area in addition to required stacking spaces (see subsection 28.50.3.K.). 
5.  Bed and breakfast facility: One (1) space per guest room in addition to the requirements for a normal residential use. 
6.  Bowling alley or center: Four (4) parking spaces for each alley or lane. 
7.  Business or professional office (general): One (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area, except as otherwise specified herein. 
8.  Car wash (self-serve): One (1) space per washing bay or stall in addition to the washing areas/stalls themselves and required stacking spaces; Car wash (full service): One (1) space per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area in addition to the required stacking spaces (also see subsection 28.50.3.K.). 
9.  Church, rectory, or other place of worship: One (1) parking space for each three (3) seats in the main auditorium/sanctuary (see subsection 28.50.7.B.). 
10.  Commercial amusement (indoor): One (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area, or as follows: 
a.  Racquetball or handball courts -Three (3) spaces for each court. 
b.  Indoor tennis courts -Six (6) spaces for each court. 
c.  Gymnasium, skating rinks, and martial arts schools -One (1) space for each three (3) seats at a maximum seating capacity (based upon maximum occupancy), plus one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet. 
d.  Swimming pool -One (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross water surface and deck area. 
e.  Weight lifting or exercise areas -One (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet. 
f.  Indoor jogging or running tracks -One (1) space for each one hundred (100) linear feet. 
g.  Motion picture theaters (which do not include live performances): a) one (1) space per three and one-half (31/2) seats for single-screen theaters; b) one (1) space per five (5) seats for motion picture theaters with two (2) or more screens (see subsection 28.50.7.B.). 
h.  Amusement center -One (1) space for each game table and one (1) space for each amusement device. 
i.  [All other areas.] -All areas for subsidiary uses not listed above or in other parts of this section (such as restaurants, office, etc.) shall be calculated in with the minimum specified for those individual uses. 
11.  Commercial amusement (outdoor): Ten (10) spaces plus one (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet over five thousand (5,000) square feet of building and recreational area. 
12.  Commercial use: One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area. 
13.  Community center, library, museum or art gallery: Ten (10) parking spaces plus one (1) additional space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area in excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet. If an auditorium is included as a part of the building, its floor area shall be deducted from the total and additional parking provided on the basis of one (1) space for each four (4) seats that it contains (see subsection 28.50.7.B.). 
14.  Convenience store (with gasoline pumps): One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of floor area, plus one (1) space for each gasoline pump unit (a unit may have up to six (6) nozzles for gasoline disbursement). Spaces within pump areas qualify as spaces for the parking requirement. If no gasoline sales are provided, then the parking requirements shall be the same as for a retail store. Adequate space shall be provided for waiting, stacking, and maneuvering automobiles for refueling. (See also subsection 28.50.3.K.). 
15.  Dance/aerobics studio, or assembly/exhibition hall without fixed seats: One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area thereof. 
16.  Day nursery, day care center: One (1) space per ten (10) pupils (based upon maximum occupancy and/or licensing capacity), plus one (1) space per teacher, plus one (1) space for each bus or van stored on the property (and sized to accommodate the vehicle). 
17.  Defensive driving school/class: One (1) space for each classroom seat (see subsection 28.50.7.B.). 
18.  Event venue/meeting hall: One (1) space for each three (3) seats. 
19.  Fast-food or drive-in restaurant: One (1) parking space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area (including indoor/outdoor play areas and patio dining areas), or one (1) space for every three (3) seats under maximum seating arrangement (i.e., occupancy), whichever is greater; required parking spaces are in addition to any stacking spaces that may be needed/provided for drive-through or drive-in facilities (see subsection 28.50.3.K.). 
20.  Food truck park: one (1) space outside of public rights-of-way for each one hundred (100) square feet of patron seating area. Food truck parks located in the CA District are exempt from this requirement. 
21.  Furniture or appliance store, hardware store, wholesale establishments, clothing or shoe repair or service: Two (2) parking spaces plus one (1) additional parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area over one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
22.  Gasoline station: One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of floor area, plus one (1) space for each gasoline pump unit (a unit may have up to six (6) nozzles for gasoline disbursement). Spaces within pump areas qualify as spaces for the parking requirement. Adequate space shall be provided for waiting, stacking, and maneuvering automobiles for refueling. (See also subsection 28.50.3.K.). 
23.  Golf course: Four (4) parking spaces per hole or green plus requirements for retail, office, and club house areas and one (1) space per each two (2) employees. 
24.  Golf driving range: One and one-half (12) spaces for each driving tee. 
25.  Health club, health spa or exercise club: One (1) space per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area. 
26.  Hospital: One (1) space for each two (2) beds or examination room, whichever is applicable; plus one (1) space for every two (2) employees during periods of full occupancy. 
27.  Hotel or motel: One (1) space per room for the first two hundred fifty (250) rooms and .75 space per room for each room over two hundred fifty (250), plus one (1) space per five (5) restaurant/lounge area seats (based upon maximum occupancy), plus one (1) space per one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet of meeting/conference areas. 
a.  One and one-tenth (1.1) spaces per room which contains kitchenette facilities, plus parking for restaurant and meeting areas per ratio stated in this paragraph. 
b.  Two (2) spaces per guest room provided with full kitchen facilities plus parking for restaurant and meeting areas per the ratio stated in this paragraph. 
c.  One (1) space for every two (2) employees during peak (i.e., busiest) time periods when the hotel/motel is fully occupied. 
28.  Independent living facility: One and one-half (1.5) spaces for each dwelling unit, plus any additional spaces for accessory retail, office, service or recreational uses. 
29.  Institutions of a philanthropic nature: Ten (10) spaces plus one (1) space for each employee. 
30.  Library or museum: Ten (10) spaces plus one (1) space for every three hundred (300) square feet. 
31.  Lodge or fraternal organization: One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet. 
32.  Lumber yard/home improvement center: One (1) space per four hundred (400) square feet display area, plus one (1) space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of warehouse. 
33.  Manufactured/mobile home or manufactured/mobile home park: Two (2) spaces for each manufactured/mobile home unit, plus visitor/supplemental parking in accordance with subsection 28.23.4.B. plus additional spaces as required herein for accessory uses. 
34.  Medical or dental office: One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. Facilities over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet shall use the parking standards set forth for hospitals. 
35.  Mini-warehouse or self-storage facility: Four (4) spaces per establishment plus (1) one additional space per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of storage area. 
36.  Mortuary or funeral home: One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor space in slumber rooms, parlors or individual funeral service rooms, or one (1) space for each three (3) seats in the auditorium/sanctuary (see subsection 28.50.7.B.), whichever is greater. Adequate on-site stacking spaces shall also be provided for the organization and forming of processions such that these activities do not cause excessive or extended traffic congestion/delays on a public roadway. 
37.  Motor-vehicle sales and new or used car lots: One (1) parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of sales floor/office and other indoor uses, plus one (1) parking space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of exterior lot area used for storage, sales and parking areas, plus one (1) parking space per repair bay in service areas (indoors or outdoors), plus one (1) parking space per service/towing vehicle to be stored on-site (required parking spaces are in addition to those to be used for the storage/display of vehicles for sale/lease). 
38.  Office (administrative or professional): One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area. 
39.  Outdoor display: One (1) space for each six hundred (600) square feet of open sales/display area. 
40.  Pawn shop: One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. 
41.  Places of public assembly not listed: One (1) space for each three (3) seats provided (see subsection 28.50.7.B.). 
42.  Real estate office: One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet. 
43.  Restaurant, private club, night club, cafe or similar recreation or amusement establishment: One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area (including indoor/outdoor play areas and patio dining areas), or one (1) space for every three (3) seats under maximum seating arrangement (i.e., occupancy), whichever is greater; required parking spaces are in addition to any stacking spaces that may be needed/provided for drive-through or drive-in facilities (see Subsection 28.50.3.K.). 
44.  Retail or personal service establishment, except as otherwise specified herein: One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area in addition to any required stacking spaces for drive-through facilities (see subsection 28.50.3.K.). 
45.  Rooming or boarding house: One (1) parking space for each sleeping room, plus one (1) parking space for each host resident or employee during maximum (i.e., peak) shift. 
46.  School, elementary (grades K-6): One (1) parking space for each fifteen (15) students (design capacity). 
47.  School, secondary or middle (grades 7-8): One (1) parking space for each twelve (12) students (design capacity). 
48.  School, high school (grades 9-12): One (1) space for each three (3) students, faculty and staff (design capacity). 
49.  Skilled nursing facility: One (1) space per six (6) beds; plus one (1) parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area devoted to offices, cafeterias, exercise/therapeutic rooms, and other similar ancillary uses; plus one (1) space for every two (2) employees at full occupancy. 
50.  Storage or warehousing: One (1) space for each two (2) employees or one (1) space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of total floor area, whichever is greater. 
51.  Telemarketing: One (1) space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor space. 
52.  T heater, indoor or outdoor (live performances), sports arena, stadium, gymnasium or auditorium (except school auditorium): One (1) parking space for each three (3) seats or bench seating spaces (see subsection 28.50.7.B.). 
53.  Veterinarian clinic: One (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor space. 
54.  Warehouse or wholesale type uses: One (1) space for five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
28.50.7.   Rules for computing number of parking spaces:
In computing the number of parking spaces required for each of the above uses, the following rules shall govern: 
A.  "Floor area" shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use. 
B.  "Seat" shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.  For fixed (e.g., church pews, grandstands, benches, etc.) seating, one (1) seat equals one point seventy-five (1.75) feet of length; and 
2.  For flexible (e.g., folding chairs, etc.) seating areas, one (1) seat equals eight (8) square feet of floor area occupied by such seating area (includes aisles). 
C.  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the next higher whole number. 
D.  The parking space requirements for a new or unlisted use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature. If the proposed use is not similar to any of the uses listed herein, a determination shall be made by the planning director or his/her designee, in accordance with the requirements for the most closely related use specified in this section. In the event the applicant disagrees with this determination, then he/she may submit a request for determination by the city using the same process as provided in subsection 28.49.1.D. for classifying new and unlisted uses. 
E.  Whenever a building or use is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten (10) percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. 
F.  For buildings that have mixed uses within the same structure (such as retail and office), the parking requirement shall be calculated for the most intensive use. In cases where the design of the interior of the structure is not practical for alteration, the parking requirement may be calculated for each use within a structure for buildings over twenty thousand (20,000) square 
G.  Shared parking may be allowed in the case of mixed uses (different buildings) feet under the following conditions. Up to fifty (50) percent of the parking spaces required for a theater or other place of evening entertainment (after 6:00 p.m.), or for a church, may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, and similar uses not normally open, used, or operated during evening hours. Shared parking must be on the same parking lot. Reduction due to shared parking shall be determined by the city planning director, or his/her designee. To assure retention of the shared parking spaces, each property owner shall properly draw and execute a document expressing the same and shall file this agreement with the City of Denison. 
H.  Compact car spaces: In the NS, GR, C and CBD Districts only, compact car parking spaces may be permitted when approved as part of a detailed site plan by the planning and zoning commission and the city council, providing one (1) of the following conditions apply: 
1.  Where it is necessary to preserve the natural landscape and native trees, a maximum of twenty (20) percent of required parking may be designated for compact cars. 
2.  On parking lots larger than fifty (50) spaces involving large industrial buildings or large offices and where there is only one (1) tenant, a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the required parking may be for compact cars. 
3.  On parking lots larger than fifty (50) spaces involving a shopping center, a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the required parking may be for compact cars. 
28.50.8.   Location of parking spaces:
All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot (and within one hundred fifty (150) feet, in the case of nonresidential buildings/uses) of the building or use served, except as follows: 
A.  Where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of an existing use, or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two (2) or more buildings or establishments, the required additional spaces may be located not to exceed three hundred (300) feet from any nonresidential building served. 
B.  In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council is required according to the following criteria: 
Off-site parking may be permitted on an immediately contiguous lot or tract or on a lot or tract within one hundred fifty (150) feet of such building or structure providing: 
1.  That a permanent, irrevocable easement of the parking facilities in favor of the premises to be benefited shall be dedicated and recorded as a condition of such use; or 
2.  That a long-term remote parking lease agreement be provided upon approval by the city as a condition of such use. 
28.50.9.   Use of required parking spaces, nonresidential districts:
Required off-street parking and loading spaces shall be used only for these respective purposes and shall not be used for refuse containers, cart corrals, recycling kiosks, signs or sign support structures, telecommunications towers or support structures, storage or permanent display of boats, trailers, campers, motor vehicles or other goods, materials, or products for sale/lease/rent. 
28.50.10.   Fire lanes:
A.  Fire lanes shall be provided in all multi-family (and in some single-family attached), manufactured home, and nonresidential developments, as required by the adopted fire code of the city (also see the subdivision ordinance for certain fire lane regulations). Fire lanes shall be a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet of paving, and shall have a minimum inside turning radius at curves of twenty (20) feet, or as required by the fire code and/or the fire chief of the City of Denison. The minimum overhead vertical clearance over fire lanes shall be fourteen (14) feet for a linear distance of fifty (50) feet on each side (i.e., in front of and behind, as a fire apparatus would traverse underneath) of any overhead structure (e.g., canopy, roof overhang, vertical height control device, etc.). 
B.  Any such fire lane easement shall either connect both ends to a dedicated street or be provided with a turnaround having a minimum outer radius of fifty (50) feet. If two (2) or more interconnecting lanes are provided, interior radius for that connection shall be required in accordance with the following: 
For ninety (90) degree or greater turns only. 
Twenty-four-foot fire lane-minimum radius twenty (20) feet. 
Thirty-foot fire lane-minimum radius ten (10) feet. 
28.50.11.   Construction requirements for parking areas:
All weather surface. All weather surface shall mean either: 
A.  Five (5) inches of compacted base material with two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete cover; or 
B.  Four (4) inches of concrete on a prepared sub-grade. 
28.50.12.   Certain residential off-street parking prohibited:
A.  Definitions: As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply unless otherwise stated: 
1.  Additional residential parking space shall mean an area not to exceed one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet that is situated between residences existing driveway and the nearest lot line. 
2.  Circular driveway shall mean a driveway serving a residential lot that enters and exits the residential lot from separate driveway approaches situated on the residential lot. 
3.  Double driveway shall mean a driveway of sufficient width to accommodate two (2) vehicles parked side by side. 
4.  Driveway shall mean a path giving access from a public right-of-way to a building abutting private property that is situated perpendicular to the public right-of-way. 
5.  Vehicle shall mean automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, motor home, truck camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, camping trailer, motorized dwelling, fifth wheel, mobile home, house trailer, trailer, semi-trailer, horse trailer, airplane glider, off-highway motor vehicle, snowmobile, sand buggy, dune buggy, all-terrain vehicle, tractor, implement of husbandry, special mobile equipment, or any other major recreational equipment or motorized equipment. 
B.  Prohibition: No person shall park or allow any parking of a vehicle on any part of a front or side residential yard other than on a paved or other hard-surfaced, impervious area driveway, double driveway, circular driveway or additional residential parking space, provided that the driveway or parking space meets the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable law. 
C.  Exception: This section shall not apply to a driveway, double driveway; circular driveway or additional residential parking area existing on the residential property on the effective date of this section, but this section shall be effective against all other pre-existing driveways or parking areas on a residential lot. 
D.  Medical hardship exemption: In the event that the foregoing parking restrictions create a hardship upon a permanent, full-time resident and such hardship is created by the medical incapacity of such resident, the city manager may grant a specific exemption to this section. Such request shall be made in writing and shall include such medical documentation as is necessary in the judgment of the city manager, for the making of an informed decision. The city manager's decision shall be made in writing, addressed to the applicant, shall specify the condition under which the exception is granted and shall return all medical documentation to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 4866, § 3, 5-1-17; Ord. No. 4892, § 3(3.01), 8-7-17; Ord. No. 4893, § 3(3.02), 8-7-17; Ord. No. 4901, § 3(3.03), 9-5-17) 
Sec. 28.51. - Landscape requirements. 
28.51.1.   Purpose:
Landscaping is accepted as adding value to property and is in the interest of the general welfare of the city. In addition, the provision of landscaped areas and the preservation of natural areas serve to increase the amount of property that is devoted to pervious surface area that, in turn, helps to reduce the amount of impervious surface area, stormwater runoff, and consequent non-point pollution in local waterways. Therefore, landscaping is hereafter required of new development and, in some cases, of redevelopment. 
28.51.2.   Scope and enforcement:
A.  The provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced by planning director or his/her designee. The standards and criteria contained within this section are deemed to be minimum standards and shall apply: 
1.  To all new nonresidential and multi-family development (including uses such as schools and churches within a residential zoning district); 
2.  To any redevelopment that: 
a.  Increases the existing square footage of a structure(s) by more than thirty (30) percent; and/or 
b.  Increases the use of the site by more than thirty (30) percent. 
3.  To any nonresidential or multi-family use requiring a conditional use permit (CUP) or a planned development (PD) zoning designation, unless special landscaping standards are otherwise provided for in the ordinance establishing the CUP or PD District. 
B.  If at any time after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, landscaping as required and approved according to this chapter is found to be not in conformance with the standards and criteria of this section: 
1.  The planning director (or his/her designee) shall issue notice to the owner, citing the violation and describing what action is required to comply with this section. 
2.  The owner, tenant or agent shall have thirty (30) days from date of said notice to establish/restore the landscaping, as required. 
3.  If the landscaping is not established/restored within the allotted time, then such person shall be in violation of this chapter. 
28.51.3.   Permits:
A.  Landscaping for standard development/redevelopment: No permits shall be issued for building, paving, grading or construction until a landscape plan is submitted and approved by the city planning director (or his/her designee) along with the applicable required plan, as specified in section 28.13 of this chapter. The landscape plan may be shown on the required plan (provided the plan remains clear and legible) or may be drawn on a separate sheet. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any building or structure, all landscaping shall be in place in accordance with the landscape plan. 
B.  Landscaping for phased development: In any case in which development of a site is being accomplished in two (2) or more phases, landscaping may be established in phases. Phased landscaping shall only be permitted in conjunction with a required plan, as specified in section 28.13 that is submitted and approved in phases as well. In all cases, a landscaping plan shall be submitted along with a required plan. 
C.  Seasonal deferment for landscaping installation: In any case in which a certificate of occupancy is sought at a season of the year in which the planning director (or his/her designee) determines that it would be impractical to plant trees, shrubs or groundcover, or to successfully establish turf areas, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued. 
1.  A letter of agreement from the property owner shall be submitted that states when the installation shall occur. 
2.  All landscaping required in accordance with this section shall be installed within six (6) months of the date of the issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy. 
3.  Following the installation of the required landscaping and city approval of the same, a permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
28.51.4.   Landscape Plan:
Prior to the issuance of a building, paving, grading or construction permit for any use other than single-family detached or duplex dwellings, a landscape plan shall be submitted to the planning director, or his/her designee. In accordance with section 28.13 of this chapter the planning director (or his/her designee) shall review such plans and shall approve same if the plans are in accordance with the criteria of these regulations. If the plans are not in conformance, they shall be disapproved and shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the changes necessary for compliance. 
Landscaping plans shall be prepared by a person knowledgeable in plant material usage and landscape design (e.g., landscape architect, landscape contractor, landscape designer, etc.) and shall contain the following minimum information: 
A.  Minimum scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet or other such scale as approved by the planning director or his/her designee; show scale in both written and graphic form. 
B.  Location of all trees to be preserved (do not use "tree stamps" unless they indicate true size and location of trees). 
C.  Location of all plant and landscaping material to be used, including plants, paving, benches, screens, fountains, statues, earthen berms, ponds (to include depth of water), topography of site, or other landscape features. 
D.  Species and common names of all plant materials to be used. 
E.  Size of all plant material to be used (container size, planted height, etc.). 
F.  Spacing of plant material where appropriate. 
G.  Layout and description of irrigation, sprinkler, or water systems including location of water sources. 
H.  Description of maintenance provisions. 
I.  Name and address of the person(s) responsible for the preparation of the landscape plan. 
J.  North arrow/symbol, and a small map showing where the property is located. 
K.  Date of the landscape plan. 
28.51.5.   General standards:
The following criteria and standards shall apply to landscape materials and installation: 
A.  Landscaping materials such as wood chips and gravel may be used under trees, shrubs and other plants, but shall not comprise a significant portion of the total landscaped area. This requirement shall not apply to public or private playgrounds built in association with any nonresidential or park use. 
B.  Plant materials shall conform to the standards of the recommended plant list for the City of Denison (see appendix C of this chapter for the recommended plant list) and the current edition of the "American Standard for Nursery Stock" (as amended), published by the American Association of Nurserymen. Grass seed, sod and other material shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests and insects. 
C.  Tree caliper measurements as required by this chapter shall be the caliper of the tree at a height twelve (12) inches above the ground (at average grade). 
D.  All existing trees that are to be preserved as well as all new trees that are added to the lot shall have a permeable surface under the drip line that is a minimum of five (5) feet by five (5) feet. 
E.  Canopy trees required pursuant to this section shall meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  An average crown spread of fifteen (15) feet or greater at maturity. Trees having a lesser average mature crown of fifteen (15) feet may be substituted by grouping the same so as to create a crown spread that is the equivalent of fifteen (15) feet or greater. 
2.  A minimum of two (2) inches in caliper and five (5) feet in height at time of planting. 
3.  Tree crown shall be estimated by computing the area that the mature crown will encompass, based on the standard tree list in appendix C of this chapter. Mature crown measurements shall be estimated for existing trees on site. Any tree not on the tree list shall be estimated by use of the American Standards for Nursery Stock . 
F.  Understory/ornamental trees required pursuant to this section shall be a minimum of one and one-half inch (1.5) in caliper and five (5) feet in height at time of planting. 
G.  Shrubs required pursuant to this section shall meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Shrubs shall be a minimum of three (3) gallons at time of planting. 
2.  Hedges, where installed for screening/buffering purposes, shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid visual screen which should be at least six (6) feet in height within three (3) years after time of planting. The exception to this shall be hedges that are installed as screening for parking lot/headlights. Such hedges shall form a continuous, solid visual screen which should be at least three (3) feet in height within two (2) years after planting. 
H.  Grass areas that are installed for the purposes of meeting the landscaping requirements of this section shall be sodded, plugged, sprigged, hydro-mulched (between the dates of April 16 and August 15) and/or seeded, except that solid sod shall be used in swales, earthen berms or other areas subject to erosion. Grass areas that are existing at the time of development or redevelopment and that are left in a natural state are exempt from this requirement. 
I.  Ground covers that are installed for the purposes of meeting the landscaping requirements of this section shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably completed coverage within one (1) year of planting. Ground covers that are existing at the time of development/redevelopment and that are left in a natural state are exempt from this requirement. 
J.  Earthen berms shall have side slopes not to exceed 33.3 percent (three (3) feet of horizontal distance for each one (1) foot of vertical height). All berms shall contain necessary drainage provisions as may be required by the city's engineer. 
K.  The planting requirements specified herein shall not be cumulative and planting materials required to meet one (1) section of the ordinance may be credited toward the requirements to meet other sections of the ordinance. For example, tree plantings required to meet the buffer yard standards may also be credited toward the tree planting requirements for the perimeter planting requirements for off-street parking and vehicular use areas. 
L.  Vehicular driveways from the public right-of-way and sidewalks, in accordance with city regulations, shall be permitted through all required landscaping. However, the amount of area consumed by vehicular driveways that traverse through landscaping shall not be counted toward meeting the landscaping requirements of this section. 
28.51.6.   Minimum landscaping requirements for nonresidential and multi-family developments:
A.  General landscaping requirement. 
1.  A minimum of eight (8) percent of the total area shall be comprised of landscaped area. 
a.  Front yard and side yard required landscaping may be counted toward meeting the eight (8) percent requirement. 
b.  Areas that are retained in a natural vegetative state may be counted toward meeting the eight (8) percent requirement, if they are maintained in accordance with this section, but such areas shall not be counted toward meeting front and side yard landscaping requirements. 
2.  The percentages specified in this section are the minimum required. At times, more landscaping or tree canopy will be required to meet the needs of the other sections of the landscaping standards, such as screening or parking areas, landscaping of setback areas, and providing usable outdoor space. 
B.  Interior lots: 
A minimum of eight (8) percent of the front yard shall be comprised of landscaped area. 
1.  Areas left in a natural vegetative state within the front yard shall not count as landscaped area, and therefore shall not be calculated in the total area needed to meet the eight (8) percent requirement. 
2.  All of the following elements shall be used and integrated together to meet the eight (8) percent requirement: 
a.  At least one (1) canopy tree-This may be an existing, preserved tree; 
b.  At least one (1) understory/ornamental tree-This may be an existing, preserved tree; 
c.  Shrubs; 
d.  Groundcover; 
e.  Landscaped berms may also be used. 
C.  Corner lots: In addition to the above requirement, a minimum of five (5) percent of the side yard shall be comprised of landscaped area. Areas left in a natural vegetative state within the side yard shall not count as landscaped area, and therefore, shall not be calculated in the total area needed to meet the five (5) percent requirement. The above-listed landscaping elements shall be used to meet this requirement, except that trees shall not be required. 
D.  General tree requirements. 
1.  A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the total trees required for the property shall be canopy trees as specified within this section. 
2.  Minimum number of trees required-The minimum number of trees shall be provided and maintained on the building site, as outlined below, based on the total area of the lot: 
a.  Less than 3,000 square feet: 0 
b.  3,001 to 7,000 square feet: 1 
c.  7,001 to 10,000 square feet: 2 
d.  10,001 to 20,000 square feet 3 
e.  20,001 to 30,000 square feet 4 
f.  30,001 to 40,000 square feet: 6 
g.  40,001 or greater, 3 trees per 20,000 
square feet (rounded up to the whole tree) 
E.  Requirements for landscaping in and around parking lots: The following requirements may be credited toward the requirement for landscaping of the total area, as specified in 28.51.6.A., and toward the requirement for landscaping of the front yard or side yard (not both). These requirements may also be credited toward the tree requirements, as specified in 28.51.6.D. 
1.  Landscape areas shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) square feet in area. Landscape areas shall be a minimum of five-feet wide. 
2.  There shall be a minimum of one (1) tree planted in the parking area for every fifty (50) parking spaces for parking lots having more than fifty (50) spaces. 
3.  There shall be a landscaped area that is a minimum of ten (10) feet wide to separate parking areas that have two hundred (200) or more parking spaces. 
4.  Landscape areas shall be located such that they assist in defining parking areas and in clarifying appropriate circulation patterns. All landscape areas shall be protected by a monolithic concrete curb or wheel stops, and shall remain free of trash, litter, and car bumper overhangs. 
28.51.7.   Sight distance and visibility:
A.  Strict compliance with these landscaping requirements shall not be such as to cause visibility obstructions and/or blind corners at intersections. 
B.  Landscaping, except required grass and low ground cover, shall not be located closer than three (3) feet from the edge of any vehicular pavement. 
C.  It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real property bordering on any street to prune trees next to the street in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade the street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct the view from any street or alley intersection, pursuant to the city's visibility standards. The minimum clearance of any portion of a tree overhanging public street right-of-way shall be fourteen (14) feet, and overhanging a public sidewalk shall be eight (8) feet. 
D.  In the event other visibility obstructions are apparent in the proposed landscape plan, as determined by the planning director (or his/her designee) the requirements set forth herein may be slightly reduced, if necessary, to remove the conflict. 
28.51.8.   Tree preservation and incentives for preservation of natural areas and trees:
A.  Tree preservation requirements. 
1.  Purpose. Trees provide vital benefits by cleaning the air, conserving energy, preventing soil erosion and providing shade. This section establishes rules and regulations to protect and preserve trees within the city. 
2.  Definitions. 
a.  Buildable area. The portion of a lot exclusive of required yard areas on which a structure or building improvements may be erected. 
b.  Building pad. The actual foundation area of a building and a ten-foot clear area around the foundation necessary for construction and grade transitions. 
c.  Caliper inch. Method of measuring the trunk diameter of a nursery grown tree. The point of measurement is approximately six (6) inches above the top of the root ball. 
d.  Clear-cutting. The random cutting, plowing, or grubbing of trees without regard to type or size for the purpose of clearing the land. 
e.  Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings and other structures, paving, drainage, or utilities, and agricultural activities. 
f.  Diameter at breast height (DBH). The diameter of the tree trunk diameter measured in inches at a height of four (4) feet above the soil line. For multiple-trunk trees, DBH shall be the sum of the diameter of the individual trunks. 
g.  Drip line. A vertical line run through the outermost portion of the crown of a tree and extending to the ground. 
h.  Floodplain. The area designated as being within the 100-year floodplain on the Federal Emergency Management Agency flood insurance map (FIRM). 
i.  Grubbing. Excavating or removing a significant part of the root system. 
j.  Protective fencing. Chain link, orange vinyl construction fence or other fencing at least four (4) feet in height. 
k.  Replacement trees. Trees planted to mitigate the loss of protected trees during development. 
l.  Tree. Any self-supporting woody plant which will attain a trunk caliper of three (3) inches or more DBH and which normally attains a height of at least fifteen (15) feet at maturity, with one (1) or more main stems or trunks and many branches. 
m.  Tree preservation plan. A plan or drawing that illustrates which trees are to be preserved, which trees are to be removed, and the manner in which trees will be protected during the construction process. 
n.  Tree survey. A plan or drawing that identifies the size, location and species of trees eighteen (18) inches DBH on a property, as well as smaller trees that will be used to qualify for incentives under section 28.51.6.E. 
3.  Applicability. The provisions of this ordinance apply to: 
a.  All vacant and undeveloped property; and 
b.  All property to be redeveloped, including additions and/or alterations. 
4.  Exemptions. 
a.  This ordinance does not apply to individual single-family, duplex, and townhouse lots after initial development and final inspection of the dwelling units by the building inspections department. Individual single-family and duplex lots ten (10) acres or less in size created through a minor plat in accordance with the subdivision ordinance are also exempt. However, clear cutting is prohibited on all individual single-family, duplex and townhouse lots ten (10) acres or larger in size. 
b.  For all new single-family developments, the buildable area, as defined above, plus the area needed to establish proper drainage, detention and retention areas, sidewalks, septic systems and lateral lines, fences, screening walls, swimming pools and decking, driveways, public street rights-of-way, private street lots and utility easements are exempt. Sufficient area to allow the normal operation of construction equipment for these improvements is also exempt. 
c.  For all nonresidential and multifamily developments, the building pads, proposed public street rights-of-way, utility easements, areas needed to establish property drainage, detention and retention areas, drive aisles, sidewalks and fire lanes are exempt. Sufficient area to allow the normal operation of construction equipment for these improvements is also exempt. 
d.  During the period of an emergency such as a tornado, severe thunderstorm, ice storm, flood, or other natural disaster, the requirements of this ordinance may be waived as deemed necessary by the emergency management coordinator or other designee of the city manager. 
e.  In addition to rights granted by easement, utility companies franchised by the city may remove trees during the period of an emergency that are determined by the company to be a danger to public safety and welfare by interfering with utility service. 
f.  Any plant nursery (growing for commercial sales) shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this ordinance only in relation to those trees planted and growing on the premises for the sale or intended sale to the public. 
g.  Utility and drainage easements required by the city and utility companies to install and maintain infrastructure. 
h.  Trees that are diseased or dead, unless the tree was required to be planted as part of an approved landscape plan or tree mitigation plan. 
i.  The city may approve selective thinning of protected trees, upon the recommendation of a certified arborist engaged by the developer, that will enhance the likelihood of survival of a larger tree or trees. 
j.  Exempt tree species - the following tree species are exempt from the provisions of this ordinance unless located in floodplains: 
Scientific Name Common Name Acer saccherinum Silver Maple Celtis occidentalis Common Hackberry Crataegus spp. Hawthorns Fraxinus velutina Arizona Ash Gleditsia triacanthos Honey Locust Juniperus virginiana Eastern Red Cedar Maclura Pomifera Bois d'Arc Melia azedearach Chinaberry Morus alba Mulberry Populus spp. Cottonwood Prosopis glandulosa Honey Mesquite Robinia pseudoacacia Black Locust Salix spp. Willow Sapium sebiferum Chinese Tallow Thuja spp. Arborvitae Ulmus alata Winged Elm Ulmus pumila Siberian Elm  
5.  Tree preservation requirements. The following requirements must be met: 
a.  In all zoning districts, no clear-cutting of land is allowed without a permit. An approved tree preservation plan or approved site plan is the permit that allows the removal of trees subject to this ordinance. 
b.  Removal and clearing of underbrush (but not grubbing) is allowed and does not require a permit. 
c.  No tree eighteen (18) inches DBH may be removed unless located in areas specifically exempted by this ordinance, the city has approved removal based on the tree's health and condition, or the city has approved removal after assessment of a mitigation fee. 
6.  Tree survey and preservation plan requirements. 
a.  Tree survey. A tree survey must be submitted with all site plan and preliminary plat applications. A tree preservation plan, if applicable, shall be submitted with all final plat applications. The planning department is authorized to maintain a list of required information for tree surveys and tree preservation plans. The tree survey shall include the exact location, size, condition if damaged or diseased, and common name of each non-exempt tree eighteen (18) inches DBH or larger, including those located in the 100-year floodplain. Smaller trees that will be used to qualify for tree preservation incentives in accordance with section 28.51.6.E below must also be shown on the tree survey. The tree survey for properties with ten (10) or fewer protected trees may be shown on the site plan or preliminary plat instead of a separate plan. 
1)  For property containing large heavily wooded areas, the city may, in lieu of a tree survey, authorize the submittal of an aerial photograph indicating all areas of tree cover that will not be disturbed or critically altered, provided that a tree survey and tree preservation plan of all other areas is submitted prior to any grading or construction. Trees within the non-disturbance area do not need to be individually identified unless they will be used for tree preservation incentives. 
2)  In lieu of a tree survey, the applicant may submit a statement from a certified arborist certifying that there are no protected trees on a property. 
b.  Tree preservation plan. The tree preservation plan shall indicate which trees are to be preserved, which are to be removed and the manner in which they will be protected during the construction period. A tree mitigation plan, if required, must be included as part of the tree preservation plan. 
7.  Requirements for tree preservation. Developers shall adhere to the following tree protection measures on all construction sites. 
a.  Prior to grading, brush removal, or construction, the developer shall clearly tag or mark all trees to be preserved. 
b.  The developer shall erect protective fencing around each tree or group of trees to prevent the placement of debris or fill within the root protection zone. The fence shall be installed prior to the release of any permit. If the protection fence is found removed, down, or altered at any time during construction prior to final inspection or landscape installation, a stop work order may be issued. 
c.  During the construction phase of development, the developer shall prohibit cleaning, parking, or storage of equipment or materials under the canopy of any tree or group of trees being preserved. The developer shall not allow the disposal of any waste material such as, but not limited to, paint, oil solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar, etc. in the canopy area. 
d.  No attachments or wires of any kind, other than those of a protective nature shall be attached to any tree. 
e.  No fill or excavation may occur within the drip line of a tree to be preserved unless there is a specific approved plan for use of tree wells or retaining walls. Major changes of grade (six (6) inches or greater) will require additional measures to maintain proper oxygen and water exchange with the roots. 
8.  Tree replacement and mitigation. 
a.  If non-exempt trees eighteen (18) inches and larger DBH are removed from a property, replacement trees a minimum of three (3) inches in caliper must be planted to equal the diameter of the tree removed. Replacement trees are a credit towards the trees removed from the property and shall be in addition to trees required by other landscape requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
b.  Replacement trees planted to mitigate tree removal may be located on the property being developed or in a location mutually agreed upon by the city and developer. 
c.  If all replacement trees cannot be properly located, the developer may pay a mitigation fee to the city in lieu of tree replacement. All fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of any building permits associated with the project. 
B.  Incentives for preservation of natural areas and trees. These incentives are designed to maintain a more natural and less manicured aesthetic through the preservation of existing natural areas and trees. These incentives shall not be used to reduce the landscaping percentage requirements for front and/or side yard areas. 
1.  Natural areas. The following incentives are applicable for an area(s) that is preserved in its natural state: 
a.  2:1 match . Such areas may be counted toward the amount of landscaping required for the total area on a two-to-one (2:1) basis. For example, if ten (10) percent of the total area must be landscaped to meet the requirements of this section (after front and side yard requirements have been met), five (5) percent of the total area may be left in a natural state to meet the requirements of this section. 
b.  Increase impervious coverage. In cases where such areas result in thirty (30) percent or more of the total area being comprised of landscaping and natural areas, the allowable impervious coverage percentage may be increased by ten (10) percent. 
c.  Natural areas. Areas left in a natural state must meet the maintenance requirements of this section, but do not have to be irrigated with an automatic sprinkler system. 
2.  Tree preservation. The following incentives are applicable for existing trees that are preserved: 
a.  Reduction in parking. For developments requiring fifty (50) parking spaces or more, the number of parking spaces may be reduced by two (2) spaces for every one (1) tree preserved. However, in no case shall the parking requirement be reduced by more than twenty (20) percent. 
b.  Tree credits. Credit toward the total number of trees required as outlined in the following: 
DBH of Existing Tree Credit Against Tree Requirement 4"-6" 1.5 trees Over 6" to 8" 2 trees Over 8" to 10" 2.5 trees Over 10" to 12" 3 trees Over 12" to 15" 4 trees Over 15" 5 trees  
C.  Penalty; enforcement. In addition to the penalties provided by section 28.66 of this chapter, no building permit(s), certificate of occupancy, or acceptance of public improvements shall be issued or authorized by the city until any and all violation(s) have been mitigated by replacement of the protected tree or payment of the tree mitigation fee in accordance with this section. Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, or in state law as adopted, allegation and evidence of culpable mental state are not required for the proof of an offense defined by this section. 
(Ord. No. 4958, § 3(3.1), (3.2), 8-6-18) 
Sec. 28.52. - Accessory building and use regulations. 
28.52.1  In a single-family or multi-family district, an accessory building is a subordinate or incidental building, attached to or detached from the main building, not used for commercial purposes and not rented. Accessory buildings shall be located toward the rear portion of the property. Accessory buildings shall not be permitted without a main building or primary use being in existence. 
28.52.2  In nonresidential districts, an accessory building is a subordinate building, the use of which is secondary to and supportive of the main building. Accessory buildings shall not be permitted without a main building or primary use being in existence or in the case of a vacant lot, a building permit for the primary structure has been issued. Accessory buildings should, wherever possible, be located toward the rear portion of the property. 
28.52.3  Accessory dwellings (including garage and detached units) may be permitted in residential zoning districts (see regulations for the specific district, and the use charts, section 28.49), and shall conform to the height limitations of the main structure. No such accessory dwelling or quarters shall be used or occupied as a place of abode or residence. 
28.52.4.   Area regulations for accessory buildings in residential and multi-family districts:
A.  Size of yards: 
1.  Front yard: Detached accessory buildings shall be prohibited in front of the main building. Garages and carports are permitted if attached to the main or primary structure and maintain the same setbacks as for the primary or main structure. 
2.  Side yard: There shall be a side yard not less than three (3) feet from any side lot line, or alley line for any accessory building provided that such building is separated from the main building by a minimum distance of ten (10) feet. Accessory buildings adjacent to a side street shall have a side yard not less than fifteen (15) feet. Garages or carports located and arranged so as to be entered from the side yard shall have a minimum distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the side lot line, alley line, alley easement line or street. Carports or garages arranged to be entered from the side yard, facing a public street, shall have a minimum distance equal to the required yard for the main building or twenty-five (25) feet, whichever is greater. 
3.  Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard not less than three (3) feet from any lot line or alley line, or easement line, except that: 
a)  Where apartments are permitted, the main building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than sixty (60) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint of one (1) side lot line with the midpoint of the opposite side lot line; 
b)  Carports, garages, or other accessory buildings, located within the rear portion of a lot as heretofore described, constructed closer than ten (10) feet to the rear property line; or 
c)  Accessory buildings constructed ten (10) feet or more from the main building shall have a rear yard of three (3) feet. If an alley exists, accessory buildings may be located within three (3) feet of a rear lot line. 
4.  Carports shall be measured from the posts supporting the roof nearest to the street, alley or property line (see Illustration 6). Carports are prohibited in the front yard. 
5.  Accessory buildings are not permitted without a main structure. 
6.  Accessory buildings shall not exceed twenty-six (26) feet in height, unless otherwise allowed in the specific zoning district. 
7.  Metal accessory buildings less than two hundred forty (240) square feet are permitted but shall not be used as an enclosed parking area or garage or carport. 
8.  Steel storage containers designed to be transported to a residential lot on a temporary basis shall only be permitted in the rear yard for a maximum of ninety (90) days once per year and shall only be allowed on a paved surface. All temporary steel storage containers require permits. 
9.  In all districts except those specifically excepted herein, in order for a structure to qualify as an accessory building, the structure shall be one originally designed and constructed for use with a primary structure, compatible with the primary use and surrounding structures, and shall have a roof pitch ratio of at least 6:1. Specifically, prohibited from use as an accessory building are trailers, with or without wheels attached, buses, cargo containers and all other equipment and apparatuses whose original design is for the transport of goods, materials or humans. 
In the commercial, light industrial and heavy industrial zoning districts a cargo container without wheels or axles may be placed behind the primary structure and used as an accessory building under the following conditions: 
1.  Adequate ventilation to accommodate the safe storage of the contents of the container provided; 
2.  Prior to locating the container on the property, the container is painted the primary color of the property's main structure; and 
3.  Screening on three (3) sides of the container is provided in a manner that complies with the screening criteria provided by this chapter. 
No utilities other than electricity may be provided to such containers, and then only with the prior approval of a wiring and installation application for permit submitted to the chief building official. 
Sec. 28.53. - Fence, screening and wall regulations. 
28.53.1.   Purpose:
To encourage the most appropriate use of land and conserve and protect the privacy and value of adjacent permitted uses. Regulations are prescribed for the location and type of various screening devices to be used when required in the various zoning districts or in this section in accordance with the following standards. 
28.53.2.   General fence and screening requirements for AH Districts:
A.  A permit from the Building Inspections Department shall be required for the construction, repair, or replacement of all fences and screening walls. 
B.  Fences around swimming pools shall comply with the City of Denison's Code of Ordinances. All swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence with a minimum height of four (4) feet and with self-latching gates. 
C.  Tennis court fencing is allowed in all zoning districts and shall be a maximum twelve (12) feet in height. 
D.  All fences shall comply with the sight visibility requirements for landscaping set forth in Section 28.51.7 and as shown in Appendix "A" Illustration 5. 
E.  The following materials are prohibited for use as fences: 
1.  Metal panels or corrugated sheet metal panels except as allowed in subsection 28.53.5.1.E below. 
2.  Plywood and/or loading pallets. 
3.  Any welded wire fabric unless specifically allowed by this section. 
4.  Barbed or barbless agricultural wire, such as hog wire, poultry wire, cattle panels, or electrical fencing unless used to enclose pastures, cropland or agricultural activities or approved in conformance with subsection 28.53.5.E. 
5.  Pipe and cable fencing unless specifically allowed by this section. 
F.  When chain link fencing is used, it shall include metal posts, post caps and metal top rails. 
G.  In the H (Historic Overlay District), a Certificate of Appropriateness must be approved before a permit can be issued for construction. 
28.53.3.   Screening required between non-residential and residential uses:
A.  In the event that the property line of a multi-family use, nonresidential use, or manufactured/mobile home park is adjacent to the property line of a single-family, two-family or residential PD district, or in the event that the property line of any nonresidential district is adjacent to a multiple-family district, a screening wall or fence of not less than six (6) feet, nor more than eight (8) feet in height shall be erected on the property line separating these properties. The purpose of the screening wall or fence is to provide a visual and protective barrier between the properties. The construction material for such screening fences may be wood stockade with metal poles, masonry, brick, stone or another approved material. 
1.  The owner of the multi-family property shall be responsible for and shall build and maintain the required screening wall or fence on the property line dividing the property from the single-family or duplex residential district. This construction requirement applies only when multi-family is adjacent to residential uses. 
2.  When screening is required between nonresidential and residential uses, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property with the nonresidential use to construct and maintain the screening wall or fence. 
3.  Any screening wall or fence required under the provisions of this section or under a conditional use permit, planned development district, or other requirement shall be constructed of masonry, reinforced concrete, wood or other similar suitable permanent materials that do not contain openings except gates. Gates shall be equal in height and screening characteristics to the wall or fence. 
4.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve alternative equivalent screening through the site plan approval process in Section 28.13. A solid living screen consisting of landscaping that will achieve a minimum height of six (6) to eight (8) feet within two (2) years may be considered by the Commission as an alternative screening equivalent. The living screen must be irrigated by an automatic irrigation system which shall be constructed and maintained by the property owner requesting the approval of the alternative screening. 
5.  The screening wall and fence may extend into the front yard setback of the non-residential, multi-family or mobile home district at the minimum height unless restricted by the sight visibility easements in subsection 28.51.7. 
6.  The screening fence/wall shall be finished on both sides in a manner/color that is compatible to the exterior finish materials used on the nonresidential or multi-family buildings. 
28.53.4.   Residential fences and walls:
A.  Any fence or wall located to the rear of the front face of the main residential structure shall not exceed a total of eight (8) feet in height measured from grade and including the height of a functional retaining wall. 
B.  No fence or wall shall be permitted between the street and the front face of any single-family or duplex residential structure or within the side yard setback of a corner lot unless it does not exceed four (4) feet in height and has openings of not less than fifty (50) percent of the fence area. 
C.  Gates designed for vehicular access shall be set back from the property line a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
D.  For single-family residential and duplex corner lots where one yard has been designated as a side yard but adjoins a front yard on an adjacent lot, a fence may be erected to enclose the side yard but must be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the property line. 
E.  For properties used as multi-family, assisted living facility, and nursing/convalescent or skilled home, an ornamental metal fence a maximum of six (6) feet in height and fifty percent (50%) open in construction may be erected within the front yard setback and within the side yard setback of corner lots. 
28.53.5.   Non-residential fences and walls:
A.  Fences located within the front yard setback in the O, NS, LR, RR, CR, C and BP zoning districts, unless addressed below in subsections D. and E., shall be a maximum of forty-eight (48) inches in height and constructed of wrought iron or tubular steel, and shall be no less than fifty percent (50%) open. The fence must be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the property line or behind any required landscaped edge. 
B.  Fences erected within the side yard setback of corner lots shall comply with the standards in subsection A above. 
C.  Fences and walls located within the side or rear yards of non-corner lots may be erected on the property line, shall be a maximum of eight (8) feet in height, and may be constructed of black or green vinyl coated chain link with matching top rails and caps, galvanized/zinc coated chain link, wrought iron or tubular steel or masonry, brick or stone screening walls. Solid metal panels are allowed only in the LI and HI districts, and must be of materials and design specifically manufactured or fabricated for use as screening or fencing. 
D.  For uses categorized as "Transportation and Auto Services" in Section 28.49, except for impound lots and wrecking yards, pipe rail fencing with a maximum height of twenty-four (24) inches may be erected on the property line. Pipe rail fencing shall have a painted or powder coated finish in a color complimentary with the surrounding development. Automobile storage areas on impound lots and wrecking yards must be screened in accordance with subsection 28.53.6.A below. 
E.  In the LI and HI districts, fences located within the front yard setback shall be a maximum of eight (8) feet in height and shall be no less than fifty percent (50%) open. Green or black coated vinyl chain link or galvanized/zinc coated chain link fencing may be used. Fences shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the front property line, but may be erected on the side and rear yard property lines. Solid metal panels are allowed only in the side and rear yards of non-corner lots, and must be of materials and design specifically manufactured or fabricated for use as screening or fencing. Barbed wire, electric wire or razor wire is allowed only if approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission as part of the site plan review process. 
28.53.6.   Screening for open storage, refuse containers and ground-mounted equipment:
A.  In districts permitting open storage, screening shall be required only for those areas used for open storage. A screening fence or wall which is a minimum of six (6) feet but does not exceed a maximum of eight (8) feet in height shall be provided and maintained at the property line adjacent to the area to be screened by one (1) or a combination of the following methods: 
1.  Solid masonry (brick, concrete block or concrete panels). 
2.  Wrought iron with solid landscape screening. 
3.  Alternate equivalent screening may be approved through the site plan approval process under Section 28.13. 
No outside storage may exceed the height of the screening fence or wall. Outside storage exceeding eight (8) feet shall require a conditional use permit. 
B.  Refuse storage areas which are not within a screened rear service area and which are visible from a public right-of-way in the HO, AO, MO, PD, BP, MF-1, MF-2, MHP districts shall be visually screened by a minimum six-foot (6) solid masonry wall on at least three (3) sides (see Illustration 1 for refuse container enclosure diagrams). The fourth side, which is to be used for garbage pickup service, shall be gated to secure the refuse storage area. Alternate equivalent screening methods may be approved through the site plan approval process in Section 28.13. Each refuse facility shall be located so as to facilitate pickup by refuse collection agencies. Adequate reinforced paved areas shall be provided for refuse facilities and their approaches for loading and unloading, as per Appendix "A" Illustration #1. 
C.  Plans and specifications for screening and/or fencing around ground mounted utility structures (e.g. transformers, natural gas regulating stations, etc.) shall be submitted for review by the affected utility company prior to construction of said screening/fencing. 
(Ord. No. 4872, § 3, 5-1-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4872, § 3, adopted May 1, 2017, changed the title of § 28.53 from "Fencing, walls and screening requirements" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 28.54. - Exterior construction and design requirements. 
28.54.1.   Exterior construction requirements and standards:
    Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  Masonry construction shall include all construction of stone material, brick material, concrete masonry units, or concrete panel construction, which is composed of solid, cavity, faced, or veneered-wall construction. 
The standards for masonry construction types are listed below: 
a.  Stone material -Masonry construction using stone material may consist of granite, marble, limestone, slate, river rock, and other hard and durable naturally occurring all weather stone. Cut stone and dimensioned stone techniques are acceptable. Manmade/cultured stone is also an acceptable exterior material. 
b.  Brick material -Brick material used for masonry construction shall be hard fired (kiln fired) clay or slate material which meets the latest version of ASTM standard C216, Standard Specification for Facing Brick (solid masonry unit made of clay or shale), and shall be Severe Weather (SW) grade, and Type FBA or FBS or better. Unfired or underfired clay, sand, or shale brick are not allowed. 
c.  Concrete masonry units -Concrete masonry units used for masonry construction shall meet the latest version of the following applicable specifications; ASTM C90, Standard Specification for Hollow Load Bearing Concrete Masonry Units; ASTM C145, Standard Specification for Solid Load Bearing Masonry Units; ASTM C129, Standard Specification for Hollow and Solid Non-Load Bearing Units; and cementitous composition fiberboard or material of equal characteristics in accordance with the city's building and fire codes. Concrete masonry units shall have an indented, hammered, split face finish or other similar architectural finish as approved by the city council. Lightweight concrete block or cinder block construction is not acceptable as an exterior finish. 
d.  Concrete panel construction -Concrete finish, pre-cast panel, tilt wall, or cementitious composition reinforced panel construction shall be painted, fluted, or exposed aggregate. Smooth or untextured concrete finishes are not acceptable unless painted. 
e.  Stucco -Stucco is a durable, attractive and weather-resistant wall covering traditionally exterior finish applied in three coats (1) the scratch coat, (2) the brown coat and (3) the finish coat. The two base coats of plaster may be either hand-applied or machine sprayed. The finish coat may be troweled smooth, hand-textured , floated to a sand finish, or sprayed. EIFS shall be allowed only as a trim element or architectural detail element in conjunction with other authorized wall materials, shall only be allowed in residential districts, and shall not be allowed as a primary wall finish. 
2.  Glass and metal standards are as follows: 
a.  Glass walls shall include glass curtain walls or glass block construction. Glass curtain wall shall be defined as an exterior wall which carries no structural loads, and which may consist of the combination of metal, glass, or other surfacing material supported in a metal framework. 
b.  Metal walls shall include profiled panels, deep ribbed panels and concealed fastener systems. Exterior finish shall be film laminated or baked on enamel painted to the wall manufacturer's standards. 
1.  The use of corrugated metal, plastic, or fiberglass panels is prohibited. 
2.  The use of galvanized, aluminum coated, zinc-aluminum coated or unpainted exterior metal finish is prohibited. 
3.  The use of metal roofs is allowed in SF-7.5, SF-5, A, RD, and 2F if compatible with roof color of surrounding neighborhood. Allowable roof systems include stone coated metal roof systems equivalent to Decra TM or Gerard TM with a minimum of twenty-six (26) gauge and/or Standing Seam or equivalent interlocking metal roof panels that do not have exposed screws or grommets with painted factory finish guaranteed for a minimum of twenty (20) years in a color compatible with the surrounding residential roofs-Colors shall include Galvalume (matte finish/non-reflective), pewter, burnished slate, ivy green, light stone and copper (matte finish/non-reflective) are allowed. Roofs with bright colors such as bright red, neon or similar colors or reflective or shiny finishes are prohibited. 
28.54.2.   Construction standards:
A.  Construction standards: The standards and criteria contained within this section are deemed to be minimum standards and shall apply to all new construction occurring within the city. 
1.  Residential: 
a.  All residential buildings and structures except residential structures in SF-5 shall be of standard masonry construction having at least seventy-five (75) percent of the total exterior walls above grade level and below the first floor plate line of all elevations, excluding doors and windows, constructed of brick, stone, cementitious composition fiberboard, stucco or a material of equal characteristics in accordance with this ordinance and with the city's building and fire codes. Strict adherence to this rule shall not be such as to prevent architectural creativity. Masonry requirements for residential buildings and structures in SF-7.5 are provided in section 28.23.4 "Area Regulations: F. Minimum exterior construction standards" and SF-5 are provided in section 28.24.4 "Area Regulations: F. Minimum exterior construction standards." 
b.  All principal buildings and structures located in the MF Districts shall be of exterior fire-resistant construction having at least one hundred (100) percent of the total exterior walls above grade level and below the first floor plate line, excluding door and windows constructed of brick or stone in accordance with the city's building and fire code. Stucco, cementious composition fiberboard, concrete masonry units or materials of equal characteristics are not allowed in the Multi-Family Districts and any zoning district that allows apartments - (Lakeside Development District, Office District and Central Area District). 
c.  Concrete or metal exterior construction is not permitted on any residential structure. 
d.  Exemptions: 
1.  Accessory buildings two hundred forty (240) square feet or less are excluded from these provisions. 
2.  Barns on property of three (3) acres or more, provided that such barns are used solely for agricultural purposes as distinguished from commercial or industrial purposes, shall be exempt from provisions of this section. 
3.  Mobile homes otherwise lawfully existing under the provisions of the zoning chapter shall also be excluded from provision of this section. 
4.  Historic structures. 
5.  Structures in areas of infill lots where wood frame homes are existing on adjacent lots on the date of adoption of this chapter. 
2.  Nonresidential: 
a.  All nonresidential structures shall be of exterior materials having at least seventy-five (75) percent of the total exterior walls above grade level, excluding doors and windows, constructed of masonry or glass wall construction, in accordance with below. 
b.  Temporary construction buildings-Temporary buildings and temporary building material storage areas to be used for construction purposes may be permitted for a specific period of time in accordance with a permit issued by the building official and subject to periodic renewal by the inspector for cause shown. Upon completion or abandonment of construction or expiration of permit, such field offices/buildings and material storage areas shall be removed at the satisfaction of the building official. 
c.  Metal buildings are permitted in light and heavy industrial districts except in the Highway Oriented Overlay District. 
B.  Procedure for determining alternative exterior materials: 
1.  All requests for alternative exterior building materials shall be noted and described on the site plan. If requested by the city, a sample(s) of the proposed exterior finish material(s) may be required to be submitted with the site plan. 
2.  The planning and zoning commission may approve an alternative exterior material if it is determined to be equivalent or better than the exterior materials cited in subsection 28.54.2.A.2.b. above as part of the approval of the site plan. 
3.  Consideration for exceptions to the above requirements shall be based only on the following: 
a.  Architectural design and creativity. 
b.  Compatibility with surrounding developed properties: 
Architectural variances may be considered for, but not limited to, Gingerbread, Victorian, English Tudor, or Log designs. 
4.  If the request is denied by the planning and zoning commission it may be appealed to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4733, § 2, 2-17-14; Ord. No. 4820, § 2(2.12-2.14), 7-18-16; Ord. No. 4841, § 2(2.03, 2.04), 10-3-16) 
Sec. 28.55. - Supplemental regulations. 
28.55.1.    
A.  Measuring setbacks: All setback measurements shall be made in accordance with Illustration 8. 
B.  Configuration of lots: Wherever possible, flag lots (i.e., lots with minimal, or panhandle type, frontage) shall be avoided. Similarly, through (i.e., double frontage) lots (particularly within residential zoning districts) shall also be avoided wherever possible. (Also see subdivision ordinance for regulations pertaining to the configuration of lots.) 
28.55.2.   Front yard:
A.  On all corner lots, the front yard setback shall be observed along the frontage of both intersecting streets, unless approved specifically otherwise on a final plat. Where single-family and duplex lots have double frontage, extending from one street to another, or are on a corner, a required front yard shall be provided on both streets unless a side or rear yard building line has been established along one (1) frontage on the plat, in which event only one (1) required front yard need be observed. The side and/or rear yards in the case of single-family and duplex uses shall be identified and the front of the structure shall not face the side or rear yard (see Illustration 9). 
B.  Where the frontage on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets is divided by two (2) or more zoning districts, the front yard shall comply with the requirements of the most restrictive district for the entire frontage (see Illustration 10). 
C.  The front yard shall be measured from the property line to the front face of the building, to the nearest supporting member of a covered porch or terrace, or to any attached accessory building. Eaves and roof extensions or a porch without posts or columns may project into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four (4) feet, and subsurface structures, platforms or slabs may not project into the front yard to a height greater than thirty (30) inches above the average grade of the yard (see Illustration 11). 
D.  Minimum lot widths for lots with predominate frontage on the curved radius of a street (e.g., cul-de-sac or "eyebrow" portion of a street) shall be measured as the linear distance of the curved front building line, and shall be shown on the subdivision plat. Lot widths for all lots shall be as set forth in the respective zoning district for each lot. 
E.  Gasoline service station pump islands that parallel a public street may be located a minimum of eighteen (18) feet to the property line adjacent to a public street. For pump islands that are perpendicular or diagonal to a public street, the setback shall be thirty (30) feet in order to prevent vehicles stacking out into the street while waiting for a pump position. Pump islands may extend beyond the front building line as described above (provided that all other requirements of this chapter are met), but shall not be closer than fifteen (15) feet to any property line that is not adjacent to a public street. 
F.  Where a future right-of-way line has been established for future widening or opening of a street or thoroughfare, upon which a lot abuts, then the front, side, or rear yard shall be measured from the future right-of-way line. 
28.55.3.   Side yards:
A.  On a corner lot used for one- or two-family dwellings, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards on all lots platted after the effective date of this chapter, except that where one street exposure is designated as a side yard for both adjacent lots or where the two (2) lots are separated by an alley, street right-of-way, creek/floodplain area, or other similar phenomenon. In such case, a building line may be designated by the planning director (or his/her designee) with a minimum side yard of twenty (20) feet or more (as determined by the applicable zoning district standards). On lots that were official lots of record prior to the effective date of this chapter, the minimum side yard adjacent to a side street shall comply with the minimum required side yard for the respective district. 
B.  Every part of a required side yard shall be open and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, and other architectural features not to exceed twelve (12) inches into the required side yard, and roof eaves projecting not to exceed thirty-six (36) inches into the required side yard. Air conditioning compressors and similar equipment are permitted in the side yard. 
C.  Where a future right-of-way line has been established for future widening or opening of a street or thoroughfare, upon which a lot abuts, then the front, side, or rear yard shall be measured from the future right-of-way line. 
28.55.4.   Special height regulations:
In the districts where the height of buildings is restricted to two (2) to three (3) stories, cooling towers may extend for an additional height not to exceed fifty (50) feet above the average grade line of the building. Water stand pipes and tanks, church steeples, domes and spires, school buildings, and institutional buildings may be erected to exceed the height limit, as specified in the particular zoning district, provided that one (1) additional foot shall be added to the width and depth of front, side, and rear yards for each foot that such structures exceed the district height limit. 
28.55.5.   Wireless telecommunications:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, telecommunication antennas, when such are permitted by federal law and the laws of the State of Texas, shall be regulated and governed by this article. 
A.  Definitions: For the purposes of this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows: 
1.  Telecommunications tower means a structure more than ten (10) feet tall, built primarily to support one (1) or more telecommunications antennas. 
2.  Telecommunications means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
3.  Telecommunications service means the offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used. 
4.  Antenna means any structure or device used to collect or radiate electromagnetic waves, including both directional antennas, such as panels, and dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as whips, but not including satellite earth stations. 
5.  Telecommunications antenna means an antenna used to provide a telecommunications service. 
6.  Antenna array means a structure attached to a telecommunications tower that supports a telecommunications antenna. 
7.  Whip antenna means an omni-directional dipole antenna of cylindrical shape which is no more than six (6) inches in diameter. 
8.  Non-whip antenna means an antenna which is not a whip antenna such as dish antennas, panel antennas, etc. 
9.  EIA-222 means Electronics Industries Association Standard 222, "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Support Structures." 
B.  Telecommunications towers. 
1.  Telecommunications towers shall be permitted and located only in accordance with section 28.49 of this chapter after the applicant has complied with the requirements of this article. 
2.  A site plan shall be submitted by the applicant to the planning and zoning Administrator which shall satisfy all of the following requirements: 
a.  Tower height, including antenna array, may not exceed one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
b.  Telecommunications towers must be a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) feet from residential structures. 
c.  Telecommunications towers shall be separated from other towers regulated by this section a minimum distance as set out in the table below. 
Required Tower Separation 
Existing Towers 
Proposed Towers Towers 76 feet to 
120 feet in height Towers 75 feet or less in height Towers 76 feet to 
120 feet in height 2,500 feet 1,500 feet Towers 75 feet or 
less in height 1,500 feet 1,250 feet  
d.  All guys and guy anchors are located within the buildable area of the lot and not within the front, rear, or side yard setbacks and no closer than five (5) to any property line. 
e.  The base of the tower is enclosed by security fencing. Security fence shall consist of a minimum of six-foot-chain link fence with at least two (2) strands of barbed wire above the chain link fence. 
f.  Equipment buildings must be similar in color and character to the main or adjoining building or structure or blend with the landscaping and other surroundings immediately adjacent to it and be screened by a chain link or wrought iron fence with evergreen hedge, a blind fence, or a masonry wall. 
g.  The tower is erected and operated in compliance with current Federal Communications Commission and Federal Aviation Administration rules and regulations and other applicable federal and state standards. 
h.  A telecommunications tower must be: 
1.  Used by two (2) or more wireless communications providers; or 
2.  Designed and built so as to be capable of use by two (2) or more wireless communications providers including providers such as cellular or PCS providers using antenna arrays of nine (9) to twelve (12) antennas each within fifteen (15) vertical feet of each other with no more than three (3) degrees of twist and sway at the top elevation and the owner of the tower on which it is located must certify to the city that the antenna is available for use by another wireless telecommunications provider on a reasonable and nondiscriminatory basis and at a cost not exceeding the market value for the use of the facilities provided space is available at the time of the request. If the property on which the tower is proposed to be located is to be leased, the portions of the actual or proposed lease that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this paragraph shall be submitted with the site plan and zoning application, if applicable. 
i.  No lettering, symbols, images, or trademarks large enough to be eligible to occupants of vehicular traffic on any adjacent roadway shall be placed on or affixed to any part of a telecommunications tower, antenna array or antenna, other than as required by FCC regulations regarding tower registration or other applicable law. 
j.  The need for the requested site and the nature of any existing sites shall be documented and the manner in which the rezoning and/or location of the tower will promote the City of Denison's telecommunications policies shall be demonstrated. 
k.  Telecommunications towers should be constructed to minimize potential safety hazards. Telecommunications towers shall be constructed so as to meet or exceed the most recent EIA-222 standards and prior to issuance of a building permit the building official shall be provided with an engineer's certification that the tower's design meets or exceeds those standards. All towers shall be located in such a manner that if the structure should fall along its longest dimension, it will remain within property boundaries and avoid residential structures, public streets, utility lines and other telecommunications towers. 
l.  Telecommunications towers and equipment buildings shall be located to minimize their number, height and obtrusiveness to minimize visual impacts on the surrounding area and in accordance with the following policies: 
i.  Ensure that the height of towers and monopoles has the least visual impact and is no greater than required to achieve service area requirements and potential collocation, when visually appropriate. 
ii.  Demonstrate that the selected site for a new monopole and tower provides the least visual impact on residential areas and the public rights-of-way. Analyze the potential impacts from other vantage points in the area to illustrate that the selected site provides the best opportunity to minimize the visual impact of the proposed facility. 
iii.  Site telecommunication facilities to minimize being visually solitary or prominent when viewed from residential areas and the public rights-of-way. The facility should be obscured by vegetation, tree cover, topographic features, and buildings or other structures to the maximum extent feasible. 
iv.  Place telecommunication facilities to ensure that historically significant landscapes are protected. The views of and vistas from architecturally and/or historically significant structures should not be impaired or diminished by the placement of telecommunication facilities. 
v.  The commission may recommend a variance and the council may grant a variance to a requirement for telecommunications towers when it is determined that such a variance better accomplishes the policies set out in this subsection than would a strict application of the requirement. Such variance shall be no greater than necessary to accomplish those policies. 
m.  No signals or lights or illumination shall be permitted on a tower unless required by the Federal Communications Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, or the city. 
n.  If any additions, changes, or modifications are to be made to the tower, the chief building official shall have the authority to require proof, through the submission of engineering and structural data, that the addition, change, or modification conforms to structural wind load and all other requirements of the current building code adopted by the city. 
o.  The applicant shall fully and accurately complete a questionnaire supplied them by the planning and zoning administrator designed to gather information to assist in making a decision regarding any rezoning application. In order to assist the staff and the council in evaluating visual impact, the applicant shall submit color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the tower with a photo-realistic representation of the proposed tower as it would appear viewed from the closest residential property or from one-quarter (1/4) mile, whichever distance is less. 
p.  The tower complies with all ordinances of the city not in conflict with this section. 
1.  Any telecommunications tower in place at the time of adoption of these standards which can be extended upward to accommodate additional antennae may be so extended without fully complying with the siting requirements of this section so long as the total height limitation of this article is not exceeded and by complying with permitting requirements of this article. 
2.  In addition to the usual application fee for a request for a change in zoning, if applicable, under of this chapter, the applicant shall reimburse the city for the reasonable, actual cost to the city for the services of an engineer should one be required to review the application and provide engineering expertise. 
C.  Antennas mounted on existing structures. 
1.  Antennas mounted on buildings. 
a.  Roof-mounted telecommunications antennas are allowed on nonresidential buildings and structures pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, provided a non-whip antenna does not exceed the height of the building by more than ten (10) feet and is screened from view from any adjacent public roadway and provided a whip antenna does not exceed the height of the building by more than fifteen (15) feet and is located no closer than fifteen (15) feet to the perimeter of the building. Prior to installation of a roof-mounted antenna, the department of building inspections shall be provided with an engineer's certification that the roof will support the proposed antenna and associated roof-mounted equipment. Roof-mounted antennas and associated equipment may be screened with enclosures or facades having an appearance that blends with the building on which they are located or by locating them so that they are not visible from an adjacent public roadway. 
b.  Building-mounted telecommunications antennas of the non-whip type are allowed on nonresidential buildings and structures pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, provided the antenna is mounted flush with the exterior of the building so that it projects no more than thirty (30) inches from the surface of the building to which it is attached; and the antenna's appearance is such as to blend with the surrounding surface of the building. 
c.  Associated equipment shall be placed either within the same building or in a separate building which matches the existing building in character and building materials or blends with the landscaping and other surroundings immediately adjacent to the separate building housing the equipment. Associated equipment for roof-mounted antennas may be located on the roof of the building if it is screened from view from any adjacent public roadway. 
2.  Telecommunications antennas are allowed without further zoning or existing utility, lighting, telecommunications towers and sign structures, provided that the antenna does not exceed the height of the structure by more than ten (10) feet if a non-whip type or fifteen (15) feet if whip type. Existing structures may be rebuilt if necessary to support the load of the new antenna without further zoning if the rebuilt structure is substantially similar in appearance to the existing structure it replaces. The owner of the structure may be permitted to rebuild the structure at a height greater than the original structure by demonstrating to the city's satisfaction that the additional height accommodates and promotes the purposes and objectives of this article. 
3.  Telecommunications antennas located on existing structures in excess of eighty (80) feet in height are not subject to the five-thousand-foot separation requirement. 
4.  When an application for a building permit to locate a telecommunications antenna on an existing building or other structure is made, the chief building official shall be provided with color photo simulations showing the site of the existing structure with a photorealistic representation of the proposed antenna and the existing structure or any proposed reconstruction of the structure as it would appear viewed from the closest residential property or from one-quarter (1/4) mile, whichever distance is less. The applicant shall also submit photographs of the same views showing the current appearance of the site without the proposed antenna. 
5.  Telecommunications antennas shall not be constructed or used within the city without all approvals and permits first having been secured. The chief building official shall approve or reject the site plan within thirty (30) days of the zoning application being approved by the city council, if applicable, or of the date of submittal of the site plan by applicant, whichever last occurs. In the event the site plan as originally submitted is incomplete, the thirty-day review period does not commence until the chief building official determines the site plan, as amended, to be administratively complete. 
6.  Within thirty (30) days of the enactment of this article and during each January thereafter, providers of personal wireless services, as that term is defined by federal law, operating in the city shall provide the city with their respective master antenna plan, including detailed maps, showing the precise locations and characteristics of all telecommunications antennas and towers serving any portion of the city and indicating coverage areas for current and future telecommunications antennas and towers and shall provide the city with any updates to the above documents. Updating documents shall be provided to the city within three (3) months of their creation. 
7.  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution for violation of a provision of this section that compliance with the provision would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services as defined by federal law. In addition, any entity that desires to erect or utilize telecommunications facilities that would be prohibited by the ordinances or regulations of the city dealing with zoning and land use may apply for such use under this chapter and the council shall, upon a showing that strict application of the regulation would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless service as defined by federal law, vary the subject regulation, consistent with the spirit and intent of this section, to the extent necessary to prevent the prohibition. 
28.55.6.   Minimum dwelling unit area:
Minimum dwelling unit areas specified in this chapter shall be computed exclusive of breezeways, garages, open porches, carports and accessory buildings. 
28.55.7.   Open storage areas:
Open storage of materials, commodities or equipment (where allowed in the specific zoning district) shall be located behind the front building line and observe all setback requirements for the main structure or building. This standard does not apply to outside display (see definition of outside display). 
28.55.8.   Sight visibility:
Visual clearance shall be provided in all zoning districts so that no fence, wall, architectural screen, earth mounding or landscaping thirty (30) inches or higher above the street center line obstructs the vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching any street, alley, or driveway intersection as follows: 
A.  At a street intersection, clear vision must be maintained for a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet across any lot measured from the corner of the property line in both directions (see Illustration 5). 
B.  At an intersection with an alley, this clearance must be maintained for ten (10) feet (see Illustration 5). 
C.  Shrubs and hedges that are typically less than thirty (30) inches in height at maturity, as measured from the centerline of the street, may be located in the visual clearance areas of all districts. 
D.  A limited number of single-trunk trees having a clear trunk (i.e., branching) height of at least eight (8) feet may be located within sight visibility areas provided that they are spaced and positioned such that they will not produce a visibility inhibiting, "picket-fence" effect when they attain mature size. 
28.55.9.   Requirements for recycling facilities:
A recycling operation for the collection, processing, and transfer of recyclable materials is a permitted use in the LI District with a conditional use permit if the use satisfies the following conditions: 
A.  The collection, processing, and transfer of recyclables is fully contained within a building. 
B.  The site has no less than one hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage on a public street. 
C.  The unloading area for recyclable materials is not less than fifty (50) feet from any adjoining property located in a more restrictive zoning district, however, this provision shall not apply where the adjoining property is railroad track right-of-way. 
D.  That portion of the site used for truck maneuvering and the receiving and loading of recyclable material is enclosed by a solid fence or wall not less than six (6) feet in height except for any part of the site contiguous to a railroad. The fence or wall shall have a nonglare finish. 
E.  The recyclable materials unloading areas, including maneuvering areas for trucks, are all-weather surfaced. 
F.  The site shall be kept free of uncontrolled litter, scrap, paper or other refuse. 
Sec. 28.56. - Wind energy conversion systems (WECS). 
28.56.1  Wind energy conversion systems shall require a conditional use permit (CUP) in all zoning districts and floodplain areas. Large wind energy systems shall be located on a lot having a minimum lot size of five (5) acres. All wind energy systems shall be subject to the following additional requirements (unless one or more of the following requirements are specifically waived or modified in the CUP ordinance): 
A.  An accurately drawn-to-scale survey/site plan is required with the CUP application and shall include the following: 
1.  Property lines and physical dimensions of the property; 
2.  Location, dimensions, setbacks and types of existing major structures on the property; 
3.  Location of the proposed wind system tower, and setbacks/dimensions from all existing structures on-site, from all property lines, and from structures on adjacent properties; 
4.  Locations and dimensions/setbacks from all public rights-of-way that are contiguous with the property; 
5.  Overhead utility lines, and approximate locations/canopy coverage of large existing trees on the property; 
6.  Wind system specifications, including manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type and rated kW output; 
7.  Tower foundation blueprints or drawings; 
8.  Tower blueprint or drawing; 
9.  Elevation drawings showing the design and height of the proposed energy system, and any screening that will be provided to screen the system/tower from public view. 
B.  Wind towers and generators proposed to be installed within the 100-year floodplain shall also have approval of the city's engineer and, where applicable, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Such tower sites shall take such measures, as required by the city's engineer, to protect the sites from damage from potential flooding. The city's engineer shall require a floodplain permit and a licensed engineer's certification that the tower/generator will not pose a threat or safety hazard due to flood conditions. 
C.  No portion of the tower structure of a wind energy system shall be located within any required front, side or rear yard, and the tower and all of its appurtenances shall be located behind (i.e., not in front of) the main building unless otherwise authorized (i.e., varied) in the SUP ordinance. No portion of a system may protrude over a property line without acquisition of an easement for the encroachment from the adjacent property owner(s), nor over an easement without proper written release from the utility provider or entity who owns or controls such easement. 
D.  A wind energy system may exist only as an accessory use, and it may not be constructed/installed until a primary structure exists on the property. A wind energy system may only supply power to structures on the lot/parcel where the system is located (i.e., not to an off-site structure). 
E.  For property sizes less than or equal to five (5) acres in area, the tower height shall be a maximum of sixty-five (65) feet. For property sizes greater than five (5) acres in area, the tower height shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet unless otherwise approved in the SUP ordinance. Blade clearance shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet above the ground. 
F.  Wind energy conversion systems must comply with applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations, including any necessary approvals for installations close to airports, and must also comply with applicable ASHTO engineering standards. 
G.  The tower for a wind energy system shall be set back a minimum distance of two (2) times the tower's height from all property lines, public rights-of-way and occupied buildings, and shall be set back a minimum distance of one and one-half (1.5) times the tower's height from the applicant's own building(s) on the property unless constructing the WEC according to subsection P. below. 
H.  The tower for a wind energy system shall be set back a minimum distance of one and one-half (1.5) times the tower's height from any overhead utility lines, unless written permission is granted otherwise by the affected utility. 
I.  No tower shall be erected closer than two hundred (200) feet or a distance of five (5) times the diameter of the larger rotor, whichever is the greater distance, to another wind energy tower. 
J.  All wind energy systems shall be equipped with a redundant braking system. This includes both aerodynamic over speed controls (including variable pitch, tip and other similar systems) and mechanical brakes. Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a fail-safe mode. Stall regulation shall not be considered a sufficient braking system for over speed protection. 
K.  Safety and security measures: 
1.  A clearly visible warning sign that states "Caution, High Voltage" must be placed at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and substations. 
2.  All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access. 
3.  The tower shall be designed and installed so as to not provide step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of twelve (12) feet from the ground. 
4.  All access doors to wind energy systems and their appurtenances (e.g., cabinets, junction boxes, etc.) shall be locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry by nonauthorized persons. 
L.  All electrical wires associated with a wind energy system, other than wires necessary to connect the wind generator to the tower wiring, the tower wiring to the disconnect junction box, and the grounding wires shall be located underground. 
M.  Wind energy systems shall be required to comply with any noise standards and requirements contained in any of the applicable ordinances. 
N.  Visual appearance. 
1.  A wind tower and generator shall not be artificially lighted unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
2.  The wind tower and generator shall remain painted or finished the neutral white, light grey or silver color or finish that was originally applied by the manufacturer. 
3.  All signs, other than the manufacturer's or installer's identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner identification on a wind generator, tower, building, or other structure associated with a wind energy system, shall be prohibited. Such signs as described above shall be no larger than four (4) square feet in size, and shall be located near the base of the tower. 
4.  No flags, pennants, banners or similar materials may be displayed on or attached to any portion of a wind energy system, including its tower, unless a proper permit is obtained from the city for a temporary sign/display, in accordance with the city's sign ordinance. 
O.  Nuisance prevention. 
1.  Wind energy systems shall be sited, to the greatest extent practical, to minimize the impact of shadow flicker or blade glint upon any inhabited structures (except for the owner's) or public roadways. Systems found to be a nuisance or a traffic hazard shall be shut down until the flicker or glint problem is remedied. 
2.  Wind energy systems shall comply with all applicable Federal Communications Commission (FCC) rules, and shall not cause static noise interference with other individuals' television reception or with private or public telecommunications (e.g., public safety communications, 911 dispatch, etc.). 
P.  No wind energy system shall be placed or constructed on the roof of any existing structure unless such structure is/was designed and constructed to structurally accommodate and support a roof-mounted wind energy system. Certification by a structural engineer shall be required for any roof-mounted system. No roof-mounted WEC shall exceed a maximum height of sixty-five (65) feet, as measured from the lowest ground level elevation point of the structure to which it is mounted, to the top of the tower (i.e., at the center of the hub). 
Q.  A building permit shall be required for the installation of a wind energy system: 
1.  The owner shall submit an application to the building official. The application shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, a line drawing of the electrical components, and two (2) copies of the site plan for the wind energy system, and any fee the city requires for an accessory use or building. 
2.  No permit for a wind energy system shall be issued until evidence of written approval has been given to the city that the utility company has been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator, and the utility company has expressed written approval for the system. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement. 
3.  Building permit applications for wind energy systems shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base and footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the city's building code, and certified by a licensed professional engineer, shall also be submitted. This analysis is frequently supplied by the manufacturer. 
4.  Building permit applications for wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the city's electrical code. This information is frequently supplied by the manufacturer. 
5.  A building permit issued for a wind energy system shall expire if the system is not installed, functioning and passed city inspection within six (6) months (i.e., one hundred eighty (180) calendar days) following the date the permit is issued. 
R.  Abandonment. 
1.  A wind energy system that is out-of-service for a continuous twelve-month period (i.e., three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days) will be deemed to be abandoned. The building official (or designee) may issue a notice of abandonment to the owner of a wind energy system that is deemed to have been abandoned. The owner shall have the right to respond to the notice of abandonment within thirty (30) calendar days from the date that the notice was mailed to the owner. The building official (or designee) shall withdraw the notice of abandonment and notify the owner that the notice has been withdrawn if the owner provides sufficient information that demonstrates the wind energy system has not been abandoned, and that it is in compliance and operational in accordance with the city's regulations for WECs. 
2.  If the wind energy system is determined to be abandoned, the owner of the wind energy system shall remove the wind generator and tower structure (including all its appurtenances) from the property at the owner's sole expense within three (3) months (i.e., ninety (90) calendar days) after the notice of abandonment has been sent to the owner. If the owner fails to completely remove the wind generator, tower and any associated appurtenances, the building official (or designee) may pursue a legal action to have the wind generator and tower structure removed at the owner's expense. 
S.  Future subdivision of any property upon which a wind energy system is located shall only be allowed if the WEC is a legally conforming use/structure, and if all setback, height and other requirements for WECs (as such exist at the time of such future subdivision) remain in compliance. 
Sec. 28.57. - Lighting and glare standards. 
28.57.1.   Purpose:
Standards for controlling lighting and glare are set forth to reduce the annoyance and inconvenience to property owners and traffic hazards to motorists. These standards are intended to allow reasonable enjoyment of adjacent and nearby property by their owners and occupants while requiring adequate levels of lighting of parking areas. 
28.57.2.   Nonresidential site lighting and glare standards:
A.  Any use shall be operated so as not to produce obnoxious and intense glare or direct illumination across the bounding property line from a visible source of illumination of such intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from the use or enjoyment of adjacent property. All outside lights shall be made up of a light source and reflector so selected that acting together, the light beam is controlled and not directed across any bounding property line above a height of three (3) feet. The allowable maximum intensity measured at the property line of a residential use in a residential district shall be 0.25 footcandles. Light poles shall be placed on the site a setback equal to its height from all adjacent residential property. 
B.  All off-street parking areas for nonresidential uses in nonresidential districts that are used after dark shall be illuminated beginning one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and continuing throughout the hours of business operation. If only a portion of a parking area is offered for use after dark, only that part is required to be illuminated in accordance with these standards. 
However, the portion offered for use shall be clearly designated. Lighting within the parking areas shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
1.  Intensity: 
a.  Minimum at any point on the parking area surface to be at least 0.6 footcandles initial, and at least 0.3 footcandles maintained or one-third ( 1/3 ) of the average, whichever is greater. 
b.  Illumination shall not exceed an average of one (1) footcandle at ground level and shall distribute not more than 0.25 footcandles of light upon any adjacent residentially zoned area. 
2.  Height: 
a.  On tracts or lots over three (3) acres in size, the maximum height for poles with lights is thirty-five (35) feet. 
b.  On tracts or lots less than three (3) acres, the maximum height of poles with lights is thirty-five (35) feet. 
c.  Special lighting or lighting higher than thirty-five (35) feet may be approved as specifically noted on a site plan. 
28.57.3.   Residential lighting and glare standards:
Residential lighting for security and night recreation use is permitted in all residential districts provided the following requirements are met: 
A.  Direct lighting over ten (10) feet in height is shielded from adjacent property. 
B.  No light source shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height. Street lights and other traffic safety lighting are exempt from this standard. 
C.  Lighting shall not directly shine on adjacent dwellings. 
28.57.4.   Luminaires:
Light sources shall be of a down-light type, indirect, diffused, or shielded type luminaries installed and maintained so as to reduce glare effect and consequent interference with use of adjacent properties and boundary streets. Bare bulbs above seventy-five (75) watts and strings of lamps are prohibited, except for temporary lighting. 
Sec. 28.58. - Home occupation regulations. 
28.58.1.   Purpose:
Standards for controlling home occupations are set forth to minimize annoyance and inconvenience to neighboring property owners within residential areas. These standards are intended to allow reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of adjacent and nearby property by their owners and by occupants of neighboring residential dwellings, while providing opportunities for the pursuit of home-based businesses. 
28.58.2.   Special provisions for home occupations:
A.  Home occupations shall be permitted as accessory use in single-family residential zoning districts provided that they comply with all restrictions herein; 
B.  The occupation shall produce no alteration or change in the character or exterior appearance of the principal building from that of a residential dwelling, and performance of the occupation activity shall not be visible from the street; 
C.  Such use shall be incidental and secondary to the use of the premises for residential purposes, and shall not utilize floor area exceeding twenty (20) percent of the combined gross floor area of dwelling unit and any accessory building(s) that are used for the home occupation (in no case shall the combined floor area utilized for a home occupation exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet); 
D.  Not more than two (2) patron or business-related vehicles shall be present at one time, and the proprietor shall provide adequate off-street parking on the property where the use is located; 
E.  The operation of such an occupation shall be between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for outdoor activities, and between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. for indoor activities; 
F.  One (1) commercial vehicle, GVW of one (1) ton or less (according to the manufacturer's classification), may be used or parked on the property in connection with the home occupation; 
G.  The occupation activity shall not increase vehicular traffic flow beyond what normally occurs within a residential district, and shall not require regular and frequent deliveries by large delivery trucks or vehicles with a rated capacity in excess of one and one-half (1.5) tons, according to the manufacturer's classification; 
H.  There shall be no outside storage, including trailers, or outside display related to the home occupation use; 
I.  No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be employed on the premises other than that which is customarily found in a home environment, and that which is customarily associated with a hobby or avocation which is conducted solely for pleasure and not for profit or financial gain; 
J.  The home occupation shall not generate noise, vibration, glare, fumes/odors, heat or electrical interference beyond what normally occurs within a residential district; 
K.  The occupation shall not require the use of chemicals on the property that are obnoxious or hazardous to the welfare of the neighborhood; 
L.  The home occupation shall not involve the use of advertising signs or window displays, or any other device that calls attention to the business use of the premises through audio and/or visual means; 
M.  The occupation shall not offer a ready inventory of any commodity for sale on the premises unless the commodity is made/assembled on-site (e.g., arts and crafts items, handmade clothing, etc.); and 
N.  The occupation shall not be harmful or detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of the neighborhood, nor shall it interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property and recreation by residents of the area. 
28.58.3.   Applicability of other regulations:
Home occupations shall also be subject to any and all other provisions of local, state and/or federal regulations and laws that govern such uses. 
28.58.4.   Uses allowed as home occupations:
Subject to the provisions of subsection 28.58.2 above, home occupations may include the following uses: 
A.  Secondary office of an accountant, architect, landscape architect, attorney, engineer, consultant, insurance agent, realtor, or similar profession must have primary office in appropriate zone; 
B.  Author, artist or sculptor; 
C.  Dressmaker, seamstress or tailor; 
D.  Music/dance teacher, or similar types of instruction, provided that instruction shall be limited to no more than one (1) pupil at a time; 
E.  Individual tutoring and home schooling; 
F.  Millinery; 
G.  Office facility of a minister, rabbi, priest or other clergyman; 
H.  Home crafts, such as rug weaving, model making, etc.; 
I.  Office facility of a salesman, sales or manufacturer's representative, etc., provided that no retail or wholesale transactions or provision of services are personally and physically made on the premises; 
J.  Food preparation establishments such as cake making/decorating or catering, provided that there is no on-premises consumption by customers, and provided that all aspects of the business comply with all State and local health regulations; 
K.  Swimming lessons and water safety instruction, provided that such instruction involves no more than six (6) pupils at any one time. 
28.58.5.   Uses prohibited as home occupations:
Home occupations shall not, in any event, be deemed to include the following uses: 
A.  Animal hospitals or clinics, commercial stables, or kennels; 
B.  Schooling or instruction, except swimming/water safety classes and home schooling, with more than one (1) pupil at a time; 
C.  Restaurants or on-premises food or beverage (including private clubs) consumption of any kind, except for limited food/meal consumption associated with the operation of a licensed registered family home or a bed and breakfast facility; 
D.  Automobile, boat or trailer paint or repair shop; small engine or motorcycle repair shop; welding shop; large household appliance repair shop; or other similar type of business; 
E.  Office facility for a doctor, dentist, veterinarian or other medical-related profession; 
F.  On-premises retail or wholesale sales of any kind, except for items that are produced entirely on the premises in conformance with this chapter, and except for occasional garage sales; 
G.  Commercial clothing laundering or cleaning; 
H.  Mortuaries or funeral homes; 
I.  Trailer, vehicle, tool or equipment rentals; 
J.  Repair shops or services, except as specifically provided in subsection 28.58.4 above; 
K.  Furniture upholstery shops; 
L.  Antique, gift or specialty shops; 
M.  Repair shops for any items having internal combustion engines; 
N.  Any use that would be defined by the building code as an assembly, factory/industrial, hazardous, institutional or mercantile occupancy; and 
O.  Personal services such as nails, massage, beauty shop or barber shops. 
28.58.6.   Home occupation uses not classified:
Any use that is not either expressly allowed nor expressly prohibited by subsections 28.58.4 and 28.58.5, respectively, is considered prohibited, unless and until such use is classified by amendment to this chapter by the Denison City Council, subsequent to an affirmative recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. 
28.58.7.   Effect of section 28.58 upon existing home occupations:
A.  Any home occupation that was legally in existence as of the effective date of this chapter and that is not in full conformity with the provisions herein shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use, and is subject to the provisions of section 28.9 provided that the owner/proprietor of such home occupation register his/her business with the city within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter. 
B.  Any home occupation that was legally in existence as of the effective date of this chapter and that conforms with (i.e., is not in violation of) the provisions herein shall be hereby authorized to continue. 
Sec. 28.59. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4678, § 1, adopted Feb. 18, 2013, repealed § 28.59, which pertained to sign regulations and derived from Ord. No. 4720, adopted July 29, 2009. The user's attention is directed to § 19-1 et seq. 
Sec. 28.60. - Alcoholic beverages. 
28.60.1.   Prohibitions:
The following prohibitions shall be applicable to premises whereon alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed: 
A.  The sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited on the premises of a business that is located within: three hundred (300) feet of a church, public or private school, or public hospital; 
B.  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. 
28.60.2.   Regulations:
The following regulations shall apply to premises upon which the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted herein: 
A.  Before the city shall sign any certificate for an application for a permit or license under the state liquor control act, such certificate shall be submitted to the planning department to ensure that the application complies with all provisions of this and all applicable ordinances. 
B.  All applicable standards and requirements of this chapter shall apply. Said standards shall include, but not be limited to off-street parking and loading, landscaping, fencing, sign, height, area, design, special conditions, and supplementary standards for the zoning district in which the premises is located. 
C.  Any premises permitted in accordance with this section shall conform to all city regulations and ordinances relating to fire codes, health permits, and building codes. 
D.  It is the intent of this chapter to regulate establishments selling (retail) or serving alcoholic beverages the same as establishments of the same type that do not sell (retail) or serve alcoholic beverages. If, however, a particular use in the use chart in section 28.49 expressly identifies that use as selling (retail) or serving alcoholic beverages, or the definition of a particular use in section 28.63 includes reference to the sale (retail) or serving of alcoholic beverages, then such uses are subject to the regulations applicable within those districts in which the use is permitted outright or conditionally. Similar establishments that do not sell (retail) or serve alcoholic beverages may not be allowed in the same zoning districts, or may be subject to different regulations. 
Sec. 28.61. - Development standards for cluster development plans. 
28.61.1.   Calculation of maximum number of dwelling units:
A.  For development subject to a cluster development plan, the maximum number of dwelling units permitted on a site shall be based on net buildable acreage (NBA), using the following method, substantiated by sufficient plans and data to verify the calculations: 
1.  The NBA shall be determined by subtracting the following from the gross acreage of the site: 
a.  All lands located within existing street rights-of-way; 
b.  All lands located within existing utility and railway rights-of-way; 
c.  All lands located within a floodplain; 
d.  All lands located within a wetland; 
e.  All of the area located within a pond or lake; 
f.  All of the land area having a slope of twelve (12) percent or greater; and 
g.  Twenty-five (25) percent of the area located within a woodland area to be preserved. 
2.  In the calculation in subsection 1. above, the following shall apply: 
a.  The elevation of the 100-year recurrence interval floodplain determined through floodplain studies shall be used where available. Where such flood stage data are not available, the regulatory flood elevation shall be determined by a registered professional engineer and the sealed report of the engineer setting forth the regulatory flood stage and the method of its determination shall be approved by the city's engineer. 
b.  Where two (2) or more categories overlap, the overlapping acreage shall be counted only once, using the most restrictive classification. 
B.  To determine the maximum number of units permitted on a given site, the number of net buildable acres shall be multiplied by the maximum residential density allowed in the RD or UD District, as applicable. 
28.61.2.   Design standards for cluster areas:
A.  All dwelling units subject to a cluster development plan shall be grouped into cluster areas, each of which shall be surrounded by or have access to common open space. 
B.  A cluster development plan may contain one (1) or more cluster areas. 
C.  No cluster area shall contain more than one hundred (100) dwelling units. The maximum number of lots in a cluster area may be increased, however, and cluster areas may be assembled into larger groupings, with the approval of the planning and zoning commission and provided that the applicant can demonstrate that such an alternative plan is more appropriate for the development parcel and will meet both the general intent and design standards of this chapter. 
D.  Cluster areas shall be defined by the outer perimeter of contiguous lotted areas or abutting streets, and may contain lots, streets, and cluster area open space. When the development does not include individual lots, as in a condominium, the outer perimeter shall be defined as an area encompassed by a line drawn around the units, no point of which is less than one hundred (100) feet from any unit. 
E.  The outer boundaries of each cluster area shall meet the separation distance requirements specified in subsection A. 
F.  Cluster areas shall be defined and separated by common open space in order to provide direct access to common open space and privacy to individual lot or yard areas. Cluster areas may be separated by streets if the street right-of-way is designed as a boulevard. 
G.  Cluster areas containing twenty-five (25) or more dwelling units must provide internal open space at a minimum rate of two thousand (2,000) square feet per dwelling unit, and shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Common open space located within cluster areas shall be counted toward meeting the overall open space requirement specified for the base zoning RD or UD District, as applicable. 
2.  The open space shall have a minimum street frontage of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
3.  Internal open space may contain parking areas, but parking areas shall not be included in the required two thousand (2,000) square feet of internal open space per dwelling unit. 
H.  All lots in a cluster area shall have access from interior streets. 
I.  All lots in a cluster area shall abut or have access to common open space to the front or rear. Common open space across a street shall qualify for this requirement. 
J.  In locating cluster areas, disturbance to existing woodlands, hedgerows, and individual mature trees shall be minimized. 
28.61.3.   Design standards for common open space:
On all parcels developed under cluster development plan, a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the gross land area shall be set aside as protected common open space. This open space shall meet the following standards: 
A.  For the purposes of this subsection, gross land area includes all lands within parcel, except existing street, railway, and utility rights-of-way. 
B.  Common open space shall comply with the following design standards: 
1.  The location of common open space shall be consistent with the objectives of the city comprehensive plan. 
2.  All open space areas shall be part of a larger continuous and integrated open space system within the parcel being developed. At least seventy-five (75) percent of the common open space areas shall be contiguous to another common open space area. For the purposes of this subsection, areas shall be considered contiguous if they are within one hundred (100) feet of each other and there are no impediments to access between the areas. 
3.  Common open space shall, to the greatest extent possible, protect site features identified in the site inventory and analysis as having particular value in the context of preserving rural character, in compliance with the intent of this chapter. 
4.  Natural features shall generally be maintained in their natural condition, but may be modified to improve their appearance, or restore their overall condition and natural processes. Permitted modifications may include woodland management, woodland reforestation, meadow management, and wetland management, when recommended by qualified professionals, or buffer area landscaping. 
5.  All wetlands, floodplains, wildlife habitat areas, and areas having slopes over twelve (12) percent, shall be contained in common open space. 
6.  The common open space shall maximize common boundaries with existing or future open space on adjacent lands, as shown in the comprehensive plan. 
7.  To preserve scenic views, ridge tops and hilltops should be contained within common open space wherever possible. 
8.  A minimum of eighty (80) percent of the area of existing woodlands shall be contained within common open space. Up to twenty (20) percent of the area of existing woodlands may be located within lots or used for residential development. This limitation may be exceeded under the following conditions: 
a.  The site is primarily wooded and development at the permitted density would not be possible without encroaching further into the woodlands. 
b.  Any encroachment on woodlands beyond twenty (20) percent shall be the minimum needed to achieve the maximum permitted density, as determined by the planning and zoning commission. 
9.  No area of common open space shall be less than twenty-five (25) feet in its smallest dimension or less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area. 
10.  The boundaries of common open space shall be marked by natural features wherever possible, such as hedgerows, edges of woodlands, streams, or individual large trees. Where no such natural demarcations exist, additional plantings, fences, or other landscape features should be added to enable residents or the public, if applicable, to distinguish where common open space ends and private lot areas begin. Where structural demarcations, such as fences, are used, they shall be the minimum needed to accomplish this objective. 
11.  Trails in common open space that are located within one hundred (100) feet of homes in cluster areas shall be identified. 
12.  Under no circumstances shall all common open space be isolated in one area of the development. Common open space shall be distributed appropriately throughout the development to properly serve and enhance all dwelling units, cluster areas, and other common facilities. 
13.  Common open space shall include lands located along existing public streets in order to preserve existing rural landscape character as seen from these streets, and shall, in no case, contain less than the required buffer, setback area, or separation distance. 
14.  Safe and convenient pedestrian access and access for maintenance purposes shall be provided to common open space areas that are not used for agricultural purposes, in accordance with the following: 
a.  At least one (1) access point per cluster area shall be provided, having a width equal to or greater than the minimum width of a lot within the cluster area. This width may be reduced to no less than fifty (50) feet if the applicant can demonstrate that, due to natural site constraints, meeting the lot width requirement would run counter to the objectives of this section. 
b.  Access to common open space used for agriculture may be restricted for public safety and to prevent interference with agricultural operations. 
C.  The following areas shall not be included in the calculation of common open space areas: 
1.  Private lot areas. 
2.  Street and highway rights-of-way, public or private. 
3.  Railway and utility rights-of-way. 
4.  Parking areas. 
5.  Areas not meeting the requirements of subsection 28.61.3.B. above. 
D.  Preservation of existing natural landscape. 
1.  For the purpose of conserving the natural landscape and in recognition of the time value of existing vegetation, the preservation of existing vegetation shall always be preferred to the installation of new plant material. 
2.  Existing woodlands and hedgerows shall be retained to the maximum extent possible. Where possible, existing woodlands and hedgerows shall be incorporated into the required separation areas between cluster areas and external streets and site boundaries. 
3.  Suitable existing vegetation shall be credited toward the landscaping requirements of this section, when, in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission, it would equal or exceed the visual impact of the new required plant material after two (2) years of growth. 
4.  All new landscaping to be installed and existing vegetation to be preserved shall be protected in accordance with accepted landscape methods. 
E.  Street trees. 
1.  Street trees shall be planted along internal streets within cluster areas. 
2.  Street trees may be planted, but are not required, along internal streets passing through common open space. 
3.  Informal arrangements are encouraged for street trees, to avoid the urban appearance that regular spacing may invoke. 
4.  Street trees shall be located so as not to interfere with the installation and maintenance of utilities and paths, trails, or sidewalks that may parallel the street. 
5.  The species of street trees shall be selected from the "List of Recommended Species for Landscaping" adopted by the city. 
6.  Street tree plantings shall comply with all applicable regulations in the city. 
F.  Buffers. 
1.  A planted buffer area at least twenty-five (25) feet in width shall be established within all required separation areas between external streets and cluster areas. 
2.  Planted buffers within separation areas between cluster areas are encouraged to enhance privacy and a rural appearance between lots. 
3.  Buffers consisting of an informal arrangement of native plant species combined with infrequent mowing are strongly encouraged, to create a low-maintenance, natural landscape. 
28.61.4.   Ownership and maintenance of common facilities and open space:
A.  Ownership: To ensure adequate operation and maintenance of common open space, recreation facilities, stormwater management facilities, common parking areas and driveways, private streets, and other common or community facilities (hereinafter referred to as common facilities) for land subject to a cluster development plan, one of the following ownership options shall be provided for: 
1.  Homeowner's association. Common facilities may be held in common ownership as undivided proportionate interests by the members of a homeowner's association, subject to following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall provide to the city a description of the association, including its bylaws, and all documents governing maintenance requirements and use restrictions for common facilities. Such documents shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. 
b.  The association shall be established by the owner or applicant and shall be operating, with financial subsidy by the applicant, if necessary, prior to the sale of any dwelling units in the development. 
c.  Membership in the association shall be mandatory for all purchasers of dwelling units therein and their successors and assigns. 
d.  The association shall be responsible for maintenance and insurance of common facilities. 
e.  The members of association shall share equitably the costs of maintaining, insuring, and operating common facilities. 
f.  The association shall have or hire adequate staff to administer, maintain, and operate common facilities. 
g.  Written notice of any proposed transfer of common facilities by the homeowners association or the assumption of maintenance of common facilities must be given to all members of the association and to the city at least thirty (30) days prior to such event. 
h.  Each lot shall be automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the homeowner's association's maintenance of common open spaces or the provision and upkeep of common facilities. 
i.  The city shall have the right of immediate access to the common elements at all times if necessary for the preservation of public health, safety and welfare. Should homeowners association fail to maintain the common elements to city specifications for ninety (90) days after written request to do so, then the city shall have the same right, power and authority to enforce the association's rules and to levy assessments necessary to maintain the common areas. 
j.  The association may not be dissolved, nor may the provisions of the association documents pertaining to the maintenance of common areas and facilities and assessments be amended, without the prior written consent of the city council. 
2.  Fee simple dedication to the city. The city or other public agency acceptable to the city may, but shall not be required to, accept any portion of the common facilities, provided that: 
a.  There shall be no cost of acquisition, other than costs incidental to the transfer of ownership, such as title insurance. 
b.  Any facilities so dedicated shall be accessible to the residents of the city, if the city so chooses. 
c.  The city or other public agency shall maintain such facilities. 
d.  The residents of the development shall hold a conservation easement on the land and facilities so dedicated, protecting the common open space from development in perpetuity. 
3.  Dedication of conservation easements to a public agency. The city or other public agency acceptable to the city may, but shall not be required to, accept easements for public use of any portion of the common facilities, title of which is to remain in private ownership, provided that: 
a.  There is no cost of easement acquisition, other than costs incidental to the transfer of ownership, such as title insurance. 
b.  A satisfactory maintenance agreement shall be reached between the owner and the city. 
c.  Lands under a city easement may or may not be accessible to residents of the city. 
4.  Dedication to a nonprofit conservation organization. With the approval of the city council, an owner may dedicate any portion of the common facilities to a nonprofit conservation organization in fee simple or as a conservation easement, provided that: 
a.  The organization is acceptable to the city. 
b.  The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper reverter or retransfer in the event that the organization becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its responsibilities. 
c.  A maintenance agreement acceptable to the city is established between the owner and the organization. 
5.  Ownership retained by the original landowner. Ownership of common open space and facilities may be retained by the original landowner provided that: 
a.  The city and residents of the development shall hold conservation easements on the land protecting it from any further development. 
b.  Resident access to the land is limited only by agreement of the residents of the development, as indicated by documents signed at the time of purchase of individual dwelling units. 
B.  Maintenance and operation of common facilities. A plan and narrative for the use, maintenance, and insurance of all common facilities, including provisions for funding, shall be provided to and approved by the planning and zoning commission prior to approval of the cluster development plan. The maintenance plan shall: 
1.  Define ownership. 
2.  Establish necessary regular and periodic operation and maintenance responsibilities. 
3.  Estimate staffing needs, insurance requirements, and other associated costs and define the means for funding the same on an ongoing basis. 
4.  Include a description specifically focusing on the long-term management of open space lands. 
5.  At the discretion of the planning and zoning commission, the applicant may be required to escrow sufficient funds for the maintenance and operation costs of common facilities for up to one (1) year. 
C.  Leasing of common open space lands. Common open space lands may be leased to another person or other entity for use, operation, and maintenance, provided that: 
1.  The residents of the development shall at all times have access to such leased lands, except in the case of lease for agricultural purposes, in which case the residents, with their agreement, may be restricted from accessing the lands. 
2.  The common open space lands to be leased shall be maintained for the purposes set forth in this section. 
3.  The operation of such leased open space lands may be for the benefit of the residents of the development only, or may be open to the public, if so determined by the residents. 
4.  The lease, and any transfer or assignment thereof, shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
5.  Lease agreements shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Grayson County within thirty (30) days of their execution, and a copy of the recorded lease shall be filed with the city. 
D.  Conservation. Common open space shall be restricted in perpetuity from further subdivision and/or land development by deed restriction, conservation easement, or other agreement in a form acceptable to the planning and zoning commission upon recommendation of the city attorney and duly recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Grayson County. 
Sec. 28.62. - Sexually oriented businesses. 
28.62.1. Applicability: 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of the zoning ordinance to the contrary, the procedures and standards contained in this section shall apply to regulation of sexually oriented businesses and those businesses selling or renting sexually oriented media or merchandise, or providing sexually oriented entertainment, and in the event of a conflict the provisions of this section shall prevail. 
B.  This section shall be construed together with the provisions of Chapter 29 of the City Code of Ordinances regarding the licensing of sexually oriented businesses. 
28.62.2. Findings: 
The facts and other matters set forth in the "Whereas" clauses that form the preamble to this section [Ordinance No. 4563] are hereby adopted as findings of fact in support of this amendment to the zoning ordinance. Upon adoption of this section, the recitals contained in the whereas clauses shall be incorporated into the zoning ordinance by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
28.62.3. Definitions: 
For the purposes of this section the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows: 
1.  Applicant: Any person, including any spouse of an individual owner, or any other entity required to submit any documentation and/or receive any approvals for operating sexually oriented business or working within a sexually oriented business within the City of Denison. 
2.  Bath house, sexually oriented: An enterprise where a portion of its business is offering baths and/or showers with other persons present who are nude or displaying specified anatomical areas. 
3.  Body painting studio, sexually oriented: An establishment where a portion of its business is the application of paint or other substance to or on the human body by any means of application, technique or process when the subject's body displays for the patron's view specified anatomical areas. 
4.  Business, sexually oriented: Any of the following businesses: sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub; sexually oriented entertainment; sexually oriented motion picture theater; sexually oriented video viewing arcade; sexually oriented encounter center; sexually oriented media store; sexually oriented bathhouse; sexually oriented massage business; sexually oriented retail establishment; sexually oriented body painting studio; sexually oriented lingerie or swimwear modeling studio; sexually oriented modeling/photography studio; sexually oriented escort business; or any other such business establishment whose purpose is offering sexually oriented entertainment, media or merchandise. Each such business is considered a separate land use for purposes of these regulations. 
5.  Business license, sexually oriented: Any license applied for under the sexually oriented business licensing ordinance establishing licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses. 
6.  Cabaret or nightclub, sexually oriented: A building or portion of a building which provides or allows the provision of live sexually oriented entertainment to its customers or which holds itself out to the public as an establishment where sexually oriented entertainment is available, but such definition shall not include any sexually oriented use prohibited by this section. Signs, advertisements or an establishment name including verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult entertainment," "strippers," "showgirls," "exotic dancers," "gentleman's club," "XXX" or similar terms, shall be considered evidence that the establishment holds itself out to the public as a sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. 
7.  Child care facility: A facility licensed by the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services providing supervision for children thirteen (13) years of age or younger or for any individual who is deemed mentally challenged. 
8.  Customer: A person who: 
a.  Enters a business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; or 
b.  Enters a business and purchases, rents, or otherwise partakes of any material, merchandise, goods, entertainment, or other services offered therein; or 
c.  Enters a business other than as an employee, vendor, service person, or delivery person. 
9.  Director of planning: This is the Planning and Zoning Director of the City of Denison, Texas, or a designated agent. 
10.  Display publicly: The act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item or activity in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision from a street, highway, or public sidewalk, or from the property of others or from any portion of the premises where items and materials other than sexually oriented media or merchandise are offered for sale or rent to the public. 
11.  Educational facility: A public or private kindergarten, primary, secondary and postsecondary educational facilities offering instruction in the branches of learning and study required to be taught by the Texas Education Agency; and such federally-funded educational programs for preschool children as the Head Start Program. 
12.  Encounter center, sexually oriented: A business or enterprise that offers physical contact between two (2) or more persons when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, for the purpose of engaging in specified sexually activity or touching specified anatomical areas, but not including a sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. 
13.  Entertainer, sexually oriented: Any person paid by some form of remuneration to provide entertainment to customers at a sexually oriented business; entertainment may consist of dancing, singing, modeling, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers whereby the entertainer is paid any form of remuneration directly or indirectly for such conversations. 
14.  Entertainment, sexually oriented: Any of the following activities, when performed by a sexually oriented entertainer at a sexually oriented business: dancing, singing, talking, touching, modeling (including lingerie or photographic), gymnastics, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers. 
15.  Escort, sexually oriented: A person who offers to provide, for some form of remuneration, acts of sexually oriented entertainment, companionship or conduct to a client. 
16.  Escort business, sexually oriented: A business or person that advertises or solicits in any way to prospective clients for the provision of sexually oriented escorts that will provide sexually oriented entertainment, companionship or conduct or employs or contracts with a sexually oriented escort, or refers or provides to a client a sexually oriented escort. 
17.  Floor area, gross: The total area of the building accessible or visible to a person, including showrooms, theaters including stage area, service areas (but not including restrooms), behind-counter areas, areas used for storage of sexually oriented media or merchandise, and aisles, hallways, and entryways serving such areas. 
18.  Frequently: Two (2) or more times per month. 
19.  Library, public: A publicly-owned facility in which literary and artistic materials, such as books, periodicals, newspapers, pamphlets, prints, records, and tapes, are kept for reading, reference, or lending. 
20.  Lingerie or swimwear modeling studio, sexually oriented: An establishment or business that provides the services of live models modeling lingerie, bathing suits, or similar wear to individuals, couples, or small groups in a space smaller than one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
21.  Massage: The act of touching, stroking, kneading, stretching, friction, percussion, and vibration, and includes holding, positioning, causing movement of the soft tissues and applying manual touch and pressure to the body. 
22.  Massage business, sexually oriented: Any business in which massages are offered as one of the business's services by a person who is not licensed as a massage therapist under the Texas State Statutes, Title 3, Chapter 455: Massage Therapy. 
23.  Massage therapist: A person licensed as a massage therapist in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Department of State Health Services in accordance with the Texas State Statutes, Title 3, Chapter 455: Massage Therapy. 
24.  Media: Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that is or may be used as a means of communication. Media includes but shall not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers, magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, CD-ROMS, DVDs, other magnetic media, and undeveloped pictures. 
25.  Media, sexually oriented: Media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
26.  Media store, other (some sexually oriented media): A store with sexually oriented media for sale or rent with no on-premises viewing of or listening to sexually oriented media; which does not advertise or hold itself out in any forum as a "XXX," "adult" or "sexually oriented" media business; and to which any of the following applies: 
a.  Sexually oriented media constitutes more than ten (10) percent but less than forty (40) percent of the stock in trade; or 
b.  Sexually oriented media constitutes more than ten (10) percent but less than forty (40) percent of the gross floor area (display, storage and aisles); or 
c.  Sexually oriented media constitutes more than ten (10) percent but less than forty (40) percent of the value of media in inventory, disregarding for this purpose any high-value media that by type of product, character or price are inconsistent with the general media offered by the store. 
27.  Media store, sexually oriented: A store with sexually oriented media for sale or rent with no on-premises viewing of or listening to sexually oriented media, and to which any of the following applies: 
a.  Sexually oriented media constitutes forty (40) percent or more of the stock in trade; or 
b.  Sexually oriented media constitutes forty (40) percent or more of the gross floor area (display, storage and aisles); or 
c.  Sexually oriented media constitutes forty (40) percent or more of the value of media in inventory, disregarding for this purpose any high-value media that by type of product, character or price are inconsistent with the general media offered by the store; or 
d.  It advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a "XXX," "adult" or "sexually oriented" media business. 
28.  Merchandise, sexually oriented: This term includes any of the following categories of merchandise: lingerie presented in combination with other merchandise contained within this definition; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; and sexually oriented novelties. Sexually oriented media is merchandise that is separately defined for the purpose of this section. 
29.  Modeling/photography studio, sexually oriented: Any place where a person who appears nude or semi-nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity and is to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. Such studio shall not include one with a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university that offers educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. 
30.  Motel, sexually oriented: A hotel, motel, or similar commercial lodging establishment that: 
a.  Provides as its business accommodations to the public for any form of consideration for the purpose of viewing sexually oriented media or sexually oriented entertainment. This definition does not include lodging facilities that offer sexually oriented media via cable or satellite services on room televisions as ancillary television programming; or 
b.  Is marketed as or offered as "adult," "XXX," "couples," or "sexually oriented" lodging facility; or 
c.  Offers a sleeping room for a period of less than ten (10) hours or allows a tenant or occupant to rent the room for a period of time of less than ten (10) hours. 
31.  Motion picture theater, sexually oriented: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, sexually oriented media are frequently shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or that is marketed as or offered as "adult," "XXX," or sexually oriented. Frequently shown media as characterized herein do not include sexually oriented speech and expressions that take place inside the context of some larger form of expression. This definition does not include any type of facility that would meet the definition of a sexually oriented video viewing arcade or booth. 
32.  Novelties, sexually oriented: Instruments, devices, toys, or paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or female breasts or designed or marketed primarily for use in sexually oriented stimulation of specified anatomical areas. 
33.  Nudity or state of nudity: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. See, also, Semi-nude. 
34.  Owner: The individual owner of an establishment, or if the legal owner is a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company, the term shall include all general partners, any limited partner with a financial interest of ten (10) percent or more, all corporate officers and directors, and any shareholder or member with a financial interest of ten (10) percent or more. "Owner" includes the spouse(s) of any of the above persons. 
35.  Premises: The physical location at which a business is located; as used in this section, the term shall include all parts of that physical location, both interior and exterior, which are under the control of the subject business, through ownership, lease or other arrangement. 
36.  Protected land use: A child care facility, educational facility, public library, public recreational facility, or religious facility. 
37.  Protected zoning district: Any of the following zoning districts established under this zoning ordinance: "urban development district;" "one-family, two-family, or multiple-family residential district;" "manufactured home district;" "lakeside development district;" "planned development overlay district" within the area designated as residential on the approved concept plan; and "historic overlay district." 
38.  Public area: A portion of a sexually oriented business that is accessible to the customer, excluding restrooms, while the business is open for business. 
39.  Recreational facility, public: A permanent facility devoted to public recreational purposes such as parks, play fields, or community recreation buildings. 
40.  Religious facility: A permanent facility exclusively used on a regular basis for religious assembly such as customarily occurs in a synagogue, temple, mosque, or church or convent or monastery. 
41.  Retail store, other (some sexually oriented merchandise): A store selling or renting one or more categories of sexually oriented merchandise, or a combination of sexually oriented merchandise or sexually oriented media, with no on premises viewing of or listening to sexually oriented media; which does not advertise or hold itself out in any forum as a "XXX," "adult" or "sexually oriented" merchandise business; and to which any of the following applies: 
a.  Any combination of two (2) or more of the following categories of merchandise: lingerie; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; sexually oriented novelties; or sexually oriented media; where such combination constitutes more than ten (10) percent but less than forty (40) of the stock in trade, gross floor area (display, storage and aisles), or the value of the inventory; or 
b.  Sexually oriented merchandise constitutes more than ten (10) percent but less than forty (40) percent of the stock in trade; or 
c.  Sexually oriented merchandise constitutes more than ten (10) percent but less than forty (40) percent of the gross floor area (display, storage and aisles); or 
d.  Sexually oriented merchandise constitutes more than ten (10) percent but less than forty (40) percent of the value of merchandise in inventory, disregarding for this purpose any high-value items that by type of product, character or price are inconsistent with the general merchandise offered by the establishment; or 
e.  The combination of sexually oriented merchandise or sexually oriented media sold or rented on the premises meets the criteria in subsections b, c or d. 
42.  Retail store, sexually oriented: A store with sexually oriented media and merchandise for sale or rent with no on premises viewing of or listening to sexually oriented video in which: 
a.  Any combination of two or more of the following categories of merchandise: lingerie; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; sexually oriented novelties; or sexually oriented media; where such combination constitutes forty (40) percent or more of the stock in trade, gross floor area (display, storage and aisles), or the value of the inventory; or 
b.  Sexually oriented media and merchandise constitutes forty (40) percent or more of the stock in trade; or 
c.  Sexually oriented media and merchandise constitutes forty (40) percent or more of the gross floor area (display, storage and aisles); or 
d.  Sexually oriented media and merchandise constitutes forty (40) percent or more of the value of the inventory, disregarding for this purpose any high-value inventory item that by type of product, character or price are inconsistent with the general type offered by the store; or 
e.  It advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a "XXX," "adult" or "sexually oriented" merchandise business. 
43.  Sadomasochistic practices: Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked. 
44.  Semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity: The showing of the female areola or nipple with less than fully opaque covering. Showing of any other part of the anatomy defined under nude or state of nudity shall constitute being nude or in a state of nudity. 
45.  Specified anatomical areas: Areas that include: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft or the human female areola or nipple; or 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
46.  Specified criminal act: Any offense as defined in Chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code; or any sexual offense, rape, statutory rape or other sexually related offense as defined by criminal statutes in Texas or any other state or by federal laws addressing similar or related offenses; or any offense involving controlled substances, or illegal drugs or narcotics as defined in federal or state laws in Texas or any other state. 
47.  Specified sexual activities: Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy. These activities include, but are not limited to the following: bestiality, erotic or sexual stimulation with objects or mechanical devices, acts of human analingus, cunnilingus, fellatio, flagellation, masturbation, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, or any excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth above with any person on the premises. This definition shall include apparent sexual stimulation of another person's genitals whether clothed or unclothed. 
48.  Video, sexually oriented: This definition is used to refer to any motion pictures, movies, films, videotapes, CD-ROMS, DVDs, computer images, slides, sound recordings, other magnetic media or electrical or electronic reproductions of anything that is or may be used as a means of communication that is distinguished or characterized by it emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
49.  Video viewing arcade, sexually oriented: A building or any portion of a building wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any other form of consideration, electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
50.  Video viewing arcade booth, sexually oriented: Any booth, cubicle, stall, or compartment that is designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat customers and is used for presenting videos or viewing publications by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other means or medium (including, but not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, CD-ROMs, books, DVDs, magazines or periodicals) to show images of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by customers therein. The term "booth," "arcade booth," "preview booth," and "video arcade booth" shall be synonymous with the term "motion picture arcade booth." 
28.62.4. Use regulations: 
A.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted uses within the designated zoning districts and shall be incorporated in the use charts in section 28.49: 
1.  Media store, other (some sexually oriented media). Permitted in Commercial and Light Industrial Districts only; 
2.  Retail store, other (some sexually oriented merchandise). Permitted in Commercial and Light Industrial Districts only; 
3.  Sexually oriented media store. Permitted in Light Industrial District only; 
4.  Sexually oriented retail store. Permitted in Light Industrial District only; 
5.  Sexually oriented motion picture theatre. Permitted in Light Industrial District only; and 
6.  Sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. Permitted in Light Industrial District only. 
B.  Prohibited uses. The following are sexually oriented business uses that are prohibited uses within any zoning district due to the experiences in other communities that demonstrate these uses create the opportunity for high-risk sexual activity, prostitution, drug use, and other criminal behavior while posing logistical difficulties and physical endangerment risks for code enforcement and police officers in policing these businesses, and uses involving sexually oriented media viewing booths or arcades are associated with deleterious effects and access to such media is available in other venues which are less harmful to the health, safety and welfare of the community: 
1.  Sexually oriented bath house; 
2.  Sexually oriented body painting studio; 
3.  Sexually oriented encounter center; 
4.  Sexually oriented escort business; 
5.  Sexually oriented lingerie or swimwear modeling studio; 
6.  Sexually oriented massage business; 
7.  Sexually oriented modeling/photography studio; 
8.  Sexually oriented motel; 
9.  Sexually oriented video viewing arcade or booth; 
10.  Any permitted sexually oriented business that includes as part of its business any business designated in subsections 1. through 9.; and 
11.  More than one use permitted under subsection A. on any lot, parcel or tract. 
C.  Nonconforming uses. Uses that are lawfully operating on the effective date of this section but do not conform to the use and separation provisions of this section, shall be deemed nonconforming uses, subject to the provisions of section 28.9, nonconforming uses and structures. A lawfully existing sexually oriented business shall comply with the provisions of section 28.62.6 of the zoning ordinance. A lawfully existing media store, other and retail store, other shall register with the planning director as a nonconforming use not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of this section 28.62. If such business does not register by such date, nonconforming status shall be lost and section 28.62 shall be strictly enforced. 
28.62.5. Location requirements and measurement of distances: 
A.  Separation standards. The following spatial requirements shall apply to the location of permitted sexually oriented business: 
1.  A "sexually oriented media store" shall be separated a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet from any protected land use or protected zoning district; 
2.  A "sexually oriented retail store" shall be separated a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet from any protected land use or protected zoning district; 
3.  A "sexually oriented motion picture theatre" shall be separated a distance of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from any protected land use or protected zoning district; 
4.  A "sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub" shall be separated a distance of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from any protected land use or protected zoning district; and 
5.  No sexually oriented business shall be located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of any other sexually oriented business. 
B.  Measurement. Where one use is required to be separated from another use, measurements shall be made in accordance with the following: 
1.  The required separation distance shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the structure containing the sexually oriented business to the nearest property line of the protected land use, protected zoning district or other sexually oriented business; 
2.  If the sexually oriented business is located in a multi-tenant building, then the distance shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the portion of the building occupied by the sexually oriented business to the nearest property line occupied by the protected land use, protected zoning district or other sexually oriented business. 
3.  The required distance separation from a protected land use, protected zoning district or other sexually oriented business shall apply regardless of whether such protected land use or zoning district is located inside or outside the City of Denison. 
4.  The separation measurements shall be provided by a licensed professional surveyor hired by the sexually oriented business. 
C.  Nonconformity. No legally permitted sexually oriented business shall become nonconforming through subsequent establishment of a protected land use or protected zoning district located in closer proximity to the permitted sexually oriented business than what is required by the separation standards in this section. 
28.62.6. Specific requirements for particular uses: 
A.  Media store, other (some sexually oriented media) and retail store, other (some sexually oriented merchandise). In addition to all other provisions of this zoning ordinance, media store, other and retail store, other must comply with the following standards: 
1.  Separate room. Sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise shall be kept in a separate room physically and visually separate from the remainder of the store by an opaque wall reaching at least eight (8) feet high or to the ceiling, whichever is less; 
2.  Access. Access to the room containing sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise shall be through a solid door, accessed by an electronic control device controlled and monitored by a clerk through direct visual control; 
3.  Location. The room entrance to the sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise shall be located so that it is as far as reasonably practicable from media and/or merchandise likely to be of interest to children; 
4.  Monitoring. Activities in the room having sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise shall be monitored at all times by a store clerk through a video system located at the clerk's counter; 
5.  Age limit. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted within the room containing sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise; 
6.  Lighting. The room having sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise shall be well lit at a lighting level of at least thirty (30) foot candles measured three (3) feet from the floor; and 
7.  Display publically not permitted. No sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise shall be publicly displayed outside the room designated for such media and/or merchandise. 
8.  Conversion to sexually oriented business. If a media store, other or retail store, other does not comply with the criteria defining such use, or otherwise converts to a sexually oriented business, the city may initiate revocation or other enforcement proceedings authorized under this zoning ordinance to remedy the conversion to a sexually oriented business. 
B.  Sexually oriented businesses. In addition to all other provisions of this zoning ordinance, sexually oriented businesses permitted under section 28.62.4.A. must comply with the following standards: 
1.  Exterior lighting. The exterior property of a sexually oriented business shall be lighted in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  Exterior lighting of the entries and parking areas shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) foot-candles as measured three (3) feet from the ground or paving; 
b.  For a business on a single lot or parcel, no lighting shall illuminate any property not in control of the business by more than five (5) foot-candles as measured at the nearest adjacent property; 
c.  Light sources shall be oriented toward the center of the site or shielded so as to not be visible from the property line; this applies to refractory lenses which extend beyond the lighting fixture and are designed to redirect the lighting source horizontally; and 
d.  All proposed exterior lighting shall be submitted with the application for site plan approval. 
2.  Exterior signage. All proposed signage for a sexually oriented business shall be in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  All proposed exterior signage shall be submitted with the application for site plan approval; and 
b.  Notwithstanding any provision of the zoning ordinance to the contrary which is more restrictive, signage permitted for sexually oriented businesses must: 
(1)  Not contain any flashing lights; 
(2)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(3)  Not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in area; and 
(4)  Not exceed ten (10) feet in height or ten (10) feet in length. 
3.  Display publically not permitted. No sexually oriented media, merchandise or activity shall be publicly displayed by a sexually oriented business. 
4.  Age limit. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted within the sexually oriented business; and 
5.  Business license. All sexually oriented businesses shall be in compliance with Chapter 29 of the City Code of Ordinances, Sexually Oriented Business Licensing. 
28.62.7. Pre-submission application: 
A.  [Pre-submission application.] No application for site plan approval, a building permit or certificate of occupancy for a sexually oriented business, or "media stores, other" or "retail stores, other" shall be accepted by the city until the owner submits a complete "pre-submission application" to the director of planning containing the following information: 
1.  A legal description or tax parcel for the proposed use; 
2.  Confirmation of the applicant's ownership or controlling interest in the property; 
3.  Detailed description and type of proposed sexually oriented business or other business having sexually oriented media and/or merchandise ("media stores, other" and "retail stores, other"); 
4.  A professional land surveyor's delineation of the proposed building and the location of its primary entrance and confirming via specific measurements that the proposed sexually oriented business meets the separation distances required from protected land uses and zoning districts or any other sexually oriented business (not required for "media stores, other" and "retail stores, other"); and 
5.  Payment of an application fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
B.  Action on pre-submission application. Within five (5) business days of receipt of a complete pre-submission application, the director of planning shall: 
1.  Determine whether the proposed use is a permitted use in the zoning district in which it is to be located; 
2.  Determine whether the proposed use meets the required separation distances; and 
3.  If the above criteria are satisfied, approve the pre-submission application and authorize the applicant to submit an application for site plan approval pursuant to section 28.13 of the zoning ordinance. 
C.  Deadline for site plan approval. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in section 28.13, within thirty (30) calendar days from the date an application for site plan approval has been received and deemed complete, the director of planning shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the site plan. If the permit is denied, the denial shall be made in writing, and shall specify the reasons why the site plan was denied, citing specific section provisions other provisions of the other ordinances that provide the basis for such denial. In all other respects, the procedures for site plans contained in section 28.13 shall apply. 
D.  Waiver of rights. The applicant may, at its option, pursue other or additional administrative remedies available under the zoning ordinance; by doing so, the applicant shall be deemed to have waived any right to a decision within a particular time period and shall be subject to all of the terms, conditions and timelines applicable to such administrative remedies under the zoning ordinance. 
28.62.8. Exemptions to separation restrictions: 
A.  Process. If the director of planning denies the pre-submission application due to the separation restrictions of section 28.62.5A., then the applicant may apply for an exemption from the separation restrictions by filing a written petition with the city clerk requesting a hearing within ten (10) calendar days of the date the applicant receives notification of the director of planning's decision. The city council shall serve as the appeals board. The appeal shall be scheduled within twenty (20) calendar days of the date the petition is received in the office of the city clerk. The city clerk shall give written notice to the applicant of the time and place for the hearing on the applicant's appeal at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the scheduled date of hearing. 
B.  Hearing. The city council shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to demonstrate that the requested exemption to the separation restrictions meets the criteria for granting of such exemption. 
C.  Criteria for exemptions. The city council may grant an exemption from the separation restrictions of section 28.62.5A. if the city council makes the following findings: 
1.  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare; 
2.  That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of the zoning ordinance; 
3.  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight; 
4.  That the location of a sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and 
5.  That all other applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance shall be observed. 
D.  Decision. The city council shall issue a decision with findings within ten (10) calendar days. If the separation exemption is granted, the city council shall direct the director of planning to approve the pre-submission application. If the separation exemption is denied, the applicant shall be immediately notified by registered or certified mail to the address provided on the application, and the letter of notification shall state the basis for such denial. The applicant may not reapply for an exemption until at least twelve (12) months have elapsed since the date of the city council's action. Any applicant aggrieved by the denial of an exemption may seek judicial review in the appropriate court. 
E.  Time period. If the city council grants the separation exemption, the exemption is valid for one (1) year from the date of the city council's action. If a certificate of occupancy has not been issued within one (1) year from the date of the city council action granting the separation exemption, the exemption shall expire. 
(Ord. No. 4563, § 2, 6-7-10) 
ARTICLE VI. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 28.63. - Definitions. 
28.63.1  For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter. Words used in the present tense shall also include the future tense; words used in the masculine gender shall also include the feminine gender; words used in the singular number shall also include the plural number; and words in the plural number shall also include the singular number, except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. For any term or use not defined herein, Webster's Dictionary (latest edition) shall be used. 
1.  Accessory building (residential): In a residential district, a subordinate building that is attached or detached and is used for a purpose that is customarily incidental to the main structure but not involving the conduct of a business (i.e., the building area must be significantly less than that of the main structure). Examples may include, but are not limited to, the following: a private garage for automobile storage, tool shed, greenhouse as a hobby (no business), home workshop, children's playhouse, storage building, garden shelter, etc. 
2.  Accessory building (business or industry): In the nonresidential districts, a subordinate building to the main building that does not exceed the height of the main building and does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the floor area of the main building, and that is used for purposes accessory and incidental to the main use (see accessory use ). 
3.  Accessory use: A use that is customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of land or building(s) and that is located upon the same lot therewith (i.e., the land/building area that is used for the accessory use must be significantly less than that used for the primary use). 
4.  Airport or landing field: A place where aircraft can land and take off that is usually equipped with hangars, facilities for aircraft refueling and repair, and various accommodations for passengers. 
5.  Alcohol beverage off-premises retail outlet: A store or establishment that sells primarily alcohol for off-premises consumption. 
6.  All-weather surface: All-weather surface shall mean either: 
a.  Five (5) inches of compacted base material with two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete cover; or 
b.  Four (4) inches of concrete on a prepared sub-grade. 
7.  Alley: A minor right-of-way that is dedicated to public use and which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes. 
8.  Ambulance service: Provision of private (not operated by the City of Denison) emergency transportation which may include mobile medical care, and which may include storage and maintenance of vehicles. 
9.  Amusement arcade (also video arcade): Any building, room, place or establishment of any nature or kind, and by whatever name called, where more than ten (10) percent of the public floor area is devoted to three (3) or more amusement devices that are operated for a profit, whether the same is operated in conjunction with any other business or not, including but not limited to such amusement devices as coin-operated pinball machines, video games, electronic games, shuffle boards, pool tables or other similar amusement devices. However, the term "amusement device," as used herein, shall not include musical devices, billiard tables which are not coin-operated, machines that are designed exclusively for small children, and devices designed to train persons in athletic skills or golf, tennis, baseball, archery or other similar sports. 
10.  Amusement, commercial (indoor): An amusement enterprise that is wholly enclosed within a building which is treated acoustically so that noise generated by the enterprise is not perceptible at the bounding property line, and that provides activities, services and/or instruction for the entertainment of customers or members, but not including amusement arcades. Uses may include, but are not limited to, the following: bowling alley, ice skating rink, martial arts club, racquetball/handball club, indoor tennis courts/club, indoor swimming pool or scuba diving facility, and other similar types of sports and training uses. 
11.  Amusement, commercial (outdoor): An amusement enterprise offering entertainment and/or games of skill to the general public for a fee wherein any portion of the activity takes place outdoors and including, but not limited to, a golf driving range, archery range, miniature golf course, batting cages, go-cart tracks, amusement parks, and other similar types of uses. 
12.  (Reserved). 
13.  (Reserved). 
14.  (Reserved). 
15.  Antique shop, sales indoors: A retail establishment engaged in the selling of works of art, furniture and/or other artifacts of an earlier period, with all sales and storage occurring inside a building. 
16.  Art gallery or museum: An institution for the collection, display and/or distribution of objects of art or science, and which is typically sponsored by a public or quasi-public agency and generally open to the public. 
17.  Assisted living facility: A building or buildings, other than a single-family dwelling, designed and staffed to provide housing for residents who require some type of support for daily living, such as assistance for bathing, dressing, medication, meal preparation, or other functions. In addition to housing, this type of facility may also provide convenience services such as meals, housekeeping, transportation and community facilities such as central dining rooms and activity rooms. No long-term or permanent skilled nursing care or related services are provided. 
18.  Auto body painting and rebuilding: Auto body painting and rebuilding includes, but is not limited to, priming and painting of the auto body, upholstery work, interior and exterior trim work and all other nonmechanical parts or systems of an automobile. 
19.  Auto dealer (classic and performance): Indoor display and sale of vehicles that are a minimum of twenty-five (25) years in age and/or designed and built with powerful engines designed for high performance driving. This use does not include service and repair of vehicles. 
20.  Auto dealer (new): Retail sales of new automobiles or light load vehicles, including, as a minor part of the business, the sales of used automobiles or light load vehicles and the service and repair of new or used vehicles. 
21.  Auto dealer (used): Retail sales, or offering for sale, used automobiles or light load vehicles and auto repair (minor). 
22.  Auto laundry or car wash: Washing, waxing or cleaning of automobiles or light duty trucks. 
a.  Attended or full service auto laundry or car wash -The owner of the vehicle does not actually wash the vehicle. Instead, he either leaves the vehicle and comes back to retrieve it later, or he waits in a designated area while employees of the car wash facility vacuum, wash, dry, wax and/or detail the vehicle for a fee. 
b.  Unattended auto laundry or car wash -The owner of the vehicle causes the vehicle to become washed. One type of unattended car wash facility utilizes automated self-service (drive-through/rollover) wash bays and apparatus in which the vehicle owner inserts money or tokens into a machine, drives the vehicle into the wash bay, and waits in the vehicle while it is being washed. The other type of unattended facility is comprised of wand-type self-service (open) wash bays in which the vehicle owner drives the vehicle into the wash bay, gets out of the vehicle, and hand washes the vehicle with a wand-type apparatus by depositing coins or tokens into a machine. 
23.  Auto parts supply store and accessory sales (indoors): The use of any building or other premises for the primary inside display and sale of new or used parts for automobiles, panel trucks or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles. 
24.  Auto rental: Storage or renting of automobiles and light trucks. 
25.  Auto storage or impound lot: The storage or impoundment, on a lot or tract which is paved in accordance with parking lot paving requirements set forth in this chapter, of operable automobiles for the purpose of holding such vehicles for sale, distribution and/or storage. This definition shall not include the storage of wrecked or inoperable vehicles (see wrecking yard ). 
26.  Automobile accessory installation (minor): Minor installation of minor automobile accessories such as car alarms, radio and stereo equipment, window tinting, pin striping, cellular telephones and similar accessories. 
27.  Automobile repair (major): The term "automotive repair" includes any and all activities where parts of a vehicle are removed, repaired or replaced includes body repair and mechanical repair, but does not include wrecking or salvage operations. 
28.  Automobile repair (minor): Auto mechanical repair includes, but is not limited to, repair of an auto's engine, brakes, front end and suspension, HVAC system, cooling system, electrical system and the component parts necessary for the effective operation of each. 
29.  Automotive gasoline or motor fuel service station: Any building, land area or other premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail dispensing or sales of automotive fuels, lubricants and automobile accessories, including those operations listed under automobile repair, minor. Vehicles that are inoperative or are being repaired may not remain parked outside these facilities for a period greater than forty-eight (48) hours. 
30.  Bakery or confectionery (retail): A facility less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet for the production and/or sale of baked goods. 
31.  Bakery or confectionery (wholesale or commercial): A manufacturing facility over fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet for the production and distribution of baked goods and confectioneries to retail outlets. 
32.  Ballroom dancing: An establishment open to the general public for dancing (no sales of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption shall be permitted) to live or recorded music. 
33.  Bank, savings and loan, or credit union: An establishment for the custody, loan, exchange and/or issue of money, the extension of credit, and/or facilitating the transmission of funds. 
34.  Barn: A structure intended for the purpose of storing farming and ranching related equipment and/or housing livestock. 
35.  Bar or tavern: An establishment primarily devoted (seventy-five (75) percent) to the serving of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption and in which the service of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. 
36.  Basement (or cellar): A portion of a building that is partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height measurement, a basement shall be counted as a story when more than one-half (1/2) of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall be located in the rear yard. 
37.  Bed and breakfast inn or facility: A dwelling occupied as a permanent residence by an owner or renter which serves breakfast and provides or offers sleeping accommodations in not more than ten (10) rooms for transient guests for compensation. 
38.  Block: A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the planning director (or his/her designee) shall determine the outline of the block. 
39.  Boarding or rooming house: A dwelling other than a hotel, where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, lodging and/or meals are provided. 
40.  Brew pub or micro-brewery: A restaurant or other facility that manufactures alcoholic beverages including but not limited to beer, wine or liquor for either on-premises or off-premises retail and wholesale and consumption in quantities not considered industrial or large scale production as determined by the director of planning and zoning or designee. 
41.  Brewery/distillery: The production of beer, wine and/or liquor at industrial quantities and internal large scale commercial distribution. 
42.  Building: Any structure intended for shelter, occupancy, housing or enclosure for persons, animals or chattel. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of such structure so separated shall be deemed a separate building. 
43.  Building height: The vertical distance from the average line of the highest and lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest point of coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. 
44.  Building line: A line parallel, or approximately parallel, to any lot line at a specific distance there from, marking the minimum distance from the lot line that a building may be erected (see Illustration 8). 
45.  Building, main or primary: A building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is situated is conducted. In a residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated. 
46.  Building materials and hardware sales (indoor or outdoor): Materials, tools, and/or hardware customarily used in the construction of buildings and other structures, including facilities for storage of materials for retail sales. Sometimes referenced as a "home improvement center." "Outdoor" means the storage of materials and products outside of the main building. 
47.  Building official: The inspector or administrative official charged with responsibility for issuing permits and enforcing the zoning chapter and Building Code of the City of Denison. 
48.  Building permit: A permit as required by the current building code that is issued by the building official authorizing the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, demolition, moving or maintenance of any building, structure or improvement to a given lot or tract of land or portion thereof. 
49.  Building site: See lot definition. 
50.  Bus station or terminal: Any premises for the transient housing and/or parking of motor-driven buses and the loading and unloading of passengers. 
51.  Caretakers' or guards' residence: A residence located on a premises with a main residential or nonresidential use and occupied only by a caretaker or guard employed on the premises (e.g., residence for guard in a private street development, residence for a guard/manager/caretaker for a self-storage facility or a restricted access business park, etc.). 
52.  Carnival, circus or tent service (temporary): Outdoor or indoor commercial amusement provided on a temporary basis. 
53.  Carport: A structure that is open on a minimum of two (2) sides and designed or used to shelter not more than three (3) vehicles and not to exceed twenty-four (24) feet on its longest dimension. Also called "covered parking area." 
54.  Cemetery or mausoleum: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery. 
55.  Cemetery, pet or animal: Same as cemetery except only for the burial of dead animals. 
56.  Certificate of occupancy: An official certificate issued by the city through the building official which indicates conformance with the zoning regulations and building codes and which authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued. 
57.  Child day center (or day care center): A commercial institution or place designed for the care or training of twelve (12) or more unrelated children under fourteen (14) years of age for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. 
58.  Church, rectory or temple: A building for regular assembly for religious worship which is used primarily and designed for such purpose and those accessory activities which are customarily associated therewith, and the place of residence for ministers, priests, nuns or rabbis on the premises (tax exempt as defined by state law). For the purposes of this chapter, Bible study and other similar activities that occur in a person's primary residence shall not apply to this definition. 
59.  City council: The governing body of the City of Denison, Texas. 
60.  Civic center: A building or complex of buildings that house municipal offices and services, and which may include cultural, recreational, athletic, food service, convention and/or entertainment facilities owned and/or operated by a municipality. 
61.  Cleaning plant (commercial/wholesale): An industrial facility where fabrics are cleaned with substantially no aqueous organic solvents on a commercial or wholesale basis. 
62.  Cleaning shop or laundry (small shop, pickup and self-service): A custom cleaning shop not exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of floor area and may include customer self-service laundry and cleaning. 
63.  College or university: An academic institution of higher learning, accredited or recognized by the state and covering a program or series of programs of academic study. 
64.  Commercial amusement (indoor): See amusement, commercial (indoor). 
65.  Commercial amusement (outdoor): See amusement, commercial (outdoor). 
66.  Community center (private): A central social and recreational building as part of a residential development-example: Apartment complex, senior citizen city, HUD housing recreation center, etc. for use by resident of development. 
67.  Community center (municipal): A building or complex of buildings that house cultural, recreational, athletic, food service and/or entertainment facilities owned and/or operated by a governmental agency or private nonprofit agency. 
68.  Comprehensive plan: Document adopted by the city that consists of graphic and textual policies which govern the future development of the city and which consists of various components governing specific geographic areas and functions and services of the city. 
69.  Concrete or asphalt batching plant (permanent): A permanent manufacturing facility for the production of concrete or asphalt. 
70.  Continuing care facility: A housing development designed to provide a full range of accommodations and services for older adults (fifty-five (55) years of age or older), including any combination of independent living, assisted living and skilled nursing. Residents may move from one level of care to another as their needs change. 
71.  Convenience store with (or without) gasoline sales: Retail establishment selling food for off-premises consumption and a limited selection of groceries and sundries (and possibly gasoline, if pumps are provided). Does not include or offer any automobile repair services. 
72.  Copy shop or printing: An establishment which reproduces, in printed form, individual orders from a business, profession, service, industry or government organization and occupies less than four thousand (4,000) square feet. 
73.  Contractor's shop with outside storage yard: A building, part of a building, or land area for the construction or storage of materials, equipment, tools, products, and vehicles. 
74.  Country club (private): A land area and buildings which may include a golf course, clubhouse, dining room, swimming pool, tennis courts and similar recreational or service uses available only to members and their guests. 
75.  Court: An open, unobstructed space, bounded on more than two (2) sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court has one (1) side open to a street, alley, yard, or other permanent open space. 
76.  Coverage: The lot area covered by all buildings located thereon, including the area covered by all overhanging roofs. 
77.  Custom personal service shop: Tailor, dressmaker, shoe shop, barber shop, beauty shop or similar shop offering custom service. 
78.  Dance hall or nightclub: An establishment dispensing alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and where dancing, recorded or live musical entertainment is permitted. 
79.  Day camp for children: A facility arranged and conducted for the organized recreation and instruction of children including outdoor activities on a daytime basis. 
80.  Density: The total number of residential buildings allowed upon a given tract of land usually expressed in total number of units per gross acres or net acre. 
81.  Detached: Having no physical connection above the top of the floor line of the first floor with any other building or structure. 
82.  Disabled individual: A person who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one (1) or more major life activities, a person who is regarded as having that type of impairment, or a person who has a record of that type of impairment. The term "disabled" includes persons recovering from addiction, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance (as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802). 
83.  Distribution center: Building or facility used for the storage and distribution of wholesale items/products. 
84.  Drapery or furniture upholstering shop: An establishment for the production, display and sale of draperies and soft coverings for furniture. 
85.  Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living quarters for one (1) or more households including facilities for food preparation and sleeping. 
86.  Dwelling, single-family attached (townhouse): See single-family dwelling (attached). 
87.  Easement: A grant of one (1) or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity. 
88.  Educational facilities: Public and private primary, secondary and postsecondary educational facilities offering instruction in the branches of learning and study required to be taught by the Texas Education Agency; and such federally funded educational programs for preschool children as the Head Start Program. 
89.  Electrical substation (high voltage bulk power): A subsidiary station in which electric current is transformed. 
90.  Enclosed building: A structure which is floored, roofed and surrounded by outside walls, which contains no opening larger than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area normally open to the air and which contains no series of openings forming a divided opening larger than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area normally open to the air. 
91.  Event venue/meeting hall: A building, facility, room, or portion thereof, which is rented, leased or otherwise made available to any person or group for an event, meeting or function such as a wedding or reception. A fee may or may not be charged for use of the space. This definition does not include fraternal organizations, religious facilities, or community center (municipal/civic center). 
92.  Fairgrounds or exhibition area: An area or space either outside or within a building for the display of topic-specific goods or information. 
93.  Family home (child care in place of residence): A facility that regularly provides care in the caretaker's own residence for not more than six (6) children under fourteen (14) years of age, excluding the caretaker's own children, and that provides care after school hours for not more than six (6) additional elementary school siblings of the other children given care. However, the number of children, including the caretaker's own, provided care at such facility shall not exceed twelve (12) at any given time. No outside employment is allowed at the facility. This facility shall conform to V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code ch. 42, as amended, and in accordance with such standards as may be promulgated by the Texas Department of Human Resources. 
94.  Farm, ranch, garden, crops or orchard: An area used for growing usual farm products, vegetables, fruits, trees, and grain and for the raising thereon of the usual farm animals such as horses, cattle, and sheep and including the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating, and storing products raised on the premises, but not including the commercial feeding of offal or garbage to swine or other animals and not including any type of agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by ordinance or law. 
95.  Feed and grain store: An establishment for the selling of corn, grain and other food stuffs for animals and livestock, and including implements and goods related to agricultural processes, but not including farm machinery. 
96.  Fire, police or municipal building: Any public service building of the municipal government including a library or City Hall, but excluding storage yards, utility shops and equipment centers. 
97.  Floodplain: An area of land subject to inundation by a one-hundred-year frequency flood as determined using standard engineering practices and generally as shown on the FIRM Flood Insurance Rate Map of the City of Denison. 
98.  Floor area: The total gross square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor level, but excluding carports, residential garages, and breezeways. 
99.  Floor area ratio (F.A.R.): The floor area of a main building or buildings on a lot, divided by the lot area (see Illustration 12). 
100.  Florist shop: An establishment for the display and retail sale of flowers, small plants and accessories. 
101.  Food processing: A manufacturing or light industrial use that primarily deals with the processing and packaging of food (such as dairy or grain) products that are intended for human consumption, but which are not typically sold in volume to end users on the premises. Incidental retail sales of food products (e.g., bread and baked goods, dairy products such as cheese, etc.) created and packaged on the premises may be allowed as an accessory use. 
102.  Food store: A retail business establishment that displays and sells consumable goods that are not to be eaten on the premises. Prepared food may be sold only as a secondary or accessory use. 
103.  Food truck park: An area designed to accommodate two (2) or more mobile food establishments and offering food and/or beverages for sale to the public as the primary use of the property. Food truck parks must provide a paved surface for truck parking and access to refuse collection containers, and must provide restroom facilities. 
104.  Franchised private utility (not listed): A utility such as one distributing heat, chilled water, closed circuit television or similar service and requiring a franchise to operate in the City of Denison. 
105.  Fraternal organization, lodge, civic club, or union: An organized group having a restricted membership and specific purpose related to the welfare of the members such as Elks, Masons, Knights of Columbus, or a labor union. 
106.  Front yard: See yard, front. 
107.  Funeral home or mortuary: A place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial or cremation, or a building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation. 
108.  Furniture, home furnishings or appliance stores: This group includes retail stores selling new goods for furnishing the home including, but not limited to furniture, floor coverings, draperies, glass and chinaware, domestic stoves, refrigerators, and other household electrical and gas appliances. 
109.  Furniture store (new and used): Same as above except sales may include used items. 
110.  Garage, private: An enclosed (on at least three (3) sides) accessory building, or a part of a main building, used for storage of automobiles and used solely by the occupants and their guests. Also called "enclosed parking space." 
111.  Garage/accessory dwelling: A residential dwelling unit attached to or over a garage but not attached to the main residential structure. 
112.  Garden shop (inside storage): A facility which is engaged in the selling of flowers, ornamental plants, shrubs, trees, seeds, garden and lawn supplies, and other materials used in planting and landscaping, but not including cultivation and propagation activities outside a building. 
113.  Gasoline or diesel service or filling station: See automotive gasoline or motor fuel service station. 
114.  General commercial plant: Establishments other than personal service shops for the treatment and/or processing of products as a service on a for-profit basis including, but not limited to, newspaper printing, laundry plant, or cleaning and dyeing plants. 
115.  General manufacturing: See industrial, manufacturing. 
116.  General retail stores: This major group includes retail stores which sell a number of lines of primarily new merchandise including but not limited to dry goods, apparel and accessories, furniture and home furnishings, small wares, small appliances, hardware, and food. The stores included in this group are known as department stores, variety stores, general merchandise stores, general stores, etc. (also see retail shop ). 
117.  Golf course: An area of twenty (20) acres or more improved with trees, greens, fairways, hazards, and which may include clubhouses. 
118.  Group day care home: Means a facility that provides care for seven (7) to twelve (12) children under fourteen (14) years of age less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. 
119.  Gymnastic or dance studio: A building or portion of a building used as a place of work for a gymnast or dancer or for instructional classes in gymnastics or dance. 
120.  Hauling or storage company: See motor freight company. 
121.  Heavy load vehicle: A self-propelled vehicle having a manufacturer's recommended gross vehicle weight (GVW) of greater than sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds (including trailers), such as large recreational vehicles (originally manufactured as RVs, not converted), tractor-trailers, buses, vans, and other similar vehicles. The term "truck" shall be construed to mean "heavy load vehicle" unless specifically stated otherwise. 
122.  Heavy machinery sales and storage: A building or open area used for the display, sale, rental or storage of heavy machinery, tractors or similar machines, or a group of machines which function together as a unit. 
123.  Heliport: An area of land or water or a structural surface which is used, or intended for use, for the landing and taking off of helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended for use for heliport buildings and other heliport facilities. 
124.  Helistop: The same as a heliport, except that no refueling, maintenance, repairs or storage of helicopters is permitted. 
125.  Home occupation: An occupation carried on in a dwelling unit by a resident of the premises, which occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the premises for residential purposes. 
126.  Hospital (acute care): An institution where sick or injured patients are given medical and/or surgical treatment intended to restore them to health and an active life, and which is licensed by the State of Texas. 
127.  Household: A domestic unit that resides in and shares in common a single dwelling unit and consists of one (1) or more individuals related by blood, marriage, adoption or recognized legal union or guardianship, and not more than four (4) unrelated individuals, plus any minor children, or persons residing in a household care facility. 
128.  Household care facility: A dwelling unit that provides residence and care to not more than six (6) persons, regardless of legal relationship, who are elderly; disabled; orphaned, abandoned or neglected children; victims of domestic violence; or rendered temporarily homeless due to fire, natural disaster or financial setbacks, living together with not more than two (2) caregivers as a single household. Where applicable, a household care facility shall have appropriate licensing and/or registration by the State of Texas. This definition includes, without limitation, Community Homes under Chapter 123 of the Texas Human Resources Code, as amended. 
129.  Household small appliance service and repair: The maintenance and rehabilitation of appliances that are customarily used in the home including, but not limited to, washing and drying machines, refrigerators, dishwashers, trash compactors, ovens and ranges, countertop kitchen appliances, vacuum cleaners, etc., but not including appliances/equipment which have internal combustion engines. 
130.  Household care facility: A dwelling unit which provides residence and care to persons, regardless of legal relationship, who are elderly; disabled; orphaned, abandoned, abused, or neglected children; victims of domestic violence; or rendered temporarily homeless due to fire, natural disaster or financial setbacks, living together with not more than two (2) supervisory personnel as a single housekeeping unit. This definition is subject to art. 4442c-4 (Personal Care Facility Licensing Act) V.A.C.S. (Tex.) and art. 1011n (Community Homes for Disabled Persons Location Act) V.A.C.S. (Tex.) as they presently exist or may be amended in the future. 
131.  Incidental or accessory retail and service uses: Any use different from the primary use but which compliments and/or supplements the primary use (for example, a sundries shop that serves tenants of an office building or hospital). Incidental shall mean an area which constitutes not more than fifteen percent (15) of the main use. 
132.  Independent living facility: A development providing individual dwelling units specifically designed for the needs of seniors. A minimum of eighty (80) percent of the total units shall have a household head fifty-five (55) years of age or greater. In addition to housing, the facility may provide convenience services such as meals, housekeeping or transportation and community facilities such as a central dining room and activity rooms. 
133.  Industrial, manufacturing: Establishments engaged in the manufacturing or transformation of materials into new products. These establishments are usually described as plants and factories, and characteristically use power driven machines and materials handling equipment. Manufacturing production is usually carried on for the wholesale market, rather than for direct sale to the domestic consumer. 
134.  Industrialized home or modular home: Means a structure or building module as defined, under the jurisdiction and control of the Texas Department of Labor and Standards and that is installed and used as a residence by a consumer, transportable in one or more sections on a temporary chassis or other conveyance device, and designed to be used on a permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. The term does not include a mobile home as defined in the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act (Art. 5221f V.A.C.S.); nor does it include building modules incorporating concrete or masonry as the primary structural component. 
135.  Kennels (indoor pens): An establishment with indoor pens in which more than four (4) dogs or domesticated animals more than one (1) year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained and/or sold for commercial purposes. 
136.  Kennels (outdoor pens): An establishment with outdoor pens in which more than four (4) dogs or domesticated animals more than one (1) year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained and/or sold for commercial purposes. 
137.  Kindergarten or nursery school (private): An establishment where more than three (3) children are housed for care and/or training during the day or portion thereof. 
138.  Kiosk: A small, freestanding, one-story accessory structure having a maximum floor area of one hundred (100) square feet and used for retail purposes, such as automatic teller machines or the posting of temporary information and/or posters, notices and announcements. If a kiosk is to be occupied, it shall have a minimum floor area of fifty (50) square feet. 
139.  Kitchen, residential: Generally, that portion of a residential dwelling that is devoted to the preparation and/or cooking of food for the purpose of consumption by residents of the dwelling. A kitchen, as referred to within this chapter, generally indicates the presence of complete cooking facilities (i.e., stove, oven, microwave oven and/or refrigerator) as differentiated from a "kitchenette" which provides very limited cooking facilities (i.e., single-burner hot plate, under-counter refrigerator, microwave oven only, etc.). 
140.  Laboratory equipment manufacturing: A facility that makes or produces equipment or products used for research or testing. 
141.  Laboratory, scientific or research: An establishment that engages in research, testing or evaluation of materials or products, but not medical-related (see medical facilities-medical laboratory ). 
142.  Landscaping: Material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees or palms, and non-living durable materials that are commonly used in landscaping such as, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, walls or fences, but excluding paving. 
143.  Laundromat (or self-serve washateria): A facility where patrons wash, dry and/or dry clean clothing and other fabrics in machines that are operated by the patron. 
144.  Light load vehicle: A self-propelled vehicle having a manufacturer's recommended gross vehicle weight (GVW) not greater than sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds and having no more than two (2) axles, such as pickup trucks, sport utility vehicles, vans and mini-vans, recreational vehicles (less than thirty-two (32) feet in length), campers and other similar vehicles but not including automobiles and motorcycles. 
145.  Light manufacturing or industrial use: Manufacturing of finished products or parts, predominantly from previously prepared materials, including fabrication, assembly, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing. 
146.  Loading space: An off-street space or berth used for the delivery and loading/unloading of vehicles. 
147.  Local utility line: The facilities provided by a municipality or a franchised utility company for distribution or collection of gas, water, surface drainage water, sewage, electric power or telephone service, including pad-and pole-mounted transformers. 
148.  Lot: A platted (as specified in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212) Parcel of land that is occupied or intended to be occupied by one main building (or a group of main buildings) and any accessory building(s), which includes such parking, landscaping and open space as are required by this chapter or other laws and/or ordinances, and also which has its principal frontage upon a public street. 
149.  Lot area: The total area, measured on a horizontal plane, included within lot lines. 
150.  Lot, corner: A lot which has at least two (2) adjacent sides abutting for their full lengths upon a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees (see Illustration 13). 
151.  Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines (see Illustration 14). 
152.  Lot, double frontage: A lot having frontage upon two (2) nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot (see Illustration 9). 
153.  Lot, flag: A lot having access to a street by means of a parcel of land generally having a depth greater than its frontage, but not less than thirty-five (35) feet. Flag or panhandle lots are typically discouraged. 
154.  Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
155.  Lot frontage: That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting onto a street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot. 
156.  Lot line, front: The narrower side of the lot abutting a street. Where two (2) lot lines abutting streets are of equal length, the owner shall have a choice in designating which shall be the lot frontage. For a lot which has a boundary line which does not abut the front street line, is not a rear lot line, and lies along the same general directional orientation as the front and rear lot lines, said line shall be considered a front lot line in establishing minimum setback lines (see Illustration 8). 
157.  Lot, key: A corner lot whose exterior side is adjacent to the front yard of another lot. 
158.  Lot line, rear: The lot line farthest from and most parallel to the front lot line. For triangular lots, the point opposite the front lot line shall be considered the rear lot line and have a value of zero (see Illustration 8). 
159.  Lot line, side: Any lot line not the front or rear lot line. 
160.  Lot lines or property lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
161.  Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Grayson County. 
162.  Lot width: The horizontal distance measured between side lot lines parallel to the front lot line, and measured from the point on the building line that is closest to the front lot line (see Illustration 14). 
163.  Main building: The building or buildings on a lot that are occupied by the primary use. 
164.  Manufactured home display or sales (new): The offering for sale, storage, or display of new manufactured housing units (e.g., mobile homes/trailers, HUD-Code homes, industrialized homes) on a parcel of land, but excluding the use of such facilities as dwellings either on a temporary or permanent basis. 
165.  Manufactured home display or sales (used): The offering for sale, storage, or display of previously owned (i.e., used), movable manufactured housing units (e.g., mobile homes/trailers, HUD-Code homes) on a parcel of land, but excluding the use of such facilities as dwellings either on a temporary or permanent basis. 
166.  Manufactured housing: Any one (1) of three (3) types of prefabricated housing products which are typically manufactured/assembled at a location other than the end user's permanent site, and which are regulated by the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act (Arts. 5221f and 5221f-1, V.A.C.S.). For the purpose of this chapter, there are three (3) types of manufactured homes: 
a.  Mobile home -A movable dwelling designed to be transported on its own chassis on the highway (either intact or in major sections) by a prime mover, which is constructed with a base section so as to be independently self-supporting, and which does not require a permanent foundation for year-round living. A mobile home is also defined as any manufactured home that was constructed prior to June 15, 1976. 
b.  HUD-Code manufactured home -A movable dwelling designed to be transported on the highway (either intact or in major sections) by a prime mover, which can be used as a residential dwelling either with or without a permanent foundation. A HUD-Code manufactured home is also defined as a movable manufactured home that was constructed after June 15, 1976. 
c.  Industrialized home (also called "modular prefabricated structure or modular home") -A structure or building module as defined under the jurisdiction and control of the Texas Department of Labor and Standards, that is transportable in one (1) or more sections on a temporary chassis or other conveyance device, and that is designed to be installed and used by a consumer as a fixed residence on a permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained in the structure. The term does not include mobile homes or HUD-Code manufactured homes as defined in the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act (Art. 5221f, V.A.C.S.). Industrialized homes must meet all applicable local codes and zoning regulations that pertain to construction of traditional site constructed ("stick built") homes. 
167.  Market (farmers): An open air or enclosed marketplace where agricultural goods such as vegetables and plants are sold. 
168.  Masonry construction: That form of construction comprised of brick, stone, granite, marble, concrete, hollow clay tile, concrete block or tile, brick veneer, exterior plasters (including stucco), or other similar building units or materials or combination of these materials laid up unit by unit and set in mortar. 
169.  Mausoleum: Property used for the interring of the dead and where bodies are interred above ground in staked vaults. 
170.  Medical facilities: 
a.  Medical clinic or office -A facility or group of offices for one (1) or more physicians for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted human outpatients provided that patients are not kept overnight except under emergency conditions. 
b.  Dental office or doctor's office -Same as medical clinic. 
c.  Hospital -An institution providing health services primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities. 
d.  Massage establishment -Any place of business in which massage therapy is practiced by a massage therapist, as defined and licensed by state law. "Massage therapy" as a health care service, means the manipulation of soft tissue for therapeutic purposes. The term includes, but is not limited to, effleurage (stroking), petrissage (kneading), tapotement (percussion), compression, vibration, friction, nerve strokes, and Swedish gymnastics, either by hand or with mechanical or electrical apparatus for the purpose of body massage. Massage therapy may include the use of oil, salt glows, heat lamps, hot and cold packs, tub, shower or cabinet baths. Equivalent terms for "massage therapy" are massage [or] therapeutic massage. "Massage" and "therapeutic" do not include diagnosis, the treatment of illness or disease, or any service or procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry is required by law. 
e.  Public health center -A facility primarily utilized by a health unit for providing public health services including related facilities such as laboratories, clinics and administrative offices operated in connection therewith. 
f.  Sanitarium -An institution providing health facilities for inpatient medical treatment or treatment and recuperation making use of natural therapeutic agents. 
g.  Surgical out-patient facility -An establishment offering any type of surgical procedures and related care which, in the opinion of the attending physician, can be performed safely without requiring inpatient overnight hospital care and exclusive of such surgical and related care as licensed physicians ordinarily may elect to perform in their private offices. 
h.  Medical laboratory -An indoor establishment that includes laboratories and/or experimental equipment for medical testing, prototype design and development, and product testing. 
171.  Mini-warehouse: Small individual storage units for rent or lease, restricted solely to the storage of items. The conduct of sales, business or any other activity within the individual storage units, other than storage, shall be prohibited. 
172.  Minor medical emergency clinic: See medical clinic or office. 
173.  Mobile home park (also trailer park or RV park ): A parcel of land not less than three (3) acres nor greater than thirty-five (35) acres which is designed, improved, or intended to be used for short- or long-term occupancy by mobile homes/trailers and/or recreational vehicles (including travel trailers) in designated spaces. Facility may include a residence for the owner/manager of the premises, utility hook-ups, accessory structures, playgrounds and open space areas, fenced yard areas for pets, and other similar amenities. 
174.  Mobile home space: A plot of ground within a mobile home park, trailer park, RV park, or mobile home subdivision which is designed for the accommodation of one (1) mobile home, trailer or RV unit. 
175.  Mobile home subdivision: A parcel of land which is designed, platted, improved and intended for the long-term placement of individually owned mobile home units or HUD-Code manufactured homes on platted lots which can be purchased outright by the owners of the mobile home units. Facility may include a residence for the owner/manager of the premises, utility hook-ups, accessory structures, playgrounds and open space areas, fenced yard areas for pets, and other similar amenities. 
176.  Model home: A dwelling in a developing subdivision, located on a legal lot of record, that is limited to temporary use as a sales office for the subdivision and to provide an example of the dwellings which have been built or which are proposed to be built within the same subdivision. 
177.  Motel or hotel: A facility offering temporary lodging accommodations or guest rooms on a daily rate to the general public and providing additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, housekeeping service and recreational facilities. A guest room shall be defined as a room designed for the overnight lodging of hotel guests for an established rate or fee. 
178.  Motorcycle: A usually two-wheeled, self-propelled vehicle having one (1) or two (2) saddles or seats, and which may have a sidecar attached. For purposes of this chapter, motorbikes, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), motor scooters, mopeds and similar vehicles are classified as motorcycles. 
179.  Motorcycle sales and repair: The display, sale and/or servicing, including repair work, of motorcycles. 
180.  Motor freight company: A company using trucks or other heavy load vehicles to transport goods, equipment and similar products. Includes companies that move residential or commercial belongings. 
181.  Motor vehicle: Any vehicle designed to carry one (1) or more persons which is propelled or drawn by mechanical power, such as automobiles, vans, trucks, motorcycles and buses. 
182.  Multiple-family dwelling: Three (3) or more dwelling units on a single lot designed to be occupied by three (3) or more households living independently of one another, exclusive of hotels or motels. This includes three-household units (triplex) and four-household units (quadplex), as well as traditional apartments. 
183.  Municipal facility or use: Any area, land, building, structure and/or facility which is owned, used, leased or operated by the City of Denison, Texas. 
184.  Nonconforming use: A building, structure, or use of land lawfully occupied as of the effective date of this chapter or amendments thereto, but which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
185.  Nursery: An establishment, including a building, part of a building or open space, for the growth, display and/or sale of plants, shrubs, trees and other materials used in indoor or outdoor planting. 
186.  Nursing, convalescent or rest home: See skilled nursing facility. 
187.  Occupancy: The use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants. 
188.  Offices, professional and general business: A room or group of rooms used for the provision of executive, management and/or administrative services. Typical uses include administrative offices and services including real estate, insurance, property management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone answering, and business offices of public utilities, organizations and associations, but excluding medical offices. 
189.  Office center: A building or complex of buildings used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, government or similar entity, that may include ancillary services for office workers such as a coffee shop, newspaper stand, sundries shop, hair/nail salon, etc. 
190.  Office showroom: An establishment with no more than twenty-five (25) percent of its total floor area devoted to storage and warehousing, but not accessible to the general public. The remaining area may include retail and wholesale sales areas, sales offices, and display areas for products sold and distributed from the storage and warehousing areas. 
191.  Office warehouse: An establishment with more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area devoted to storage and warehousing, but not generally accessible to the public. 
192.  Officially approved place of access: Access to a property, other than from a dedicated street, which is approved by the City of Denison. 
193.  Off-street parking incidental to main use: Off-street parking spaces provided in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, located on the lot or tract occupied by the main use or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of such lot or tract, and located within the same zoning district as the main use or in an adjacent parking district. 
194.  Outside display: Outside temporary display of finished or other goods that are specifically intended for retail sale but not displayed outside overnight. 
195.  Outside storage: The permanent and/or continuous keeping, displaying or storing, outside a building, of any goods, materials, merchandise or equipment on a lot or tract for more than twenty-four (24) hours. Also referred to as "open storage." 
196.  Paint shop: A commercial establishment where painting services are performed (but not automotive-related painting services, which would be included under automobile repair (major) ). 
197.  Parcel: Any unplatted tract of land, or any portion of an unplatted tract of land (also see tract ). 
198.  Park or playground (private): See private recreation facility. 
199.  Park or playground (public): See public recreation. 
200.  Parking lot: An off-street (i.e., not on a public street or alley), ground level area, paved in accordance with City of Denison parking lot standards, for the short- or long-term storage of motor vehicles. 
201.  Parking lot or structure, commercial (auto): An area or structure devoted to the parking or storage of automobiles for a fee which may include, in the case of a parking structure only, a facility for servicing automobiles provided that such facility is an internal function for use only by automobiles occupying the structure and that such facility creates no special problems of ingress or egress. 
202.  Parking space: An off-street (i.e., not on a public street or alley) area, paved in accordance with City of Denison parking lot standards, that is used for parking a vehicle, and that is accessed from a paved driveway which connects the parking space with a public street. 
203.  Patio home (zero-lot-line dwelling): A single-family dwelling on a separately platted lot which is designed such that one (1) side yard is reduced to zero feet in order to maximize the width and usability of the other side yard, and which permits the construction of a detached single-family dwelling with one (1) side (i.e., wall) of such dwelling placed on the side property line (see section 28.25). 
204.  Pawn shop: An establishment where money is loaned on the security of personal property pledged in the keeping of the owners (pawnbroker). Retail sales of primarily used (i.e., pre-owned) items is also allowed, provided that the sale of such items complies with local, state and federal regulations. 
205.  Personal service shop or custom personal services establishments: Less than two thousand (2,000) square feet in gross floor area, primarily engaged in providing services generally involving the care of the person or his apparel and including (but not limited to) barber/beauty shops, dressmaking, shoe shining and repair, dry-cleaning and laundry pickup stations, tailor or seamstress services, and other similar types of uses (no outside storage). 
206.  Pet and animal grooming shop: A retail establishment offering small animals, fish and/or birds for sale as pets, where such creatures are housed within the building, and which may include the grooming of dogs, cats and similar animals. 
207.  Petroleum distribution/storage/wholesale facility: A facility for the long-term storage and distribution of petroleum that may also involve wholesale sales, but not retail sales, of petroleum and petroleum-based products. No manufacturing or refining of petroleum or petroleum-based products occurs on the premises, only storage and/or distribution functions. 
208.  Planned development district: Planned associations of uses developed as integral land use units, such as industrial parks or industrial districts, offices, commercial or service centers, shopping centers, residential developments of multiple or mixed housing, including attached single-family dwellings or any appropriate combination of uses which may be planned, developed or operated as integral land use units either by a single owner or by a combination of owners. 
209.  Planning and zoning commission: A board which is appointed by the city council as an advisory body, and which is authorized to recommend changes in the zoning of property and other planning functions as delegated by the city council. Also referred to as the "commission." 
210.  Plat: A plan showing the subdivision of land, creating building lots or tracts, showing all essential dimensions and other information in compliance with the subdivision standards of the City of Denison, and which is approved by the City of Denison and recorded in the plat records of Grayson county. 
211.  Platted lot: See lot and lot of record. 
212.  Playfield or stadium (public): An athletic field or stadium owned and operated by a public agency (e.g., City of Denison, the school district, etc.) for the general public including a baseball field, soccer field, golf course, football field or stadium which may be lighted for nighttime play. 
213.  Playfield or stadium (private): An athletic field or stadium owned and operated by an agency other than the City of Denison or the school district. 
214.  Portable building sales (outdoor display): An establishment which displays and sells structures capable of being carried and transported to another location, but not including mobile homes. 
215.  Premises: Land together with any buildings or structures situated thereon. 
216.  Primary use: The principal or predominant use of any lot or building. 
217.  Principal building: See main building. 
218.  Private club: An establishment providing social and/or dining facilities which may provide alcoholic beverage service, to an association of persons, and otherwise falling within the definition of, and permitted under the provisions of, that portion of V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code Title 3, ch. 32, as the same may be hereafter amended, and as it pertains to the operation of private clubs. 
219.  Private recreation facility or private park: A recreation facility, park or playground which is not owned by a public agency such as the city or school district, and which is operated for the exclusive use of private residents or neighborhood groups and their guests and not for use by the general public. 
220.  Produce stand: A seasonal use for which the primary purpose and design is to sell fruit, nuts, vegetables and similar foods. No cooking or on-premises consumption of produce occurs on the site. 
221.  Professional service: Work performed which is commonly identified as a profession, and which may be licensed by the State of Texas. 
222.  Propane sales: Retail sales of gaseous substances commonly used for household purposes such as propane and/or butane; does not include the storage, sale or distribution of other types of combustible substances or alternative fuels such as containerized natural gas, liquid propane, etc. 
223.  Property take line: The property or ownership line of property owned by the Corps of Engineers around Lake Texoma. 
224.  Public agency building, shop, yard or facility: Any building, land, area and/or facility (including maintenance/storage yards and shops) which is owned, leased, primarily used and/or occupied by any subdivision or agency of the following: The State of Texas, the United States, or other public utility or agency. Any facility that is owned, leased, used and/or occupied by the City of Denison is defined as "municipal facility or use." 
225.  Public recreation: Publicly owned and operated parks, recreation areas, playgrounds, swimming pools and open spaces that are available for use by the general public without membership or affiliation. This land use shall include special event type uses such as rodeos, concerts, festivals and other special events requiring special event permits, as set forth in the City of Denison's Code of Ordinances. 
226.  Public view: Public view means areas that can be seen from any public street. 
227.  Rear yard: See yard, rear. 
228.  Recreation center: A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities, and other customary and usual recreational activities. 
229.  Recreational vehicle (RV): "Recreational vehicle" shall mean a general term for a vehicular unit not exceeding forty (40) feet in overall length, eight (8) feet in width or twelve (12) feet in overall height which applies to the following specific vehicle types: 
a.  Camper trailer -A folding or collapsible vehicular structure, without its own power, designed as a temporary living quarters for travel, camping, recreation and vacation uses and licensed and registered for highway use. 
b.  Travel trailer -A rigid structure, without its own motive power, designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping recreation and vacation use licensed and registered for vacation use and licensed and registered for highway use and which when equipped for the road has a body width of not more than eight (8) feet. 
c.  Truck camper -A portable structure, without its own motive power, designed to be transported on a power vehicle as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreation and vacation use and which in combination with the carrying vehicle is licensed and registered for highway use. 
d.  Motor home -A vehicular unit built on or as a part of a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis, primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for travel, camping, temporary living quarters for travel, camping, recreation and vacation use and licensed and registered for highway use. 
230.  Recreational vehicle/camper sales and leasing: An establishment that sells, leases and/or rents new and/or used recreational vehicles, travel trailers, campers, boats/watercraft, and similar types of vehicles. 
231.  Recreational vehicle (RV) park: An area or commercial campground for users of recreational vehicles, travel trailers, and similar vehicles to reside, park, rent or lease on a temporary basis (see also mobile home park ). 
232.  Recycling center: A recycling facility shall be located inside of a building, and shall be used for the collection, storage, and resale of recyclables. Items to be recycled may consist of glass, paper, metal, liquid, or plastics. 
233.  Rehabilitation care facility: A facility which provides residence and care to not more than six (6) persons, regardless of legal relationship, who have been convicted of prohibited criminal conduct, and received conditional release, parole or community supervision, living together with not more than two (2) supervisory personnel as a single household. Where applicable, a rehabilitation care facility shall have appropriate licensing and/or registration. 
234.  Rehabilitation care institution: A facility which provides residence and care to ten (10) or more persons, regardless of legal relationship, who have been convicted of prohibited criminal conduct and received conditional release, probation or parole with supervision, together with supervisory personnel. Where applicable, a rehabilitation care facility shall have appropriate licensing and/or registration. 
235.  Residence: Same as a dwelling; also, when used with district, an area of residential regulations. 
236.  Residence hotels: A multi-unit, extended stay lodging facility consisting of efficiency units and/or suites with complete kitchen facilities under one roof and which is suitable for long-term occupancy. Customary hotel services such as linens and housekeeping, telephones, and upkeep of furniture shall be provided. Meeting rooms, club house, and recreational facilities intended for the use of residents and their guests are permitted. This definition shall not include other dwelling units as defined by this chapter. 
237.  Residential district: District where the primary purpose is residential use. 
238.  Restaurant or cafeteria (with drive-through service): An eating establishment where customers are primarily served at tables or are self-served, where food is consumed on the premises, and which may include a drive-through window(s). 
239.  Restaurant or cafeteria (with no drive-through service): An eating establishment where customers are primarily served at tables or are self-served, where food is consumed on the premises and derives at least seventy-five (75) percent of its revenues from the on-premises consumption of food or nonalcoholic beverages, and which do not have a drive-through window. 
240.  Restaurant or eating place (drive-in service): An eating establishment where food and/or drinks are primarily served to customers in motor vehicles, or where facilities are provided on the premises which encourage the serving and consumption of food in automobiles on or near the restaurant premises. 
241.  Retail or service, incidental: The rendering of incidental retailing or services incidental to the primary use. In the office district, for example, such uses may include a barber/beauty shop, smoke shop, news stand, candy counter, restaurant, pharmacy or other incidental activity secondary to the primary office occupancy. Incidental uses shall mean uses which occupy less than fifteen (15) percent of the main use. 
242.  Retail shop (for apparel, gifts, accessories and similar items): An establishment engaged in the selling of goods and merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods (also see general retail stores ). 
243.  Room: A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied or intended to be occupied as living or sleeping quarters but not including toilet or cooking facilities. 
244.  Rooming house: See boarding house. 
245.  Salvage or reclamation of products (also see wrecking yard): The reclamation and storage of used products or materials. 
246.  Sand, gravel or stone extraction and/or storage: The process of extracting and/or storing sand, gravel, stone, topsoil, compost or other products from the earth. 
247.  School, business: A for-profit business that offers instruction and training in a profession, service or art such as a secretarial or court reporting school, barber/beauty college or commercial art school, but not including commercial trade schools. 
248.  School, commercial trade: A for-profit business that offers vocational instruction and training in trades such as welding, brick laying, machinery operation/repair, and similar trades. 
249.  School, private (primary or secondary): A school under the sponsorship of a private agency or corporation, other than a public or religious agency, which offers a curriculum that is generally equivalent to public elementary and/or secondary schools. 
250.  School, public or parochial: A school under the sponsorship of a public or religious agency which provides elementary and/or secondary curricula, but not including private business or commercial trade schools. 
251.  Scientific and industrial research laboratories: Facilities for research including laboratories, experimental equipment, and operations involving compounding or testing of materials or equipment. 
252.  Screened: Shielded, concealed, and effectively hidden from the view of a person standing at ground level on an abutting site, or outside the area or feature so screened, by a fence, wall, hedge, berm or similar architectural or landscape feature. 
253.  Seasonal uses: Seasonal uses include the sales of items such as Christmas trees, pumpkins, snow cones, fresh produce, and other items which are typically only available at certain times of the year. 
254.  Sexually oriented business: See chapter 29 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
255.  Shopping center: A group of primarily retail and service commercial establishments that is planned, constructed and managed as a total entity, and which provides customer and employee parking on-site, unloading/delivery areas which are separated from customer access, and aesthetically appropriate design and protection from the elements. 
256.  Side yard: See yard, side. 
257.  Single-family dwelling, attached (townhouse): A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one (1) or more sides by a shared wall, which is designed for occupancy by one (1) household, and which is located on a separate lot delineated by a front, side and rear lot lines. 
258.  Single-family dwelling, detached: A dwelling designed and constructed as a freestanding structure for occupancy by one (1) household, and located on a lot or separate building tract having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract. 
259.  Skilled nursing facility: A facility providing primarily in-patient health care, personal care, or rehabilitative services over an extended period of time to persons who are chronically ill, aged or disabled and who need ongoing health supervision but not hospitalization for acute care. 
260.  Small engine repair shop: Shop for the repair of lawn mowers, chain saws, lawn equipment, and other machines with one-cylinder engines. 
261.  Stable, commercial: A stable used for the rental of stall space or for the sale or rental of horses or mules. 
262.  Stable, private: An area used solely for the owner's private purposes for the keeping of horses, mules or ponies which are not kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
263.  Storage or wholesale warehouse: A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. 
264.  Story: That portion of a building (above grade), other than a basement, that is included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling above it. The average height for a story shall be defined as twelve (12) feet. The definition of a story does not include parapets, gables and other normal roof structures. In cases where the site has a significant slope, the number of stories (i.e., height) of a building shall be measured from point representing the average slope from front to back (or side to side) of the building. 
265.  Story, half: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three (3) feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the floor area is finished off for use. A half-story containing an independent apartment or self-contained living quarters shall be counted as a full story. 
266.  Street: Any dedicated public thoroughfare that affords the principal means of access to abutting property. A street is termed a major thoroughfare or arterial when the right-of-way is greater than sixty (60) feet. 
267.  Street intersection: Any street that joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other. 
268.  Street yard: The area between the building front line and the front property (i.e., right-of-way) line. 
269.  Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the ground (also see definition of building ). 
270.  Structural alterations: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as load-bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
271.  Studio, health/reducing/fitness: Includes, but is not limited to, an establishment which provides facilities and equipment (e.g., gymnasiums, weight rooms, swimming pools/spas, exercise apparatus, instruction/classes, etc.) which are intended to promote health, fitness, weight reduction and/or similar health-related activities. Such facilities may include such accessory uses as food service, sales of sundries and apparel, and child care services, provided that such accessory uses are clearly incidental to the primary use and are for the use of studio patrons only (i.e., not the general public). No outside signage may be used to advertise accessory uses. 
272.  Studio, tattoo or body piercing: A building or portion of a building used for selling and/or applying tattoos (by injecting dyes/inks into the skin), and/or for piercing the skin with needles, jewelry or other paraphernalia, primarily for the purpose of ornamentation of the human body. 
273.  Studio for radio and television: A building or portion of a building used as a place for radio or television broadcasting. 
274.  Swimming instruction as a home occupation: The teaching of swimming in a private swimming pool. Within a residential district, this use is subject to the approval and issuance of a Conditional Use Permit that may specify operating conditions and standards and which may limit the number of students and operating times. 
275.  Swimming pool, commercial: A swimming pool with accessory facilities which is not part of the municipal or public recreational system and which is not a private swim club, but where the facilities are available for use by the general public for a fee. 
276.  Swimming pool, private: A swimming pool constructed for the exclusive use of the residents of a one-family, two-family or multiple-family dwelling and located, fenced and built in accordance with the City of Denison Code of Ordinances. A private swimming pool shall not be operated as a business nor maintained in a manner to be hazardous or obnoxious to adjacent property owners. 
277.  Telemarketing agency or center: An establishment that solicits business or the purchase of goods and/or services by telephone only. No sales of goods or services to the public occurs at or on the premises. No products are stored at or on the premises. 
278.  Telephone and exchange, switching/relay or transmitting station: A line for the transmission of telephone signals and a central office in which telephone lines are connected to permit communication but not including a business office, storage (inside or outside) or repair yards. 
279.  Temporary: Used or lasting for only a limited period of time; not permanent. 
280.  Temporary building: Any nonresidential prefabricated structure that is not originally manufactured or constructed at its use site, required on-site installation of utilities and/or foundation. 
281.  Temporary field office or construction yard or office: A structure or shelter used in connection with a development or building project for housing on the site of temporary administrative and supervisory functions and for sheltering employees and equipment. Temporary permits for one (1) year for a specific time and location as determined may be issued by the building official and shall be subject to review and renewal for reasonable cause. 
282.  Tennis court, private: A surface designed and constructed for playing the game of tennis along with all fencing, nets and related appurtenances but excluding lighting for nighttime play in residential areas except as may be otherwise provided or restricted by the conditional use permit. 
283.  Reserved. 
284.  Theater or playhouse (indoor): A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of motion pictures, or for dramatic, musical or live performances. 
285.  Tire dealer, no open storage: A retail establishment engaged in the sale and/or installation of tires for vehicles, but without open storage. 
286.  Tire dealer, with open storage: A retail establishment engaged in the sale and/or installation of tires for vehicles, with open storage. 
287.  Tool and machinery rental shop: A building or a portion of a building used for the display and rental of tools, machinery and instruments. 
288.  Tract: A single individual parcel or lot. 
289.  Tractor sales: See heavy machinery sales and storage. 
290.  Trade and commercial schools: See school, commercial trade. 
291.  Trade center: A site with space inside or outside a building or an open space which is rented to two (2) or more vendors on a short-term basis for the sale of merchandise. The principal sales shall include new and used household goods, personal effects, tools, artwork, small household appliances and similar merchandise, objects or equipment in small quantities. 
292.  Trailer park or court: See mobile home park. 
293.  Trailer, hauling: A vehicle or device which is pulled behind an automobile or truck and which is designed for hauling animals, produce, goods or commodities, including boats. 
294.  Trailer home: See manufactured housing, mobile home. 
295.  Trailer or mobile home space: See mobile home space. 
296.  Trailer rental: The display and offering for rent of trailers designed to be towed by automobiles and light load vehicles. 
297.  Trailer, travel or camping: A portable or mobile living unit which is used for temporary human occupancy away from the users' permanent place of residence, which does not constitute the users' principal place of residence, and which is designed to be towed behind another vehicle. 
298.  Transportation and utility structures/facilities: Permanent facilities and structures operated by companies engaged in providing transportation and utility services including but not limited to railroad track rights-of-way, sewage pumping stations, telephone exchanges, transit station turnarounds, water reservoirs and water pumping stations. 
299.  Truck: A light or heavy load vehicle (see definitions for light load vehicle and heavy load vehicle). 
300.  Truck and bus repair: An establishment providing major and minor automotive repair services to heavy load vehicles. 
301.  Truck and bus leasing: The rental of new or used panel trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles or motor-driven buses in operable condition and where no repair work or intensive cleaning operations are performed. 
302.  Truck stop: A facility for the parking, refueling and/or minor repair of heavy load tractor-trailer trucks. These facilities may also include retail sales of food and/or other items, restaurant(s), restroom/showers facilities, and/or temporary sleeping quarters. 
303.  Truck terminal: An area and building where cargo is stored and where trucks, including tractor and trailer units, load and unload cargo on a regular basis. May include facilities for the temporary storage of loads prior to shipment. 
304.  Truck sales (heavy trucks): The display, sale or rental of new or used heavy load vehicles in operable condition. 
305.  Two-family dwelling (duplex): Two (2) attached dwellings in one (1) structure, each designed to be occupied by one (1) family. 
306.  Usable open space: An open area or recreational facility that is designed and intended to be used for outdoor living and/or recreation purposes. An area of usable open space shall have a slope not exceeding ten (10) percent, shall have no dimension of less than ten (10) feet, and may include landscaping, walks, recreational facilities, water features and decorative objects such as art work or fountains. 
307.  Use: The purpose for which land or buildings are or may be occupied in a zoning district. 
308.  Utility distribution/transmission lines: Facilities which serve to distribute and transmit electrical power, gas and water, including but not limited to electrical transmission lines, gas transmission lines, telephone lines and metering stations, whether operated by the city or private utility company. 
309.  Variance: An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of the zoning chapter to a particular parcel of property which, because of special conditions or circumstances of hardship peculiar to the particular parcel, is necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the same vicinity and zoning district. Only the board of adjustment of the City of Denison can grant a variance. 
310.  Veterinarian clinic: An establishment where animals and pets are admitted for examination and medical treatment (also see kennels ). 
311.  City of Denison: The City of Denison, Texas; sometimes referred to as the "city." 
312.  Wrecking yard (junkyard or auto salvage): Any lot upon which two (2) or more motor vehicles of any kind, which are incapable of being operated due to condition or lack of license, have been placed for the purpose of obtaining parts for recycling or resale. 
313.  Yard: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except where otherwise specifically provided in this chapter that the building or structure may be located in a portion of a yard required for a main building. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the shortest horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used (see Illustration 14). 
314.  Yard, front: A yard located in front of the front elevation of a building and extending across a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and the outside wall of the main building (see Illustration 14). 
315.  Yard, rear: The area extending across the rear of a lot measured between the lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the outside wall of the main building. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard (see Illustration 14). 
316.  Yard, side: The area between the building and side line of the lot and extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the outside wall of the side of the main building (see Illustration 14). 
317.  Zero-lot-line dwelling: See patio home. 
318.  Zoning board of adjustment: A board which is appointed by the city council, and which is authorized to make special exceptions to the zoning chapter (i.e., variances), and to hear and decide any appeals that allege error in an order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of the zoning chapter. Also referred to as the "BOA." 
319.  Zoning district: A classification applied to any certain land area within the city stipulating the limitations and requirements of land usage and development. 
320.  Zoning district map: The official map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are drawn and which is an integral part of the zoning chapter (see section 28.3, "Zoning District Map" and section 28.4, "Zoning District Boundaries"). 
321.  Wind energy conversion system (WEC): A wind-driven energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine/rotor (blades), a tower (freestanding, engineered, monopole structure only upon which the wind turbine/generator is mounted-no lattice-type or guyed tower structures allowed), and associated control or conversion electronics, that has a rated capacity of not more than one hundred (100) kW output at any given time, and that is intended for on-site production of electricity in order to reduce consumption of commercial utility power. 
322.  Wind energy conversion system, large (LWEC): A wind energy conversion system that has a rated capacity of more than ten (10) kW, but not more than one hundred (100) kW, output at any given time, and that is intended for on-site production of electricity for a residence, agricultural structure, or business. 
323.  Wind energy conversion system, small (SWEC): A wind energy conversion system that has a rated capacity of not more than ten (10) kW output at any given time, and that is intended for on-site production of electricity for a residence, agricultural structure, or small business. 
324.  Wind energy system tower height: The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower (i.e., to the center of the hub), excluding the wind turbine itself. 
325.  Wind energy turbine/generator: The blades and associated mechanical and electrical conversion components mounted on top of the tower. 
(Ord. No. 4563, § 3A, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 4740, § 2, 4-21-14; Ord. No. 4866, § 3, 5-1-17; Ord. No. 4891, § 3, 8-7-17; Ord. No. 4892, § 3(3.01), 8-7-17; Ord. No. 4893, § 3(3.03), 8-7-17; Ord. No. 4901, § 3(3.04), 9-5-17) 
ARTICLE VII. - PENALTIES AND NONCONFORMITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Formerly, Art. VI (renumbered by Ord. No. 4563, § 3C, adopted June 7, 2010). 

Sec. 28.64. - Effect of interpretation. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, or general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
Sec. 28.65. - Preserving rights in pending litigation and violations under existing ordinances. 
By the passage of this chapter, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless specifically such use falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use. Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this chapter that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty, or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time the existing zoning chapter was repealed and this zoning chapter adopted, shall be discharged or affected by such repeal; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties, or forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending proceeded with in all respects as if such prior ordinance had not been repealed. 
Sec. 28.66. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined any sum not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and each and every day that the provisions of this chapter are violated shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the said penalty provided for, the right is hereby conferred and extended upon any property owner owning property in any district, where such property owner may be affected or invaded, by a violation of the terms of the Ordinance, to bring suit in such court or courts having jurisdiction thereof and obtain such remedies as may be available at law and equity in the protection of the rights of such property owners. 
Sec. 28.67. - Validity. 
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 28.68. - Public meeting. 
It is hereby officially found and determined that the meeting at which this chapter was passed was open to the public as required by law, and that public notice of the time, place, and purpose of said meeting was given all as required by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.041. 
Appendix: A 
ILLUSTRATIONS 

(Ord. No. 4872, Exh. A, 5-1-17) 





(Ord. No. 4872, Exh. A, 5-1-17) 


Illustration #7 




(Ord. No. 4872, Exh. A, 5-1-17) 



Appendix B 
SUMMARY OF ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
SUMMARY OF ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS* 
This is a chart for general comparison purposes only and is incomplete. For complete district requirements, see the body of zoning chapter. 
District Minimum 
Lot Area Minimum 
Dwelling 
Unit Size Minimum 
Lot Width Minimum 
Lot Depth Minimum 
Front Yard Minimum 
Rear Yard Minimum 
Side 
Yard Maximum 
Height of 
Building(s) Maximum 
Lot 
Coverage 
by 
Building(s) A 1 Acre 1,000 S.F. 300' 300' 35' 10' 15' 3 Stories 
45' 15% RD 160,000 S.F. 1,700 S.F. 150' 300' 50' 50' 10' 3 Stories 
45' 10% SF-20 20,000 S.F. 1,250 S.F. 100' 150' 30' 10' 10' 21/2 Stories 
35' 35% SF-10 10,000 S.F. 1,250 S.F. 80' 100' 25' 10' 10' 21/2 Stories 
35' 35% SF-7.5 7,500 S.F. 1,000 S.F. 60' 100' 25' 10' 8' 21/2 Stories 
35' 50% SF-5 5,000 S.F. 650 S.F. 50' 100' 25' 10' 6' 21/2 Stories 
35' 50% SF-PH 5,000 S.F. 650 S.F. 40' 100' 25' 10' 10' 21/2 Stories 
35' 70% SF-TH 5,000 S.F. 1,000 S.F. 40' 110' 25' 10' 25' 21/2 Stories 
35' 50% LD See 
Ordinance See 
Ordinance See 
Ordinance See 
Ordinance See 
Ordinance See 
Ordinance See 
Ordinance See 
Ordinance See 
Ordinance UD 43,560 S.F. 1,600 S.F. 100' 300' 50' 50' 10' 21/2 Stories 
35' 10% 2F 15,000 S.F. 7,500 S.F. 100' 120' 25' 10' 10' 21/2 Stories 
35' 50% MF-1 7,500 S.F. 1,500 60' 100' 25' 10' 5' 3 Stories 
45' 50% MF-2 7,500 S.F. 1,500 60' 100' 25' 10' 5' 3 Stories 
45' 50% MH 5,000 S.F. 400 S.F. 35' 80' 25' 10' 10' 21/2 Stories 
35' 40% O 6,000 S.F. 450 S.F. 60' 100' 25' 10' 25' 3 Stories 40% NS 6,000 S.F. 100' 100' 15' 10' 2 Stories 
35' 40% LR None 200' None 15' 10' 10% 2 Stories 
35' 60% CR None 150' 300' 15' 10' 10% 3 Stories 
50' 60% RR None 150' 150' 25' 10' 10% 8 Stories 60% C None 100' 100' 25' 10' 10' 8 Stories 70% CA None 25' 125' None None None None 100% BP 20,000 S.F. 100' 150' 40' 20' 20' 2 Stories 35' 50% LI None None None 25' 0' 0' 6 Stories None Specified HI None None None 25' 0' 0' None Specified None Specified  
*See text of the chapter for additional or supplemental requirements. 
Appendix C 
RECOMMENDED PLANT LIST 
RECOMMENDED PLANT LIST 
Large Trees 
(Canopy & Shade Trees) 
(within parking areas 
or as street trees) Large Trees 
(Canopy & Shade Trees) 
(nonvehicular areas) Small Trees Pecan Bur Oak Red Oak Chinese Pistache Texas Persimmon Aristocrat Pear Chinquapin Oak Western Soapberry Crape Myrtle Live Oak Vasey Oak Red Oak Mexican Plum Shumard Oak Yaupon Holly Lacey Oak Golden Raintree Cedar Elm Southern Wax Myrtle Texas Ash Redbud White Ash Japanese Black Pine Bald Cypress Rusty 'Blackhaw' Viburnum Shining Sumac Laurel Oak Possumhaw Holly Carolina Buckthorn Mexican Buckeye Eve's Necklace  
  
Evergreen Shrubs 
(Acceptable for low 
[5' or less] screening) Evergreen Shrubs 
(Acceptable as noted 
for 6' screening) Other Shrubs Dwarf Abelia Red Tip Photinia Possumhaw Holly Dwarf Yaupon Holly Cleyera Chinese Holly Dwarf Burford Holly Nellie R. Stevens Holly Juniper Japanese Boxwood Waxleaf Ligustrum Sumac Eleagnus Chinese Photinia Fragrant Mimosa 'Berries Jubilee' Holly Abelia American Beauty Berry Carissa Holly Burford Holly Barberry 'Dazzler' Holly 'Mary Nell' Holly Autumn Sage Nandina Evergreen Sumac Ornamental Grasses  
Ground Cover Notes: # Plants in italics are preferred due to their lower water demand as designated in "Landscape Water Conservation.... Xeriscape" published by the Texas Agricultural Extension Service. Asian Jasmine Honeysuckle English Ivy Liriope Monkey Grass Vinca (Periwinkle) # Additional plant material may be approved as appropriate. Trailing Juniper Hardy Plumbago  
(Ord. No. 4563, § 3B, 6-7-10) 
Chapter 29 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4564, §§ 2, 3, adopted June 7, 2010, amended Ch. 29 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 29, §§ 29-1-29-23, pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 3386, § I, adopted June 7, 1993 and Ord. No. 3419, § 1, adopted October 4, 1993. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; food and food establishments, Ch. 9; zoning Ch. 28. 

Sec. 29-1. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform licensing regulations to ensure sexually oriented businesses are operated by persons and in a manner that prevents casual high-risk sexual activity, prostitution, drug use, other criminal activity, or logistical difficulties and risks of physical endangerment to police officers responsible for policing such businesses. 
(b)  Intent. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access to sexually oriented entertainment. 
(Ord. No. 4564, § 2, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 29-2. - Findings. 
    The facts and other matters set forth in the "Whereas" clauses that form the preamble to this ordinance are hereby adopted as findings of fact in support of the legislative action of the City of Denison in adopting this new chapter 29 sexually oriented business licensing ordinance to the City of Denison's Code of Ordinances. Upon adoption of this ordinance, the matters set forth in the "Whereas" clauses shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference to the adopting resolution. 
(Ord. No. 4564, § 2, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 29-3. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows: 
(1)  Applicant: Any person, including any spouse of an individual owner, or any other entity required to submit any documentation and/or receive any approvals for operating sexually oriented business or working within a sexually oriented business within the City of Denison. 
(2)  Bath house, sexually oriented: An enterprise where a portion of its business is offering baths and/or showers with other persons present who are nude or displaying specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  Body painting studio, sexually oriented: An establishment where a portion of its business is the application of paint or other substance to or on the human body by any means of application, technique or process when the subject's body displays for the patron's view specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  Business, sexually oriented: Any of the following businesses: sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub; sexually oriented entertainment; sexually oriented motion picture theater; sexually oriented video viewing arcade; sexually oriented encounter center; sexually oriented media store; sexually oriented bathhouse; sexually oriented massage business; sexually oriented retail establishment; sexually oriented body painting studio; sexually oriented lingerie or swimwear modeling studio; sexually oriented modeling/photography studio; sexually oriented escort business; or any other such business establishment whose purpose is offering sexually oriented entertainment, media or merchandise, but not including "media store, other" or retail store, other" as defined in the ordinance. Each such business is considered a separate land use for purposes of these regulations. 
(5)  Business license, sexually oriented: Any license applied for under the sexually oriented business licensing ordinance establishing licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses. 
(6)  Cabaret or nightclub, sexually oriented: A building or portion of a building which provides or allows the provision of live sexually oriented entertainment to its customers or which holds itself out to the public as an establishment where sexually oriented entertainment is available, but such definition shall not include any sexually oriented use prohibited by this section. Signs, advertisements or an establishment name including verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult entertainment," "strippers," "showgirls," "exotic dancers," "gentleman's club," "XXX" or similar terms, shall be considered evidence that the establishment holds itself out to the public as a sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. 
(7)  Chief of police: The Chief of Police for the City of Denison, Texas, or a designated agent. 
(8)  Child care facility: A facility licensed by the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services providing supervision for children thirteen (13) years of age or younger or for any individual who is deemed mentally challenged. 
(9)  Customer: A person who: 
a.  Enters a business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; or 
b.  Enters a business and purchases, rents, or otherwise partakes of any material, merchandise, goods, entertainment, or other services offered therein; or 
c.  Enters a business other than as an employee, vendor, service person, or delivery person. 
(10)  Director of planning: This is the Planning and Zoning Director of the City of Denison, Texas, or a designated agent. 
(11)  Display publicly: The act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item or activity in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision from a street, highway, or public sidewalk, or from the property of others or from any portion of the premises where items and materials other than sexually oriented media or merchandise are offered for sale or rent to the public. 
(12)  Educational facility: A public or private kindergarten, primary, secondary and postsecondary educational facilities offering instruction in the branches of learning and study required to be taught by the Texas Education Agency; and such federally-funded educational programs for preschool children as the Head Start Program. 
(13)  Employee: Any person who renders any service whatsoever for or to the customers of an establishment subject to this chapter or who works in or about an establishment subject to this chapter. 
(14)  Encounter center, sexually oriented: A business or enterprise that offers physical contact between two or more persons when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, for the purpose of engaging in specified sexually activity or touching specified anatomical areas, but not including a sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. 
(15)  Entertainer, sexually oriented: Any person paid by some form of remuneration to provide entertainment to customers at a sexually oriented business; entertainment may consist of dancing, singing, modeling, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers whereby the entertainer is paid any form of remuneration directly or indirectly for such conversations. 
(16)  Entertainment, sexually oriented: Any of the following activities, when performed by a sexually oriented entertainer at a sexually oriented business: dancing, singing, talking, touching, modeling (including lingerie or photographic), gymnastics, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers. 
(17)  Escort, sexually oriented: A person who offers to provide, for some form of remuneration, acts of sexually oriented entertainment, companionship or conduct to a client. 
(18)  Escort business, sexually oriented: A business or person that advertises or solicits in any way to prospective clients for the provision of sexually oriented escorts that will provide sexually oriented entertainment, companionship or conduct or employs or contracts with a sexually oriented escort, or refers or provides to a client a sexually oriented escort. 
(19)  Floor area, gross: The total area of the building accessible or visible to a person, including showrooms, theaters including stage area, service areas (but not including restrooms), behind-counter areas, areas used for storage of sexually oriented media or merchandise, and aisles, hallways, and entryways serving such areas. 
(20)  Frequently: Two (2) or more times per month. 
(21)  Library, public: A publicly-owned facility in which literary and artistic materials, such as books, periodicals, newspapers, pamphlets, prints, records, and tapes, are kept for reading, reference, or lending. 
(22)  Licensee: Anyone issued a license under this chapter. 
(23)  Lingerie or swimwear modeling studio, sexually oriented: An establishment or business that provides the services of live models modeling lingerie, bathing suits, or similar wear to individuals, couples, or small groups in a space smaller than one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
(24)  Manager: Any person designated by the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to be responsible for the operation of such business at a particular location at a particular time; when the owner, proprietor, or other principal in the business is present, such person may be considered the manager. 
(25)  Massage: The act of touching, stroking, kneading, stretching, friction, percussion, and vibration, and includes holding, positioning, causing movement of the soft tissues and applying manual touch and pressure to the body. 
(26)  Massage business, sexually oriented: Any business in which massages are offered as one of the business's services by a person who is not licensed as a massage therapist under the Texas State Statutes, Title 3, Chapter 455: Massage Therapy. 
(27)  Massage therapy: The profession in which a massage therapist licensed under the Texas State Statutes, Title 3, Chapter 455: Massage Therapy, applies massage techniques with the intent of positively affecting the health and well being of the client. 
(28)  Massage therapist: A person licensed as a massage therapist in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Department of State Health Services in accordance with the Texas State Statutes, Title 3, Chapter 455: Massage Therapy. 
(29)  Media: Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that is or may be used as a means of communication. Media includes but shall not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers, magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, CD-ROMS, DVDs, other magnetic media, and undeveloped pictures. 
(30)  Media, sexually oriented: Media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(31)  Media store, other (some sexually oriented media): A store with sexually oriented media for sale or rent with no on-premises viewing of or listening to sexually oriented media; which does not advertise or hold itself out in any forum as a "XXX," "adult" or "sexually oriented" media business; and to which any of the following applies: 
a.  Sexually oriented media constitutes more than ten (10) percent but less than forty (40) percent of the stock in trade; or 
b.  Sexually oriented media constitutes more than ten (10) percent but less than forty (40) percent of the gross floor area (display, storage and aisles); or 
c.  Sexually oriented media constitutes more than ten (10) percent but less than forty (40) percent of the value of media in inventory, disregarding for this purpose any high-value media that by type of product, character or price are inconsistent with the general media offered by the store. 
(32)  Media store, sexually oriented: A store with sexually oriented media for sale or rent with no on-premises viewing of or listening to sexually oriented media, and to which any of the following applies: 
a.  Sexually oriented media constitutes forty (40) percent or more of the stock in trade; or 
b.  Sexually oriented media constitutes forty (40) percent or more of the gross floor area (display, storage and aisles); or 
c.  Sexually oriented media constitutes forty (40) percent or more of the value of media in inventory, disregarding for this purpose any high-value media that by type of product, character or price are inconsistent with the general media offered by the store; or 
d.  It advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a "XXX," "adult" or "sexually oriented" media business. 
(33)  Merchandise, sexually oriented: This term includes any of the following categories of merchandise: lingerie presented in combination with other merchandise contained within this definition; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; and sexually oriented novelties. Sexually oriented media is merchandise that is separately defined for the purpose of this section. 
(34)  Modeling/photography studio, sexually oriented: Any place where a person who appears nude or semi-nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity and is to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. Such studio shall not include one with a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university that offers educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. 
(35)  Motel, sexually oriented: A hotel, motel, or similar commercial lodging establishment that: 
a.  Provides as its business accommodations to the public for any form of consideration for the purpose of viewing sexually oriented media or sexually oriented entertainment. This definition does not include lodging facilities that offer sexually oriented media via cable or satellite services on room televisions as ancillary television programming; or 
b.  Is marketed as or offered as "adult," "XXX," "couples," or "sexually oriented" lodging facility; or 
c.  Offers a sleeping room for a period of less than ten (10) hours or allows a tenant or occupant to rent the room for a period of time of less than ten (10) hours. 
(36)  Motion picture theater, sexually oriented: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, sexually oriented media are frequently shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or that is marketed as or offered as "adult," "XXX," or sexually oriented. Frequently shown media as characterized herein do not include sexually oriented speech and expressions that take place inside the context of some larger form of expression. This definition does not include any type of facility that would meet the definition of a sexually oriented video viewing arcade or booth. 
(37)  Novelties, sexually oriented: Instruments, devices, toys, or paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or female breasts or designed or marketed primarily for use in sexually oriented stimulation of specified anatomical areas. 
(38)  Nudity or state of nudity: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. See, also, Semi-nude. 
(39)  Operates: To cause to function, maintain or create or to put or keep in operation a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
(40)  Operator: See Manager. 
(41)  Owner: The individual owner of an establishment, or if the legal owner is a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company, the term shall include all general partners, any limited partner with a financial interest of ten (10) percent or more, all corporate officers and directors, and any shareholder or member with a financial interest of ten (10) percent or more. "Owner" includes the spouse(s) of any of the above persons. 
(42)  Person: An individual, licensee, operating owner, manager, sexually oriented entertainer, firm, partnership, joint-venture, association, independent contractor, corporation (domestic or foreign), limited liability company, trust, estate, assignee, receiver or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
(43)  Premises: The physical location at which a business is located; as used in this section, the term shall include all parts of that physical location, both interior and exterior, which are under the control of the subject business, through ownership, lease or other arrangement. 
(44)  Protected land use: A child care facility, educational facility, public library, public recreational facility, or religious facility. 
(45)  Protected zoning district: Any of the following zoning districts established under this zoning ordinance: "urban development district;" "one-family, two-family, or multiple-family residential district;" "manufactured home district;" "lakeside development district;" "planned development overlay district" within the area designated as residential on the approved concept plan; and "historic overlay district." 
(46)  Public area: A portion of a sexually oriented business that is accessible to the customer, excluding restrooms, while the business is open for business. 
(47)  Recreational facility, public: A permanent facility devoted to public recreational purposes such as parks, play fields, or community recreation buildings. 
(48)  Religious facility: A permanent facility exclusively used on a regular basis for religious assembly such as customarily occurs in a synagogue, temple, mosque, or church or convent or monastery. 
(49)  Retail store, other (some sexually oriented merchandise): A store selling or renting one or more categories of sexually oriented merchandise, or a combination of sexually oriented merchandise or sexually oriented media, with no on premises viewing of or listening to sexually oriented media; which does not advertise or hold itself out in any forum as a "XXX," "adult" or "sexually oriented" merchandise business; and to which any of the following applies: 
a.  Any combination of two or more of the following categories of merchandise: lingerie; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; sexually oriented novelties; or sexually oriented media; where such combination constitutes more than ten (10) percent but less than forty (40) of the stock in trade, gross floor area (display, storage and aisles), or the value of the inventory; or 
b.  Sexually oriented merchandise constitutes more than ten (10) percent but less than forty (40) percent of the stock in trade; or 
c.  Sexually oriented merchandise constitutes more than ten (10) percent but less than forty (40) percent of the gross floor area (display, storage and aisles); or 
d.  Sexually oriented merchandise constitutes more than ten (10) percent but less than forty (40) percent of the value of merchandise in inventory, disregarding for this purpose any high-value items that by type of product, character or price are inconsistent with the general merchandise offered by the establishment; or 
e.  The combination of sexually oriented merchandise or sexually oriented media sold or rented on the premises meets the criteria in subsections b, c or d. 
(50)  Retail store, sexually oriented: A store with sexually oriented media and merchandise for sale or rent with no on premises viewing of or listening to sexually oriented video in which: 
a.  Any combination of two (2) or more of the following categories of merchandise: lingerie; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; sexually oriented novelties; or sexually oriented media; where such combination constitutes forty (40) percent or more of the stock in trade, gross floor area (display, storage and aisles), or the value of the inventory; or 
b.  Sexually oriented media and merchandise constitutes forty (40) percent or more of the stock in trade; or 
c.  Sexually oriented media and merchandise constitutes forty (40) percent or more of the gross floor area (display, storage and aisles); or 
d.  Sexually oriented media and merchandise constitutes forty (40) percent or more of the value of the inventory, disregarding for this purpose any high-value inventory item that by type of product, character or price are inconsistent with the general type offered by the store; or 
e.  It advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a "XXX," "adult" or "sexually oriented" merchandise business. 
(51)  Sadomasochistic practices: Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked. 
(52)  Semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity: The showing of the female areola or nipple with less than fully opaque covering. Showing of any other part of the anatomy defined under nude or state of nudity shall constitute being nude or in a state of nudity. 
(53)  Simulated nudity: A state of dress in which any device or covering, exposed to view, is worn that simulates any part of the genitals, pubic region, or areola of the female breast. 
(54)  Specified anatomical areas: Areas that include: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft or the human female areola or nipple; or 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(55)  Specified criminal act: Any of the following offenses as defined by the Texas Penal Code enumerated below or any other state or federal laws addressing similar or related offenses below: 
a.  Chapter 21 sexual offenses: 
(i)  Public lewdness 
(ii)  Indecent exposure 
(iii)  Indecency with a child 
(iv)  Improper photography or visual recording 
b.  Chapter 22 assaultive offenses: 
(i)  Sexual assault 
(ii)  Aggravated sexual assault 
c.  Chapter 25 offenses against the family: 
(i)  Prohibited sexual conduct 
d.  Chapter 43 public indecency: 
(i)  Prostitution; 
(ii)  Promotion of prostitution; 
(iii)  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
(iv)  Compelling prostitution; 
(v)  Obscenity; 
(vi)  Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to minor; 
(vii)  Sexual performance by a child; 
(viii)  Possession of child pornography; 
e.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the above offenses. 
(56)  Specified sexual activities: Sex acts normal or perverted, actual or simulated, of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy. These activities include, but are not limited to the following: bestiality, erotic or sexual stimulation with objects or mechanical devices, acts of human analingus, cunnilingus, fellatio, flagellation, masturbation, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, or any excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth above with any person on the premises. This definition shall include apparent sexual stimulation of another person's genitals whether clothed or unclothed. 
(57)  Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business: This means and includes any of the following: 
a.  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; or 
b.  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
c.  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of the law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(58)  Video, sexually oriented: This definition is used to refer to any motion pictures, movies, films, videotapes, CD-ROMS, DVDs, computer images, slides, sound recordings, other magnetic media or electrical or electronic reproductions of anything that is or may be used as a means of communication that is distinguished or characterized by it emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(59)  Video viewing arcade, sexually oriented: A building or any portion of a building wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any other form of consideration, electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(60)  Video viewing arcade booth, sexually oriented: Any booth, cubicle, stall, or compartment that is designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat customers and is used for presenting videos or viewing publications by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other means or medium (including, but not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, CD-ROMs, books, DVDs, magazines or periodicals) to show images of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by customers therein. The term "booth," "arcade booth," "preview booth," and "video arcade booth" shall be synonymous with the term "motion picture arcade booth." 
(Ord. No. 4564, § 2, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 29-4. - License required. 
(a)  A license for a sexually oriented business shall be required for the following sexually oriented business uses, or conversion of an existing business to one which is a sexually oriented business: 
(1)  Sexually oriented media store (does not include media store, other). 
(2)  Sexually oriented retail store (does not include retail store, other). 
(3)  Sexually oriented motion picture theatre. 
(4)  Sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. 
(b)  No other type of sexually oriented business shall be granted a license to operate within the City of Denison. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person to establish or operate a sexually oriented business 
(1)  Without having obtained a sexually oriented business license under the provisions of this Chapter; or 
(2)  During such time as a sexually oriented business license has expired or has been suspended or revoked; or 
(3)  In violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to manager or provide entertainment within a sexually oriented business 
(1)  Without having obtained a sexually oriented business manager or entertainer license as provided under this chapter; or 
(2)  During such time as a sexually oriented business manager or entertainer license has expired or has been suspended or revoked; or 
(3)  In violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any work, service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an unlicensed sexually oriented business. 
(f)  It shall be prima facie evidence that a sexually oriented business has not obtained a sexually oriented business license if such business fails to post the license in the manner required herein. 
(g)  It shall be prima facie evidence that any person who performs any business, service or entertainment in a sexually oriented business had knowledge that such business was not licensed if the sexually oriented business license is not posted in the manner required herein. 
(h)  A license issued under this chapter shall be issued for only one sexually oriented use or position and to only the person listed on the application. Any change in the type of sexually oriented business use or position shall invalidate the license and require the licensee to obtain a new license for the change in use or position. 
(Ord. No. 4564, § 2, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 29-5. - License application fees. 
(a)  The following are the approved license application fees for licenses required under this chapter: 
(1)  The application fee for a new sexually oriented business license shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00); 
(2)  The application fee for renewal of a sexually oriented business license shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00); 
(3)  The application fee for an new manager or entertainer license shall be one hundred fifty dolalrs ($150.00); and 
(4)  The application fee for renewal of a manager or entertainer license shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(b)  No application shall be processed without the required application fee paid in full at the time of application submission. 
(Ord. No. 4564, § 2, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 29-6. - Posting of property. 
    An application for a sexually oriented business license issued for a location not previously licensed shall, not later than the sixtieth day before the date the application is filed, prominently post an outdoor sign at the location stating that a sexually oriented business is intended to be located on the premises and providing the name and business address of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 4564, § 2, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 29-7. - Issuance of a sexually oriented business license. 
(a)  All applications for a sexually oriented business license shall be made with the City of Denison's Police Department. 
(b)  All completed applications for a sexually oriented business license shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Evidence that the sexually oriented business location has received approval of the pre-submission application required under section 28.62.7 of the zoning ordinance, including any requests for an exemption to separation requirements filed pursuant to section 28.62.8 of the zoning ordinance; no application shall be accepted by the police department until such approval has been received; 
(2)  A diagram of the business's interior premises configuration, noting specific use of each space, square footages, walls or partitions, and total floor area of the building, drawn to a measurable scale of one (1) inch equals four (4) feet with all dimensions notated; 
(3)  A copy of the approved site plan required by section 28.13 of the zoning ordinance; 
(4)  The name of the sexually oriented business and identification of the type of sexually oriented business proposed (sexually oriented media store, sexually oriented retail store, sexually oriented motion picture theatre, or sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub); 
(5)  If the property owner is other than the applicant, the name of the property owner and a statement signed by the property owner stating that applicant has entered into a contract to acquire, lease or otherwise control the site or structure for use as a sexually oriented business; 
(6)  The applicant's name, any aliases, mailing address for receipt of notices, home address, home and office telephone numbers, occupation, date and place of birth and social security number, and tax identification number; all information required of the applicant shall also be required of the applicant's spouse; 
(7)  If the applicant is an entity other than an individual, each individual who has a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the entity proposing to own and/or operate the business must provide the same information as the individual applicant and sign the license application as an applicant; and 
(8)  A statement signed under oath by the applicant and the applicant's spouse that the applicant and applicant's spouse have personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct; that the applicant and spouse grant permission to the city to perform any necessary background checks on persons or businesses listed on the application; and that the applicant and spouse have read all provisions of the Denison Code of Ordinances regulating sexually oriented businesses. 
(c)  The chief of police shall approve and issue the sexually oriented business license required hereunder to an applicant within forty-five (45) calendar days after receipt of a complete application unless the chief of police finds one (1) or more of the following to be true, in which case the application shall be denied: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide information required for issuance of the license or gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application form; 
(2)  The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; all applicants shall provide documentation issued by a state or federal agency bearing the applicants' date of birth and photographs as proof that the applicant is not under the age of eighteen (18); 
(3)  The applicant or spouse has been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or received an order for deferred adjudication of, any felony within the past five (5) years or any misdemeanor within the past three (3) years where such felony or misdemeanor violation constitutes a specified criminal act as defined by this chapter; the fact that the applicant or spouse has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application; 
(4)  The applicant or spouse has been convicted of an offense under this chapter or its predecessor within the past three (3) years; 
(5)  The applicant or spouse has had a sexually oriented business license, or comparable license, of any type revoked within the past five (5) years or one suspended within the past three (3) years, immediately preceding the date of application; the fact that the applicant or spouse has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application; 
(6)  The applicant or spouse has held, within the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application, an ownership, operational or a managerial position, at a sexually oriented business that has demonstrated an inability to operate in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; 
(7)  The applicant or spouse owes delinquent city taxes or assessments or other financial obligations to the city and no arrangements satisfactory to the city manager have been made for the payment of such debts or obligations; 
(8)  The applicant's business premises does not comply with or meet the requirements of the applicable governmental licensing, zoning, building, fire, health and property maintenance ordinances or codes, provided, that upon a showing that the premises meets said requirements and that the applicant is otherwise qualified, the application shall be eligible for reconsideration; or 
(9)  The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid. 
(d)  Application processing-Sexually oriented business license. 
(1)  Within five (5) working days of receipt, the chief of police shall notify the applicant whether or not the application for the sexually oriented business license is determined complete. In the event the application is determined incomplete, the notification to the applicant shall include a written explanation of the reason(s) why the application is incomplete. 
(2)  Failure to provide information and documentation required on the application for a sexually oriented business license shall constitute an incomplete application and shall not be processed. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a complete application, the chief of police shall immediately transmit a copy of the application to the director of planning, fire chief, and chief building official. Not later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date the application is determined to be complete, the police department, the planning and zoning department, fire department, and building department shall report the results of their investigation to the chief of police. The reports shall include the following: 
a.  It shall be the duty of the police department to perform background checks on the applicant(s) for the sexually oriented business license to determine whether the information contained in the application is true and correct and whether or not the applicant(s) complies with the criteria for holding a sexually oriented business license; 
b.  It shall be the duty of the fire department to determine whether the structure identified in the application for the sexually oriented business meets the standards of the applicable fire code; 
c.  It shall be the duty of the building department to determine whether the structure identified in the application for the sexually oriented business meets the building code, and exterior and interior building standards required for sexually oriented business by this chapter and section 28.62 of the zoning ordinance; and 
d.  It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning department to determine whether the application meets the land use requirements of section 28.62 of the zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Within forty-five (45) calendar days from the date the application is determined to be complete, the chief of police shall approve or disapprove the application. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the chief of police's decision within five (5) working days thereof. 
(5)  If the chief of police is unable to act on the license application within the required time period following a determination of completeness, he shall notify the applicant in writing and issue a provisional license, which shall expire following approval of the application or denial of the application and final disposition of the appeal proceedings as provided in section 29-12. The provisions of this chapter shall fully apply to a provisional license. 
(e)  Site plan approval. The issuance of the license shall be subject to approval of any pending decision on a site plan required by section 28.13 of the zoning ordinance or any appeal taken from such decision, in accordance with the review deadlines under section 28.62.7.C of the zoning ordinance. 
(f)  Information on license. The approved sexually oriented business license shall include the license number, name of the license holder, the date of issuance and expiration, the address of the sexually oriented business, and a statement that the license is not transferrable. 
(g)  Posting. The approved sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the sexually oriented business's entrance so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Ord. No. 4564, § 2, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 29-8. - Issuance of a manager or entertainer license. 
(a)  All applications for a manager or entertainer license related to a sexually oriented business shall be made with the City of Denison's Police Department. 
(b)  No application for a manager or an entertainer license shall be accepted by the police department prior to licensing of the sexually oriented business for which the manager or entertainer license is applicable. 
(c)  All completed applications for a manager or entertainer license related to a sexually oriented business shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, any aliases, mailing address for receipt of notices, home address, home and office telephone numbers, occupation, date and place of birth and social security number, and tax identification number; 
(2)  The name and address of each sexually oriented business where the applicant intends to work and a valid copy of the current sexually oriented business license for each of the sexually oriented businesses in which the manager or entertainer proposes to work or perform; and 
(3)  A statement signed under oath by the applicant that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct; that the applicant grants permission to the city to perform any necessary background checks on the applicant; and that the applicant has read all provisions of the Denison Code of Ordinances regulating sexually oriented businesses. 
(d)  The chief of police shall approve and issue the manager or entertainer license required hereunder to an applicant within forty-five (45) calendar days after receipt of a complete application unless the chief of police finds one (1) or more of the following to be true, in which case the application shall be denied: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide information required for issuance of the license or gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application form; 
(2)  The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; all applicants shall provide documentation issued by a state or federal agency bearing the applicants' date of birth and photographs as proof that the applicant is not under the age of eighteen (18); 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or received an order for deferred adjudication of, any felony within the past five (5) years or any misdemeanor within the past three (3) years where such felony or misdemeanor violation constitutes a specified criminal act as defined by this Chapter; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant; 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of an offense under this Chapter or its predecessor within the past three (3) years; 
(5)  The applicant has had a sexually oriented manager or entertainer license, or comparable license, of any type revoked within the past five (5) years or one suspended within the past three (3) years, immediately preceding the date of application; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant; 
(6)  The applicant has held, within the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application, an ownership, operational or a managerial position, at a sexually oriented business that has demonstrated an inability to operate in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; 
(7)  The applicant owes delinquent city taxes or assessments or other financial obligations to the city and no arrangements satisfactory to the city manager have been made for the payment of such debts or obligations; or 
(8)  The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid. 
(e)  Application processing-Manager or entertainer license. 
(1)  Within five (5) working days of receipt, the chief of police shall notify the applicant whether or not the application for the manager or entertainer license related to a sexually oriented business is determined complete. In the event the application is determined incomplete, the notification to the applicant shall include a written explanation of the reason(s) why the application is incomplete. 
(2)  Failure to provide information and documentation required on the application for manager or entertainer license shall constitute an incomplete application and shall not be processed. 
(3)  Within forty-five (45) calendar days from the date the application is determined to be complete, the chief of police shall approve or disapprove the application for a manager or entertainer license. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the chief of police's decision within a time period of five (5) working days thereof. 
(4)  If the chief of police is unable to act on the license application within the required time period following a determination of completeness, he shall notify the applicant in writing and issue a provisional license, which shall expire following approval of the application or denial of the application and final disposition of the appeal proceedings as provided in section 29-12. The provisions of this chapter shall fully apply to a provisional license. 
(f)  Information on license. The approved manager and entertainer licenses shall include the license number, name of the license holder, including any stage name, licensee's photograph, the date of issuance and expiration, the address(s) of the sexually oriented business(es) where such license is applicable, and a statement that the license is not transferrable. 
(g)  Posting. A valid copy of the manager's license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business when that manager is on duty. A valid copy of the entertainer's license shall not be posted but shall be available onsite within the office of the sexually oriented business for inspection at any time. 
(Ord. No. 4564, § 2, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 29-9. - License terms and renewal. 
(a)  License terms and expiration. 
(1)  All licenses issued under this chapter shall be issued for a period of one (1) year and are required to be renewed annually. 
(2)  No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable to another person or entity. 
(3)  All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on the last day of the calendar month during which the licenses were issued or renewed during the previous year. 
(b)  License renewal. 
(1)  All applications for license renewal shall be submitted to the police department no earlier than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the date of expiration. 
(2)  A license that is expired by more than thirty (30) calendar days shall be subject to the same license review procedures and criteria required of any applicant applying for a new license. 
(3)  If an application for renewal of a license has been submitted and accepted as complete by the police department, the licensee may operate under the existing license until issuance of a renewed license. 
(4)  The chief of police shall approve the license renewal within thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of a complete renewal application unless the chief of police finds one (1) or more of the following to be true (also applicable to the applicant's spouse if a renewal for a sexually oriented business license), in which case the application shall be denied: 
a.  The applicant has failed to provide information required for renewal of the license or gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application form; 
b.  During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant has been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or received an order for deferred adjudication of, any felony or misdemeanor violation that constitutes a specified criminal act as defined by this chapter; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application; 
c.  During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant has been convicted of an offense under this chapter; 
d.  During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant had a sexually oriented business license, or comparable license, of any type revoked; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application; 
e.  During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant has held an ownership, operational or a managerial position, at a sexually oriented business that has demonstrated an inability to operate in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; 
f.  The applicant owes delinquent city taxes or assessments or other financial obligations to the city and no arrangements satisfactory to the city manager have been made for the payment of such debts or obligations; 
g.  The applicant's business premises does not comply with or meet the requirements of the applicable governmental licensing, zoning, building, fire, health and property maintenance ordinances or codes, provided, that upon a showing that the premises meets said requirements and that the applicant is otherwise qualified, the application shall be eligible for reconsideration; or 
h.  The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid. 
(5)  Application processing of license renewal. 
a.  Within five (5) working days of receipt, the chief of police shall notify the applicant whether or not the license renewal application is determined complete. In the event the application is determined incomplete, the notification to the applicant shall include a written explanation of the reason(s) why the application is incomplete. 
b.  Failure to provide information and documentation required on the application shall constitute an incomplete application and shall not be processed. 
c.  Within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the application is determined to be complete, the chief of police shall approve or disapprove the application for renewal of the license. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the chief of police's decision within a time period of five (5) working days thereof. 
(6)  If the chief of police is unable to act on the license application within the required time period following a determination of completeness, he shall notify the applicant in writing and issue a provisional license, which shall expire following approval of the application or denial of the application and final disposition of the appeal proceedings as provided in section 29-12. The provisions of this chapter shall fully apply to a provisional license. 
(7)  Information on license. The renewed licenses shall contain the same information required to be shown on the original license. 
(Ord. No. 4564, § 2, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 29-10. - License suspension. 
(a)  The chief of police shall suspend a license issued under this chapter for the following reasons: 
(1)  Licensee operated the sexually oriented business or performed sexually oriented entertainment in a location not approved for such activity; 
(2)  Licensee violated any requirement of the zoning ordinance related to the regulation of sexually oriented businesses; 
(3)  Licensee refused city or other governmental agency access to the premises; 
(4)  Licensee transferred a license issued under this chapter to another person or entity; 
(5)  Licensee allowed a person under the age of eighteen (18) years in or on the premises; 
(6)  Licensee allowed a person to appear in a state of semi-nudity or nudity or in a state of simulated nudity on the premises; 
(7)  Licensee reconfigured the interior of the premises without approval from the city; 
(8)  Licensee operated the business without a licensed manager on duty during the time the business was opened to the public; 
(9)  Licensee was delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business; 
(10)  Licensee demonstrated an inability to operate or manage the business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; or 
(11)  Licensee violated any of the "standards of conduct and operation" under section 29-14. 
(b)  The chief of police may suspend a license issued under this chapter for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(c)  A licensee subject to suspension shall have the right to appeal the suspension under the procedures provided in section 29-12. 
(Ord. No. 4564, § 2, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 29-11. - License revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a license issued under this chapter for the following reasons: 
(1)  The licensee's license has been suspended more than twice during a twelve-month period; 
(2)  The licensed business was operated during a period of time when the license was suspended; 
(3)  A licensee omitted or gave false or misleading information on the license application, including, previous license revocation or suspensions, or convictions or deferred adjudication for misdemeanors and felonies constituting a specified criminal act; the fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license; 
(4)  A licensee has been convicted of, or received an order for deferred adjudication, for a felony or misdemeanor constituting a specified criminal act; 
(5)  A licensee or an employee has allowed possession, use, or sale of a controlled substance on the premises; 
(6)  A licensee or an employee has allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in Section 21.01, Texas Penal Code; or 
(8)  On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person or persons committed specified criminal act in or on the licensee's premises; or 
(b)  The chief of police shall revoke a license issued under this chapter for a period of one (1) year. 
(c)  A licensee subject to revocation shall have the right to appeal the revocation under the procedures provided in section 29-12. 
(d)  A licensee that has had a license revoked shall be subject to the same license criteria required of any applicant applying for a new license. 
(Ord. No. 4564, § 2, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 29-12. - Appeal of license denial, suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Appeal. The applicant may appeal an unfavorable decision of the chief of police by filing a written petition with the city clerk requesting a hearing on the denial, suspension, or revocation of the license within ten (10) calendar days of the date the applicant receives notification of the chief of police's decision. The city council shall serve as the appeals board. The appeal shall be scheduled within twenty (20) calendar days of the date the petition is received in the office of the city clerk. The city clerk shall give written notice to the applicant of the time and place for the hearing on the applicant's appeal at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the scheduled date of hearing. 
(b)  Provisional license. During the appeal of a license denial, suspension, or revocation, the applicant shall be permitted to operate with a provisional license until the final disposition of the appeal proceedings before the city council. The provisions of this chapter shall fully apply to a provisional license. 
(c)  Deferring action on proceedings. If the applicant has filed an appeal with the zoning board of adjustment and appeals, to contest the decision of the director of planning regarding any standard governing a sexually oriented business, or a variance request by the applicant is pending before the board, the city council may defer action on the license application pending resolution of the appeal or variance request by the board, but shall take up the matter at the first regular meeting of the city council following the board's decision. 
(d)  Decision. The city council shall issue a decision with findings within ten (10) calendar days after any hearing held in accordance with this section. The decision on appeal shall be governed by the same standards as that for the original decision-maker. The minutes of the city council meeting shall show the action taken on the license, and if the city council acts favorably on the appeal of the license, the city council shall direct the chief of police to issue the license. 
(e)  Notification of decision. If the appeal of the license denial, suspension or revocation is denied, the applicant shall be immediately notified by registered or certified mail to the address provided on the application, and the letter of notification shall state the basis for such denial. 
(f)  Judicial review. Upon denial of the appeal of the license denial, suspension, or revocation by the city council, an applicant may seek judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 4564, § 2, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 29-13. - Inspection of premises. 
    Inspections. Any sexually oriented business shall be deemed to have consented to periodic entry into and inspection of the business premises by appropriate city officials and inspection of only those business records necessary for the purpose of determining whether such business and persons are in compliance with the City's Code of Ordinances. This entry and inspection shall take place at any time the business is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. No. 4564, § 2, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 29-14. - Standards of conduct and operation. 
(a)  [Unlawful.] It shall be unlawful for any sexually oriented business, or any owner, manager, server, entertainer or employee thereof, or any customer of any sexually oriented business, while on or about the premises of the business, to fail to adhere to the standards of conduct and operation: 
(b)  Standards for all sexually oriented businesses. The following standards apply to all sexually oriented business licensees: 
(1)  Establishment license. All sexually oriented businesses shall post the license issued under this subchapter in a conspicuous, easily viewable location, at eye level, in the portion of the business that is frequented by its customers and that is well lighted; 
(2)  Manager on duty. All sexually oriented businesses shall have a licensed manager on duty at all times the business is open to the public for any purpose; 
(3)  Identification cards for managers and entertainers. Each manager issued a license under this ordinance shall, at all times when on the premises of the licensed business, have it in his or her possession. The license for each entertainer shall be retained for ready inspection on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(4)  Age restriction. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted on the premises of any sexually oriented business; 
(5)  Interior observation: The interior of all sexually oriented businesses shall be configured in such a manner that offers an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises excluding restrooms; 
(6)  Restrooms. No restroom may contain any video equipment; 
(7)  Exterior observation. The premises of all sexually oriented businesses shall be designed as to ensure that the interior of the premises is not observable from the exterior of the building; 
(8)  Exterior display. No sexually oriented business shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of sexually oriented entertainers engaged in sexually oriented entertainment or any depiction relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any exterior source by display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening; 
(9)  Specified criminal acts and specified sexual activities prohibited. No owner, manager, employee, independent contractor, server, entertainer or a customer shall engage in any specified criminal act or any specified sexual activity on the premises of the business; 
(10)  Semi-nude or nude or simulated nudity. No person, including sexually oriented entertainers, shall be semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity, or nude or in a state of nudity, or in a state of simulated nudity, while on the premises of a sexually oriented business licensed under this chapter; and 
(11)  Posting of age restriction. A sign shall be posted at each entrance to a sexually oriented business "It is unlawful for a person under 18 years old to enter this location." 
(c)  Standards for sexually oriented media store or retail store. Shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Room size. The store shall operate all business in an open area of at least six hundred (600) square feet of floor area and no walls, dividers, curtains, screens, shades or other similar devices shall be used to obscure any part of the room where customers are located; 
(2)  Displays. No displays of sexually oriented media or images shall be visible from the exterior of the store; and 
(3)  Lighting. The area occupied by customers shall be well lit at a lighting level of least thirty (30) foot-candles measured three (3) feet from the floor. 
(d)  Standards for sexually oriented motion picture theater. Shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Presentation area. All screenings of motion pictures, videos or other media shall occur in a room open to all customers of the establishment and containing at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area. No walls, dividers, curtains, screens, shades or other similar devices shall be used to obscure any part of the screening room; 
(2)  Lighting. The lighting level in the area occupied by customers shall be at least five (5) foot-candles as measured at the floor; and 
(3)  Seating. Seating shall consist of individual, theater-style chairs (maximum seat width twenty (20) inches), with solid arms separating the chairs. No couches, benches, portable chairs, beds, loose cushions or mattresses, or other forms of seating shall be provided. Separate spaces for wheelchairs shall be provided in accordance with the applicable provisions of the building code and the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(e)  Standards for a sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. Shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Room. All customer-related activities and entertainment shall take place in a room of at least six hundred (600) square feet and in a room that has an unobstructed view by all persons from any part of such room; 
(2)  Stage. All sexually oriented entertainment shall take place on stage elevated at least eighteen (18) inches above the surrounding floor area, with a minimum area of one hundred (100) square feet, and with a horizontal separation of at least sixty (60) inches between the edge of the stage and the nearest space to which customers have access. The horizontal separation shall be physically enforced by a partial wall, rail, or other physical barrier, which may be located either on the stage (to keep the entertainers back from the edge) or on the floor (to keep the customers back from the stage); 
(3)  Access. The manager and sexually oriented entertainer shall prohibit that no person other than a licensed entertainer occupies the stage area; 
(4)  Tip. All tips for sexually oriented entertainment shall be collected in containers that are accessible to customers; 
(5)  Lighting. The lighting level in the area occupied by customers shall be at least fifteen (15) footcandles as measured three (3) feet from the floor; and 
(6)  Seating. Seating shall consist of chairs or open booths; no couches, beds, loose cushions or mattresses, or other forms of seating shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 4564, § 2, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 29-15. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The city may enforce this chapter by any methods not inconsistent with state law and city Charter. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter commits a class A misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person operating a sexually oriented business without a license or with an expired license, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred ($500.00). 
(d)  Any person working as a sexually oriented entertainer or manager of a sexually oriented business without a license or with an expired license, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars five hundred ($500.00). 
(e)  Any person violating any other provision of this chapter, upon conviction is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 4564, § 2, 6-7-10) 
Sec. 29-16. - Licenses for pre-existing sexually oriented businesses. 
    Any sexually oriented business possessing a current license under the sexually oriented business licensing requirements in effect immediately preceding the effective date of this chapter may continue to operate under such license, and may renew such license under such pre-existing requirements for a period not to exceed three (3) years, unless sooner terminated for any reason, or voluntarily discontinued for a period of sixty (60) days or more. Any increase, enlargement, extension or alteration of such pre-existing sexually oriented business, including expressly an increase in the gross floor area devoted to sexually oriented merchandise, media, or entertainment area or the inventory of merchandise or media, shall be cause for revocation of any license held or renewed under this provision. After all renewals permitted under this section, such sexually oriented business shall comply in full with all the licensing requirements of Chapter 29, as enacted by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4564, § 3, 6-7-10) 
Chapter 30 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4937, § 3, adopted March 19, 2018, repealed ch. 30 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former ch. 30, §§ 30-1-30-19, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 4168, § 1, adopted July 21, 2003; Ord. No. 4335, § 1, adopted Feb. 6, 2006; Ord. No. 4612, § 2, adopted Sept. 6, 2011; Ord. No. 4651, § 1, adopted April 16, 2012; and Ord. No. 4701, § 20(a)-(c), adopted June 17, 2013. 

Sec. 30-1. - Purpose. 
    Purpose. The city council of Denison, Texas, hereby declares that as a matter of public policy the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of districts and landmarks of historical and cultural importance and significance are necessary to promote the economic, cultural, educational and general welfare of the public. It is recognized that the historic districts and landmarks within the City of Denison represent the unique confluence of time and place that shaped the identity of generations of citizens, collectively and individually and produced significant historic, architectural and cultural resources that constitute their heritage; and, therefore, this chapter is intended to: 
(a)  Protect and enhance the district and landmarks which represent distinctive elements of the City of Denison's historic, architectural and cultural heritage; 
(b)  Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past; 
(c)  Protect and enhance the City of Denison's attractiveness to visitors and the support and stimulus to the economy thereby provided; 
(d)  Ensure the harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and development of the city; 
(e)  Promote the economic prosperity and welfare of the community by encouraging the most appropriate use of such property within the city; and 
(f)  Stabilize and improve the values of such properties. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 3, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 30-2. - Appointment of historic preservation officer. 
    The city manager or its designee shall appoint a qualified city official or staff person to serve as historic preservation officer (HPO). The HPO must have an interest, knowledge and a demonstrated background in the disciplines of architecture, history, urban planning, real estate, legal, archeology, or other disciplines related to historic preservation. In the absence of a qualified official or staff person of the municipality, a volunteer resident of the city may be appointed by city council to serve as HPO without compensation. A volunteer should be aware of the liability issues involved in serving in this capacity. The HPO shall be empowered to: 
(a)  Administer this ordinance [from which this chapter derives] and advise the HPB on matters submitted to it. 
(b)  To maintain and hold open for public inspection all documents and records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Receive and review all applications pursuant to this article to ensure their completeness. 
(d)  Review and take action on all certificates of appropriateness applications subject to administrative review pursuant to this article. 
(e)  Review and forward with any recommendations all applications for certificates of appropriateness subject to review by the HPB pursuant to this article. 
(f)  Ensure proper posting and noticing of all HPB meetings, schedule applications for HPB review, provide packets to its members prior to the meetings, record meeting minutes and facilitate all HPB meetings. 
(g)  Review and help coordinate the city's preservation and urban design activities with those of local, state and federal agencies and with local, state, and national preservation organizations in the private sector. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 3, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 30-3. - Designation of landmarks or historic districts. 
(a)  The city council may designate by zoning ordinance certain buildings, sites, structures and objects as historic landmarks and certain areas as historic districts. Such landmarks and districts shall bear the word "historic" in their zoning designation and shall be represented by designation "H" on the zoning map. 
(b)  The HPB may recommend to the city council a building or historic district, site, structure or district to be designated as a landmark. Property owners of a proposed landmark or within a proposed historic district shall be notified prior to the HPB's hearing on the designation. At the HPB's public hearing, HPB members, owners and interested parties may present testimony or documentary evidence that will become part of a record regarding the historic, architectural or cultural importance of the proposed historic landmark or district. The record also may contain staff reports, public comments and other evidence offered outside of the hearing. 
    Upon recommendation of the HPB, the proposed historic landmark or district shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its review and recommendation. The planning and zoning commission shall give notice, conduct its public hearing and make recommendations to the city council in the same manner and according to the same procedures as specifically provided in the general zoning chapter of the Code. The city council shall give notice, follow the publication procedure, hold public hearings and make its determination in the same manner as provided in the general zoning chapter of the Code. 
    The HPB shall make its recommendation, to be forwarded to the planning and zoning commission, within thirty (30) days from the date of submittal of the designation request. The planning and zoning commission shall schedule a public hearing on the HPB's recommendation to be held within forty-five (45) days of receipt of such recommendation. 
    Upon designation of an area as a historic landmark or district, the designation should be recorded in the tax records of the city and the city's official zoning maps. All zoning maps should indicate the designated landmarks and districts by an appropriate mark. 
    A historic landmark or district may be designated if it: 
1.  Possesses significance in history, architecture, archeology and/or culture. 
2.  Is associated with events that made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of local, regional, state and/or national history. 
3.  Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past. 
4.  Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period and/or method of construction. 
5.  Represents the work of a master designer, builder and/or craftsman. 
6.  Represents an established and familiar visual feature of the city. 
(c)  The HPB may recommend a district or a landmark to the city council to be designated if it: 
1.  Contains properties which meet one (1) or more of the criteria for designation of a landmark. 
2.  Constitutes a distinct section of the city. 
    The boundaries of each historic district designated henceforth shall be specified in detail and shall be filed, in writing, in the city secretary's office for public inspection. 
    Properties that are already designated as a "high" or "contributing" classification in the Denison Historic Resources Survey, listed as a Recorded Texas Historic Landmark (RTHL), State Archeological Landmark (SAL) or listed on the National Register of Historic Places (NR) shall be treated as recognized local landmarks. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 3, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 30-4. - Certificate of appropriateness. 
    Prior to the commencement of any work that affects the exterior of a structure within a designated historic district (in accordance with section 30.3), a certificate of appropriateness (COA) may be required, depending on the type of work that is proposed. Certificates of appropriateness shall be required and approved by the appropriate body according to the following criteria: 
(a)  Routine maintenance that does not require a building permit shall not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Minor modifications, including like-for-like replacement, changes in color (including paint), landscaping, and new signage shall require a certificate of appropriateness approved by the historic preservation officer in accordance with the guidelines in section 30.5. 
(c)  Major modifications, including changes to windows or doors, roofs, awnings, the addition of a new material, and substantial alterations to a structure shall require a certificate of appropriateness approved by the historic preservation board in accordance with the guidelines in section 30.5. 
(d)  New construction, the moving of, demolition of, and additions to historic structures shall require a certificate of appropriateness approved by the historic preservation board in accordance with the guidelines in section 30-5. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 3, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 30-5. - Criteria for approval of a certificate of appropriateness. 
    The following standards, guidelines and criteria should be used in a balanced evaluation of the property in question: 
(a)  The HPO and HPB shall follow the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings to assist in its consideration of all applications for certificates of appropriateness. These standards and guidelines shall be made available to property owners of historic landmarks or property within a historic district. 
(b)  The HPB shall utilize a checklist of design elements to be reviewed and considered by the HPB in reaching its determination. Such checklist shall be initially approved by the city council and modified from time to time as the city council deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 3, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 30-6. - Certificate of appropriateness procedures. 
(a)  Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate of appropriateness, the owner or the owner's representative shall submit an application for such certificate with the historic preservation officer. The property owner or the owner's representative shall consult with the historic preservation officer prior to submission of the application with regard to applicable standards and guidelines for the property. 
(b)  The application shall contain: 
1.  The name, address, telephone number of the applicant and a detailed description of the proposed work. 
2.  The location and photographs of the property and adjacent properties (historical photographs may also be helpful). 
3.  Color elevation drawings of the proposed changes. 
4.  Samples of materials to be used including colors that will be used. 
5.  If the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing showing the type of lettering to be used, all dimensions and colors, a description of materials to be used, the method of illumination (if any) and a plan showing the sign's location on the property. 
(c)  No building permit shall be issued for such proposed work until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued by the HPO or HPB or, upon appeal, to the city council pursuant to subsection (f) herein. The certificate of appropriateness required by this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any building permit that may be required by another ordinance of the city. 
(d)  The HPO or HPB shall approve, approve with modifications, or deny an application within forty-five (45) days from receipt of a complete application. For work requiring approval of HPB, with ten (10) days' written notice to the applicant the HPB shall hold a public hearing on the application at which an opportunity will be provided for proponents and opponents of the application to present their views. Should the HPB not take action within the forty-five (45) day period, the certificate of appropriateness shall be automatically approved. 
(e)  All decisions of the HPO and HPB shall be in writing. A certificate of appropriateness shall be sent to the applicant and a copy attached to the building permit for public inspection. The HPO or HPB's decision shall state the reasons for denying or modifying any application. 
(f)  Subsequent to a decision by the HPO or HPB, an appeal may be made by the applicant in accordance with the provisions of section 30-15 herein. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 3, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 30-7. - Demolition. 
    A permit for the demolition of a historic landmark or property within a historic district, including secondary buildings, shall not be granted by the chief building official without the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness for demolition by the HPB. 
    The HPB shall hold a public hearing on each application within sixty (60) days from the date a complete application is received by the historic preservation officer of chief building official. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the property owner(s). Following the hearing, the HPB has thirty (30) days in which to prepare a written recommendation to the chief building official. In the event that the HPB does not act within ninety (90) days of the receipt of the application, a permit may be granted. 
    Nothing herein shall be construed to impair, limit or suspend the emergency powers of the City of Denison and its officials pertaining to demolition of structures in times of emergencies of calamity or natural disasters. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 3, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 30-8. - Economic hardship criteria. 
(a)  For deviations. If the HPB refuses to issue the certificate of appropriateness on the ground that the proposed work will not comply with the criteria set forth in sections 30-4 and 30-5 above, and any design guidelines for the property, the owner shall have the right to seek deviations from the design guidelines and criteria on the basis of economic hardship. In order to be entitled to a deviation from the guidelines, the owner must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that he will have no reasonable opportunity to recover the cost of the proposed work if he is required to perform the work in accordance with the criteria and design guidelines. If the HPB finds that the owner has failed to satisfy this burden of proof, the certificate of appropriateness will be denied. If the HPB finds that the owner would have no reasonable opportunity to recover the cost of the proposed work if performed in accordance with the criteria and the design guidelines, the HPB shall grant a deviation from the criteria and any applicable design guidelines and may issue a certificate of appropriateness for the required work, with or without conditions. 
    The HPB may consider the following factors in determining the extent of the deviation granted: 
1.  The cost to perform the work in compliance with the criteria and design guidelines; 
2.  The value of the property; 
3.  The extent to which a deviation is necessary to allow the owner a reasonable opportunity to recover the cost of the work; 
4.  Whether granting the deviation will harm an existing or proposed historic or landmark district or structure or property designated with a high priority rating; and/or 
5.  Whether the proposed work is in harmony with the spirit and purposes of this section. 
(b)  For demolition. An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed demolition has been denied may apply for relief on the ground of hardship. In order to prove the existence of hardship, the applicant must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that: 
1.  The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of whether that return represents the most profitable return possible; 
2.  The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a reasonable return; 
3.  Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and preserving it have failed; and/or 
4.  The structure or property is in such a condition as to be irreparably damaged and, as such, poses a nuisance to the surrounding area and is a threat to the health, safety and general welfare of the community in a manner consistent with the provisions of chapter 5, article VIII of this Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 3, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 30-9. - Economic hardship application procedure. 
(a)  After receiving written notification from the HPB of the denial of a certificate of appropriateness, an applicant may, within ten (10) working days, commence the hardship process, unless the hardship application is filed simultaneously with the application for a certificate of appropriateness. No consideration or action may be taken on the hardship application unless a denial of the certificate of appropriateness has been issued. No building permit or demolition permit shall be issued unless the HPB makes a finding that a hardship exists. 
(b)  The HPB shall hold a public hearing on the hardship application at which an opportunity will be provided for proponents and opponents of the application to present their views. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the property owner(s). 
(c)  The HPB and the historic preservation officer, in consultation with local preservation groups and other interested parties, shall explore with the owner, or his designated representative, alternatives for the performance of the proposed work that will preserve the structure or property to the greatest extent possible, while being economically feasible. 
(d)  If a deviation is granted, the certificate of appropriateness for the proposed work shall state the terms and conditions of the deviation. 
(e)  All deviations shall be in compliance with other city codes and ordinances. 
(f)  All decisions of the HPB shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent to the applicant and a copy filed with the city secretary's office for public inspection. The HPB's decision shall state the reasons for granting or denying the hardship application. 
(g)  The hardship determination may be appealed in accordance with section 30-15 herein. 
(h)  In the event of an unresolved difference of opinion existing between the HPB and the chief building official concerning the soundness of the structure and the appropriateness of demolition, the application shall be heard by the city council whose decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 3, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 30-10. - Enforcement. 
    All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued under this chapter shall conform to any requirements included therein. It shall be the duty of the building inspections department to inspect any such work to ensure compliance. In the event work is found that is not being performed in accordance with the certificate of appropriateness, the historic preservation officer shall issue a stop work order, and all work shall immediately cease. No further work shall be undertaken on the project as long as a stop work order is in effect. Work may be reinstated, however, upon assurance that compliance will henceforth exist. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 3, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 30-11. - Ordinary maintenance. 
    Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance, replacement or repair of any exterior architectural feature of a landmark or property within a historic district that does not involve a change in design or material, color or outward appearance. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 3, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 30-12. - Demolition by neglect. 
    No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as a landmark or included within a historic district shall permit the property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the deterioration of any exterior architectural feature which would, in the judgment of the HPB, produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the historic district as a whole or the life and character of the property itself. It is the intent of this section to preserve from deliberate or inadvertent neglect the exterior features of buildings and structures so designated or included within the district and the interior portions thereof when such maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of the exterior. All such buildings or structures shall be preserved against decay and deterioration and free from structural defects through prompt corrections of any of the following defects: 
(a)  Facades which may fall and injure persons or property; 
(b)  Deteriorated or inadequate foundation, defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports, deteriorated walls or other vertical structural supports; 
(c)  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; 
(d)  Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, foundations, or floors, including broken windows or doors; 
(e)  Defective or insufficient weather protection for exterior wall covering, including lack of paint or weathering due to lack of paint or other protective covering; or 
(f)  Any fault or defect in the building which renders it not properly watertight or structurally unsafe. 
(g)  Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition, which could lead to the claim that demolition is necessary for public safety. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 3, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 30-13. - Fees. 
    An application filing fee of one (1) percent of the cost of the work to be performed pursuant to a proposed certificate of appropriateness for alteration or new construction shall be collected by the historic preservation officer at the time of application. For the purpose of calculating the fee to be collected, the cost shall be determined by the historic preservation officer after consultation with the applicant and the chief building official. In no event shall the fee be less than five dollars ($5.00), nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00). Additions or extensions of work undertaken at the same location within six (6) months of the original applications may be included in a new application for a certificate of appropriateness without incurring an additional application fee. 
    An application seeking a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or designation of a historic landmark or historical district shall be accompanied by an application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), such fee to be collected by the historic preservation officer at the time of application. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 3, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 30-14. - Penalties. 
    Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a violation, and the violator shall be liable for a misdemeanor charge and be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly. These penal provisions shall not prevent an action on behalf of the city to enjoin any violation of the terms of this section or an action for mandatory injunction to remove any previous violation hereof. Denison retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 3, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 30-15. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision of the HPO relating to a certificate of appropriateness may, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written decision, file a written application with the historic preservation board, through the historic preservation officer, for review of the decision and the approval, denial, modification of, or deviation from, the HPO's decision. The appeal application shall be set before the HPB at its first available meeting. 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision of the HPB relating to economic hardship, a certificate of appropriateness, or an appeal of a decision by the HPO to the HPB may, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written decision, file a written application with the city council, through the office of the city secretary, for review of the decision and the approval, denial, modification of, or deviation from, the HPB's decision. The appeal application shall be set before the city council at the first available city council meeting. The city council's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 3, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 30-16. - No vested interest. 
    No developer or property owner shall acquire any vested interest in this section or specific regulations contained herein. This section and regulations may be amended or repealed by the city council in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 4937, § 3, 3-19-18) 
Chapter 31 - SPECIAL EVENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4931, § 2, adopted Feb. 19, 2018, enacted provisions designated as ch. 31, §§ 31.101-31.103, 31.201-31.208, 31.301-31.307, 31.401, 312.402. In order to maintain the style of the Code, said provisions have been renumbered as §§ 31-1-31-3, 31-21-31-28, 31-31-31-37, and 31-41, 31-42, at the discretion of the editor. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 31-1. - Purpose. 
    It is the policy of the city to ensure the peaceable use and enjoyment of city parks, streets, and other city property by all members of the public, including persons and groups engaging in demonstrations or expressive activity or a special event regulated by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Sec. 31-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant shall mean a person, as defined herein. 
    City shall mean the City of Denison, Texas. 
    City council shall mean the city council of the City of Denison, Texas. 
    City manager shall mean the city manager of the City of Denison, Texas. 
    City property shall mean a city park, street, public right-of-way, or other property owned or held by the city. 
    Demonstration shall mean a public display of the attitude of assembled persons toward a person, cause, issue, or other matter. 
    Department shall mean the City of Denison Community Engagement Department. 
    Expressive activity shall mean conduct, the sole or principal purpose of which is the expression, dissemination or communication by verbal, visual, literary or auditory means of opinion, views or ideas. 
    Facilities shall mean, without limitation, all equipment, materials and apparatus associated with the conduct of the special event, including, without limitation: barriers, cables (electrical or otherwise), safety equipment and devices, water, sound system and related equipment, fencing, fence covering material, signs, tents, vehicles, fire protection equipment and apparatus, medical equipment and apparatus, seals, wiring, banners, structures and components thereof, furniture, furnishings, special lighting fixtures, trade fixtures and equipment furnished and installed or used in the operation of the event. The quality level, design and appearance of all facilities shall be of high quality appropriate for the circumstances of a special event. 
    Force majeure shall mean and includes fire, casualty, strikes, lockouts, labor trouble, inability to procure materials or supplies, failure of power, governmental authority, inclement weather, acts of God, war or terrorism or the potential or actual threat thereof, public safety or public welfare considerations, riots, or local, national or international emergencies, or other reason of like nature. 
    Person shall mean an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization, or other legal entity. 
    Special event shall mean a festival, celebration, or gathering that involves the reservation and temporary use of all or a portion of a public park, park road, public street, or other city property that includes one (1) or more of the following: entertainment, dancing, music, dramatic productions, art or cultural exhibitions, the sale of merchandise, food, or alcohol, or mass participation sports events, such as marathons, bicycling, walking, running and other competitive events that require the significant provision or coordination of city services, and that involves one (1) or more of the following activities, except when the activity is for construction or house-moving purposes only: 
(1)  Closing of a public street; 
(2)  Blocking or restriction of public property, including public rights-of-way; 
(3)  Sale of merchandise, food, or beverages on public property; 
(4)  Sale of alcoholic beverages on public or private property where otherwise prohibited; 
(5)  Erection of a tent or canopy on public property; 
(6)  Installation of a stage, band shell, trailer, van, portable building, grandstand, or bleachers on public property, or on private property where otherwise prohibited by ordinance; and/or 
(7)  Placement of temporary informational signs including, but not limited to: no-parking, directional, or identification, special event signs or banners in or over a public right-of-way, or on private property where otherwise prohibited by ordinance. 
    Special event permit or permit shall mean the city's written authorization to hold a special event. The permit may impose terms and conditions and is subject to the guidelines of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Sec. 31-3. - Exemptions. 
    The following are exempt from the operation, rules, and regulations of this chapter: 
(1)  A private party held on private property and to which the public is not invited, provided such party does not impact public rights-of-way or involve activities or facilities not permitted by applicable zoning regulations; 
(2)  A private party held on public park property and to which the public is not invited, provided such party does not impact public rights-of-way or involve activities or facilities not permitted by applicable zoning regulations (e.g., family function or reunion); 
(3)  An event wholly contained on property specifically designed or suited for the event and that holds a certificate of occupancy for such use including adequate parking (e.g., a hotel ballroom); 
(4)  Funeral processions; 
(5)  An event held in the Entertainment District subject to chapter 21, article VI, Entertainment Districts, of the City of Denison Code of Ordinances; 
(6)  Activities under the control of the city park and recreation department conducted on city property that do not affect public rights-of-way; 
(7)  Unorganized gatherings; and 
(8)  A peaceful demonstration, parade or assembly related to the expression of feelings and beliefs on current political, religious, or social issues at a fixed location other than a public right-of-way (sidewalk or street). 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Secs. 31-4-31-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS 

Sec. 31-21. - Permit required. 
(a)  No special event may be held within the city without first obtaining a special event permit. Special event permits are issued by the department. A special event application form may be obtained from the department or as otherwise provided by the department. All applications shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a special event application form must be completed and submitted to the department no fewer than: 
(1)  Forty-five (45) days prior to a proposed special event, excluding special events for an expressive activity; or 
(2)  Ten (10) days prior to a proposed special event involving expressive activity. 
    The department may waive the above requirements if the application can be processed in a shorter time period, taking into consideration the nature and scope of the proposed event and the number and types of permits required to be issued in conjunction with the special event permit. 
(c)  The issuance of a special event permit grants permission to use public property proposed to be used in connection with the special event and/or authorizes the use of private property in a manner not otherwise permitted by the code in connection with the special event (the "licensed premises"). The use of such licensed premises shall be solely for the purpose of constructing, installing, operating and maintaining the special event, and for such other purposes consistent with promoting and conducting the special event as the department authorizes in writing. 
(d)  The issuance of a special event permit authorizes appropriate city departments to issue permits for activities in connection with the authorized event in locations where such activities would otherwise be prohibited by ordinance. 
(e)  Additional authorization is required when a tent structure or canopy has an area in excess of four hundred (400) square feet. Uses involving smaller tents ten (10) feet by ten (10) feet when located directly adjacent to one another will require additional review. 
(f)  Setup is allowed no earlier than the day immediately preceding the day of the event and must be completely removed before noon on the next succeeding business day after the event, unless otherwise determined. 
(g)  The city and its officials, officers, employees and agents shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any such property or facilities sustained during removal or storage of such property, equipment, tents or other facilities and the permittee shall indemnify the city, its officials, officers, employees and agents against all claims for any such damage or loss. 
(h)  Issuance of a special event permit does not authorize removal or alteration of public property and any such removal or alteration is strictly prohibited except as expressly allowed in writing by the department, or other authorizing official. 
(i)  In addition to complying with all conditions of the permit and all applicable city ordinances, regulations, rules, policies and guidelines, the permittee must comply with all applicable federal, state and county laws, rules and regulations. 
(j)  A permittee may not and shall have no authority to assign, sell, transfer, pledge, encumber or otherwise convey a permit or any rights, duties, responsibilities or obligations thereunder, and any such conveyance shall be null and void and may, in the discretion of the city, result in the revocation of the permit. 
(k)  No rights granted by a permit shall create rights in anyone other than the permittee. Such rights granted by a permit shall be revocable at the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Sec. 31-22. - Application process. 
(a)  The applicant shall contact the department to discuss desired or available dates for the event. An event returning to the district or other location within the city for a successive year (a "returning event") may be given priority consideration for the same time period in which it was held in the previous year(s). 
(b)  At minimum, and in addition to the information required in this article II, the application must contain the following information, all of which is public information subject to the Texas Public Information Act and other applicable law: 
(1)  Applicant information. Applicant's name, organization name, type of organization; a representation that the applicant and organization are in good standing under the laws of the state and the United States; address, including city, state, zip code, e-mail address and web site address; 24-hour emergency telephone number; mobile telephone number; telephone number; facsimile number; driver's license number and state; date of birth; and on-site contact name and mobile telephone number. If the applicant is a corporation, copies of a current certificate of account status issued by the state comptroller's office and a current certificate of existence issued by the state secretary of state's office, or, if the corporation is not incorporated in or holding a certificate of authorization in the state, copies of similar current certificates from the state in which the corporation is incorporated; 
(2)  Event information. Event name; dates and times requested; type of event; any previous dates such event has been held; previous attendance; expected attendance; whether the event will be open to the public; admission fee; estimated budget; proposed event area; setup dates; teardown dates; event sponsors; and event beneficiaries; 
(3)  Event special features. Plans for sound amplification; stage; dance floor; food and beverage service, including participating concessionaires and caterers; sale or distribution of alcohol; open flames; cooking; road closures; tents or canopies; temporary fencing; restrooms; sinks; dumpsters; trash containers; trash collection; electrical service; rentals; professional parking/valet; carnival or amusement rides or attractions; climate control; pyrotechnics; seating; animals; barricades; bicycles; decorations; golf carts; inflatables; security; transportation; signage; ticket sales; emergency plan; and any other special features planned for or in conjunction with the event; 
(4)  Insurance. The permittee shall, at its own expense, procure, pay for and maintain the following insurance written by companies approved by the state and acceptable to the city. The permittee shall furnish to the city certificates of insurance executed by the insurer or its authorized agent stating coverages, limits, expiration dates and compliance with all applicable required provisions. 
a.  Commercial general liability insurance, including, but not limited to premises/operations, personal and advertising injury, products/completed operations, independent contractors and contractual liability, with minimum combined single limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) products/completed operations aggregate and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) general aggregate. Coverage must be written on an occurrence form. The general aggregate shall apply on a per project basis. The City of Denison shall be listed as an additional insured on all insurance policies. 
b.  Liquor liability insurance, either endorsed onto the above policy or written on a "stand alone" basis, if any of the following applies: 
1.  The applicant is in the business of manufacturing, selling, or distributing alcoholic beverages; 
2.  The applicant serves or furnishes alcoholic beverages for a charge, whether or not such activity requires a license or is for the purpose of financial gain or livelihood; or 
3.  The applicant serves or furnishes alcoholic beverages without a charge, if a license is required for such activity. 
c.  Business automobile liability insurance covering owned, hired and non-owned vehicles, with a minimum combined bodily injury and property damage limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. 
The insurance requirements for special events involving expressive activity which enjoy protection under the United States or Texas constitutions may be waived by the department if the special event involving expressive activity poses no substantial risk of public liability or property damage. 
(5)  References. List of four (4) organizations an applicant has done business with in connection with the proposed event; 
(6)  Advertising and promotion. Listing of types of advertising and promotion, including radio, television, print ads, press releases, fliers, posters, direct mail, etc.; and 
(7)  Reimbursement for services; fees. Permittee shall reimburse the city for any costs incurred by the city. Fees for services to be rendered or requested must be submitted with the application and is required for each permit or renewal of a permit, which permit shall extend only to those dates requested in the application and which are approved by the department. 
(c)  Fees must be in the form of a check, money order or credit card (as directed by the department) in the name of the organization stated on the application and shall be made payable to the city. Any amounts invoiced by the city must be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice. 
(d)  The department shall review the application and make its determination within: 
(1)  Fourteen (14) days after a complete application for a special event, including all required fees and licenses and/or permits, has been submitted to the department, unless the application is for a special event involving expressive activity; or 
(2)  Five (5) days after a complete application for a special event involving expressive activity, including all required fees and licenses and/or permits, has been submitted to the department. 
    If the department determines that clarification or additional information is necessary for proper consideration of an application, this time period may be extended an additional ten (10) days from the date clarification or additional information is provided. The department may approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application. The department may also revoke a permit if it determines at any time after approval that the event is not in compliance with the permit or with this chapter. 
    In making a final determination to approve an application, each of the following factors shall be considered: 
(1)  Whether the application establishes that there will be ample opportunity to properly plan and prepare for the event; 
(2)  Whether the proposed dates or location conflict with another event or activity; 
(3)  Whether the applicant has previous professional experience with hosting an event of the nature or scope proposed; 
(4)  Whether the proposed event has been held within the city on a previous occasion; 
(5)  Whether police, fire, or other city services will be unduly burdened or adversely affected by the event; 
(6)  Whether the event is reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create a disturbance; and 
(7)  Such other factors as the department may deem necessary or important in evaluating an application. 
(e)  The department shall notify an applicant in writing of the department's decision to deny or approve an event. If an application is approved, the notification must advise the applicant of the minimum staffing levels for the event, any specific requirements imposed pursuant to article III of this chapter, and the time frame for completing such requirements. 
(f)  A special event cancelled or postponed by the city on public property due to a force majeure may be rescheduled within ninety (90) days following its original date subject to availability of the scheduled location. There shall be no charge for such rescheduling. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Sec. 31-23. - Directives of department or other authorizing official. 
    The permittee shall comply with the printed guidelines and with all other reasonable rules, regulations and directives of the department as may be issued from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Sec. 31-24. - Force majeure. 
(a)  The city may, in its sole discretion, postpone, cancel, suspend or close any special event or revoke a permit for any force majeure event. 
(b)  The city shall have no liability for such postponement, cancellation, suspension or closing. Further, the city shall have no liability for failure to postpone, cancel, suspend, or close a special event for a force majeure event or any other reason. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Sec. 31-25. - Cancellation and revocation. 
(a)  The department may deny a special event permit if: 
(1)  A special event permit has been granted for another special event at the same place and time; 
(2)  An established special event is customarily held at the same place and time as the proposed special event; 
(3)  The proposed special event will unreasonably disrupt the orderly flow of traffic, and no reasonable means of rerouting traffic or otherwise meeting traffic needs is available; 
(4)  The applicant fails to adequately plan for: 
a.  The protection of special event participants and spectators; 
b.  Maintenance of public order in and around the special event location; 
c.  Crowd security, taking into consideration the size of the event; 
d.  Emergency vehicle access; or 
e.  Portable restroom facilities for the special event as required by the department. 
(5)  The applicant fails to comply with or the proposed special event will violate a city ordinance or other applicable law, unless the prohibited conduct or activity would be allowed under this chapter; 
(6)  The applicant makes a false statement of material fact on an application for a special event permit or fails to properly complete an application for a special event permit; 
(7)  The applicant fails to provide proof that the applicant possesses or is able to obtain a license or permit required by another city ordinance or other applicable law for the conduct of all activities included as part of the special event; 
(8)  The applicant has had a special event permit revoked within the preceding fourteen (14) months; 
(9)  The applicant has committed, within the preceding fourteen (14) months, two (2) or more violations of a provision of a special event permit of this chapter; 
(10)  The applicant fails to pay any outstanding fees assessed under this chapter for the proposed special event or for a past special event; 
(11)  The applicant has conducted or sponsored one (1) or more special event(s) within the city on at least sixty (60) days of the same calendar year during which the proposed special event is to be held, except that this sixty-day limitation does not apply to a special event that involves a commercial movie production; 
(12)  The chief of the police department or the chief of the fire department determines that the special event would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; 
(13)  The applicant or any other person responsible for the conduct or sponsorship of the special event is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or other person; 
(14)  The applicant has a history of conducting or sponsoring special events in a disorderly, unsafe, unsanitary, or fiscally irresponsible manner; 
(15)  An event has been previously scheduled for the same time on property described in this chapter that is adjacent to the location of the proposed special event; or 
(16)  The applicant, if it is a corporation, fails to provide copies of a current certificate of account status and current certificate of existence as required by section 13-22 of this chapter. 
(b)  The department shall revoke a special event permit if: 
(1)  The permittee fails to comply with or the special event is in violation of any provision of the special event permit, a city ordinance, or any other applicable law; 
(2)  The permittee made a false statement of material fact on an application for a special event permit or failed to properly complete an application for a special event permit; 
(3)  The chief of the police department or the chief of the fire department determines that the special event poses a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; 
(4)  The permittee failed to pay any outstanding fees assessed under this chapter for the proposed special event or for a past special event; 
(5)  The permittee or any other person responsible for the conduct of the special event is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the permittee or such other person; 
(6)  The permittee, if it is a corporation, failed to provide copies of a current certificate of account status and current certificate of existence as required by section 13-22 of this chapter; or 
(7)  The permittee is found guilty or pleads guilty or no contest to a citation alleging a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Sec. 31-26. - Appeal from denial or revocation of a special event permit. 
    If the department denies the issuance of a permit or revokes a permit, the department shall issue written notice of the denial or revocation and of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permittee may appeal the decision of the department to the city manager within five (5) days after the date of the denial or revocations. If such appeal is not made within this five-day period, the decision of the department shall be final. The appeal shall be decided by the city manager within ten (10) days after the date of a timely filed appeal. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Sec. 31-27. - Appeal of permit conditions. 
    A permittee who disagrees with the requirements imposed by the department on a permit issued under this chapter may appeal the to the city manager setting forth the specific condition contested and the basis for the appeal within five (5) days of the date of permit approval. The city manager shall issue his/her decision within ten (10) days and the decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Sec. 31-28. - Right of entry. 
    The city through its officials, employees, agents, and representatives shall have the right at all reasonable times to enter upon all permitted premises for the purpose of inspecting the permitted premises, for observing the performance of obligations under this chapter, and for the doing of any act or thing which the city may be obligated to or have the right to do under the permit, this chapter, or other applicable city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Secs. 31-29, 31-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 31-31. - City services. 
    To best serve the safety and welfare of the public, the following services shall be provided by the city when required (as determined by the department) in conjunction with a special event. The applicant shall reimburse the city for the cost of these services. 
(1)  Police protection, security and crowd control. 
(2)  Fire protection, emergency medical services, and emergency management services. 
(3)  Park maintenance. 
(4)  Public works: street closures and water services. 
(5)  Traffic and parking control. 
(6)  Development services: building inspections, environmental health compliance, code, et al. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Sec. 31-32. - Street closure plan. 
    Certain streets within the city may be temporarily closed to limit or exclude vehicular or pedestrian traffic prior to, during or after a special event. An applicant requesting street closure(s) for a special event shall submit for approval a traffic control plan approved by the department showing the layout of all barricades and signs at the time of application. The department shall consider such request in evaluating the application and may recommend additional or fewer street closures. Some street closures may require written consent of businesses and property owners in the adjacent area. Should street closures be approved, the city street department shall supervise the placement of all barricades and signs placed on public streets or on any public rights-of-way. At no time shall a street closure restrict access to emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Sec. 31-33. - Outdoor activities. 
(a)  Any outside area to be occupied by persons attending the event must be completely enclosed by a temporary (during the term of the event only) interlocking fence if alcohol is served or allowed to be consumed in such area. If required fencing crosses a fire lane, a twenty-foot-wide emergency gate must be utilized and kept closed. The gate must be kept closed, but unlocked, at all times to accommodate public safety vehicles and provide an emergency exit. The fencing set-up must ensure that customers are not forced to re-enter an adjacent structure, if any, in order to vacate the licensed premises in case of an emergency. 
(b)  All outdoor activities and entertainment must be confined to the area within the licensed premises (and if fencing is required by paragraph (a) of this section, then such activities and entertainment must be confined to the area within the fencing). 
(c)  All fire lanes throughout the property on which the event takes place must be kept completely unobstructed by vehicular traffic. 
(d)  All fire hydrants shall not be blocked at any time and a clearance of at least six (6) feet around fire hydrants must be maintained. 
(e)  Any portion of the licensed premises where alcohol is served, if less than the entire licensed premises is utilized for alcohol service, must be covered by a roof. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Sec. 31-34. - Parking. 
(a)  If parking needs for the event are expected to exceed the area(s) owned by or assigned to the host establishment(s), appropriate parking arrangements must be made with affected properties or establishments. 
(b)  Any required handicapped parking space affected by the outdoor fencing for the event must be temporarily replaced using a space(s) outside the fenced area that is as close as practicable to the entrance to the establishment. Such temporary space must meet all requirements for handicapped spaces including the required "clear zone" on the driver's side of the vehicle and appropriate signage. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Sec. 31-35. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Access points into the licensed premises must be constantly manned to prevent patrons from entering or exiting with alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  A copy of the permit to use public property must be provided to the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission ("TABC") or its successor agency. 
(c)  Any required permit or letter of approval from the TABC and the city must be posted on the premises where the event takes place. 
(d)  A copy of a current permit from TABC authorizing the permittee to sell, dispense or otherwise serve alcohol at the location must be submitted twelve (12) days prior to the event. 
(e)  In accordance with chapter 3, section 3-7, of the City of Denison Code of Ordinances, as amended, no person shall consume or have in his possession any alcoholic beverage while on public park property owned by the city, with the exception of T-Bar Softball Park during adult league play or tournaments. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Sec. 31-36. - Noise. 
    No loud, excessive or unusual noise is allowed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. during setup, operation or teardown of an event. Failure to comply with a request from the department concerning noise may result in the immediate revocation of the special event permit. Outdoor music must be provided at a volume level that is not distracting to drivers on adjacent or nearby streets and that is not disturbing to residents or adjacent businesses. Permittee shall adhere to the noise regulations in chapter 13, article V of the City of Denison Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Sec. 31-37. - Signs. 
(a)  All signs used in connection with a special event shall be professionally executed and must comply with all applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city, and be approved in writing by the department. 
(b)  Written permission from the city must be obtained prior to placing signs on public property. The design and content of signs placed on public property must be approved by the city. Signs placed on public property must be designed and constructed such that they do not leave adhesive residue on property when removed. Inflated signs anchored to the ground, a building, or other structure are prohibited. 
(c)  Permanent, existing signs on public property may not be removed or covered. 
(d)  The city street department shall supervise the placement of all directional or promotional signs placed on public streets. The rental cost of directional signs is the responsibility of the applicant and payment is required in advance of the event. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Secs. 31-38-31-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 31-41. - Offenses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person commences or conducts a special event: 
(1)  Without a special event permit; or 
(2)  In violation of any provision of a special event permit, this chapter, or any other city ordinance or applicable law, rule, standard, or regulation. 
(b)  For offenses punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), a culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
Sec. 31-42. - Penalty. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this chapter or a requirement of a special event permit is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed or continues. 
(b)  Each offense is punishable by a fine not to exceed: 
(1)  Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for a violation of a provision of this chapter or a requirement of a special event permit governing fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping or refuse; or 
(2)  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for all other violations of this chapter or requirements of a special event permit. 
(c)  The penal provisions imposed under this chapter shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 4931, § 2, 2-19-18) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1965 CODE 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1965 Code, as updated through June 6, 1988 which are included herein. Sections of the 1965 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1965 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-2 1-4 1-9 1-6 1-12 1-7 1-11 2-3 16-51 2-7-2-9 16-76-16-78 2-11 2-206 2-12 2-46 2-13 16-1 2-14 2-47 2-20-2-31 2-96-2-107 2-61 2-161 2-70 2-182 2-71 2-186 2-72 2-181 2-73-2-75 2-183-2-185 3-1-3-3 3-1-3-3 3-3.1 3-4 3-4 3-5 3-6, 3-7 3-6, 3-7 3-15-3-17 3-8-3-10 3-19 3-11 4-1, 4-2 4-1, 4-2 4-3 4-9 4-5, 4-6 4-9 4-7 4-3 4-8, 4-9 4-5, 4-6 4-17 4-32 4-21 4-33 4-34 4-31 4-35-4-38 4-34-4-37 4-39-4-41 4-56-4-58 4-42, 4-43 4-7, 4-8 4-44 4-11 4-45 4-10 4-46, 4-47 4-13, 4-14 5-1-5-4 5-1-5-4 5-5-5-7 5-41-5-43 5-8 5-61 5-9, 5-10 2-126, 2-127 5-19(a), 5-19(b) 5-81, 5-82 5-78-5-89 5-311-5-322 6-1-6-6 18-26-18-31 6-17-6-24 18-46-18-53 7-1-7-9 6-1-6-9 7-21 6-10 8-1-8-3 16-26-16-28 8-5 16-28 8-7 16-29 8-17 16-30 8-29 16-31 9-1-9-3 5-101-5-103 9-4 5-116 9-5 5-26 9-6, 9-7 5-117, 5-118 9-8 5-210 9-9 5-119 9-11, 9-12 5-141, 5-142 9-13 5-143, 5-144 9-15, 9-16 5-146, 5-147 9-17(a) 5-149 9-17(b) 5-150 9-18 5-145 9-31, 9-32 5-166, 5-167 9-33 5-148 9-33(a)-(c) 5-168 9-33(d) 5-169 9-34 5-170 9-36 5-171 9-37 5-186-5-188 9-38 5-104 9-39.1 5-120 9-39.2 5-120 9-39.3(a) 5-121 9-39.3(b) 5-122 9-39.4 5-120 9-39.5-9-39.7 5-122-5-124 9-40, 9-41 5-125 9-42 5-124 9-60 5-206 9-60(a)-(i) 5-207 9-60(j) 5-189 9-60(k)-(n) 5-207 9-61, 9-62 5-208, 5-209 9-64, 9-65 5-211, 5-212 9-68 5-213 91/2-1 7-170 91/2-2-91/2-5 7-172-7-175 91/2-6-91/2-9 7-177-7-180 91/2-10 7-176 91/2-11 7-181 10-1 7-66 10-2 7-116 10-3, 10-4 7-2, 7-3 10-5 7-1 10-16-10-27 7-41-7-52 10-38-10-47 7-86-7-95 10-58-10-61 7-131-7-134 10-63-10-72 7-135-7-144 10-78-10-86 7-145-7-153 11-1-11-15 9-26-9-40 12-1 20-2 12-2 20-1 12-3, 12-4 20-3, 20-4 12-6, 12-7 20-6, 20-7 12-8 4-12 12-9 13-34 12-10, 12-11 20-8, 20-9 121/2-1, 121/2-2 5-231, 5-232 14-11-14-18 13-26-13-33 15-1-15-18 2-61-2-78 15-20 2-80 151/2-1, 151/2-2 10-1, 10-2 151/2-21-151/2-32 10-26-10-37 153/4-1 5-256, 5-257 15-19 2-79 16-2-16-4 11-1-11-3 16-6 11-4 16-11 11-5 16-11.1 11-6 16-20.1 13-74-13-78 16-20.1(a)-16-20.1(d) 13-66-13-69 16-22(a)-16-22(c) 13-96-13-98 16-22(d) 13-100 16-22(e) 13-99 16-23 13-101 16-25, 16-26 11-7, 11-8 16-26.1 11-9 16-28 11-10 161/2-1-161/2-5 12-1-12-5 161/2-8-161/2-11 12-26-12-29 163/4-1-163/4-5 14-1-14-5 163/4-6-163/4-17 14-26-14-37 163/4-18-163/4-29 14-56-14-67 17-1-17-3 18-111-18-113 17-4-17-9 18-137-18-142 17-17-17-24 18-86-18-93 18-1-18-3 15-1-15-3 18-5 15-4 18-16 15-26 18-17 15-27 15-61 18-18-18-28 15-28-15-38 18-30, 18-31 15-39, 15-40 18-32-18-36 15-56-15-60 18-37 15-62 18-38 15-61 18-39-18-44 15-63-15-68 181/2-1(a) 17-26 181/2-1(b) 17-27 19-1 5-282 20-3, 20-4 13-51, 13-52 20-5 2-141 21-3 18-71 21-4 18-136 21-5-21-13 23-1-23-9 211/2-1, 211/2-2 18-161, 18-162 211/2-2.1 18-163 211/2-3, 211/2-4 18-164, 18-165 22-1-22-4 25-201-25-204 221/2-1-221/2-6 19-26-19-31 221/2-11 19-51 221/2-12, 221/2-13 19-55, 19-56 221/2-14 19-54 221/2-15-221/2-17 19-57-19-59 221/2-18 19-52 23-1 21-1 23-2.1-23-2.3 21-2-21-4 23-4-23-10 21-5-21-11 23-11 15-5 23-20-23-35 21-26-21-41 23-45-23-50 21-61-21-66 23-51-23-54 21-81-21-84 23-54.1 21-85 23-55-23-57 21-106-21-108 24-3 24-1 24-5 24-2 24-16 24-26 24-30-24-33 24-47-24-50 24-34 24-46 25-1, 25-2 27-26, 27-27 25-4-25-6 27-28-27-30 25-8-25-16 27-31-27-39 25-19 27-40 25-27-25-31 27-61-27-65 25-33-25-38 27-66-27-71 25-49-25-57 27-72-27-80 25-68-25-70 27-96-27-98 25-72-25-75 27-99-27-102 25-86-25-88 27-116-27-118 25-90-25-98 27-119-27-127 25-110-25-114 27-41-27-45 26-1-26-14 25-1-25-14 26-16-26-18 25-15-25-17 26-20 25-18 26-30 25-41 26-34, 26-35 25-42, 25-43 26-37-26-45 25-44-25-52 26-47-26-55 25-53-25-61 26-57 25-62 26-59, 26-60 25-19, 25-20 26-70-26-75 25-81-25-86 26-79 25-87 26-81 25-89 26-92-26-97 25-106-25-111 26-108 25-131  
1965 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 26-109 25-132, 25-133 26-110-26-115 25-134-25-139 26-115.1, 26-115.2 25-140, 25-141 26-116-26-119 25-142-25-145 26-119.1, 26-119.2 25-146, 25-147 26-120-26-124 25-148-25-152 26-151-26-157 25-176-25-182 27-1(1.1) 26-27 27-1(1.2, 1.3) 26-26 27-2(1.1) 26-111 27-2(1.2) 26-28 27-2(1.3) 26-29 26-48 27-2(1.4)-27-2(1.6) 26-30-26-32 27-2(1.7) 26-112 27-3(1.1), 27-3(1.2) 26-113, 26-114 27-3(1.3(a)), 
27-3(1.3(b)) 26-116, 26-117 27-3(1.3) 26-115 27-3(1.4(a))-27-3(1.4(c)) 26-118-26-120 27-3(1.5)-27-3(1.8) 26-121-26-124 27-4(1.1)-27-4(1.8) 26-71-26-78 27-4(1.9(a)), 
27-4(1.9(b)) 26-79, 26-80 27-4(1.10) 26-81 27-5(1.1)-27-5(1.4) 26-96-26-99 27-6(1.1), 27-6(1.2) 26-46, 26-47 27-6(1.4)-27-6(1.10) 26-49-26-55 27-7-27-13 26-141-26-147 27-14-27-28 26-181-26-195 27-29-27-35 26-211-26-217 27-36-27-47 26-236-26-247 27-48(1.2) 26-248, 26-249 27-48(1.3) 26-250 27-109, 27-110 26-276, 26-277 27-111 16-278 27-112-27-116 26-279-26-283  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1965 Code, as updated through June 6, 1988, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1965 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede July 6, 1988, but which were never included in the 1965 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code  3-13-57 Art. II 22-2 Art. III 22-1 Art. IV 22-8 Art. V(A)-Art. V(C) 22-39-22-41 Art. V(D)-Art. V(F) 22-42-22-44 Art. VI 22-7 Art. VII(A)-Art. VII(C) 22-19-22-21 Art. VIII 22-5 Art. IX 22-9 Art. XV 22-6 1073 1-3 22-3 1171  7- 7-65 2 28-2 3-5 28-91-28-93 6 28-5 7 28-3 8 28-95 8-109 28-96 8-300-8-303 28-97 8.100-8.108 28-94 9-100 28-116 9-101, 9-102 28-117 9-110, 9-111 28-118 9-200, 9-201 28-119 9-300, 9-301 28-120 9-400, 9-401 28-121 9-402 28-122 9-500, 9-501 28-123 9-502 28-124 9-600, 9-601 28-125 9-700-9-702 28-126 11-100, 11-101 28-181 11-102-11-104 28-182-28-184 12-100-12-102 28-206 13-100, 13-101 28-71, 28-72 14-100, 14-101 28-207, 28-208 15 28-209 16 28-10 17-100-17-104 28-46-28-50 17-200 28-51 17-300 28-52 18 28-7 19 28-6 20, 21 28-8, 28-9 22-100, 22-101 28-11 22-102 28-12 22-103 28-11 23 28-1 25 28-4 26-102 28-73 1740 10- 1-73 1, 2 28-94 3 28-95 4 28-182 1800  7- 1-74 3 22-1 4, 5 22-20 1819 10- 7-74 1 22-39 1831 12- 2-74 1 28-94 1833 12- 2-74 1 28-183 1884  7- 7-75 1 28-71 2 28-94 1885  7- 7-75 1 28-94 1932 11-17-75 1 22-20 1976  7- 6-76 1 28-117 1977  7- 6-76 1 22-39 1996  9- 7-76 1 28-71 2 28-94 2023 12-20-76 2 28-1 6 28-94 7A 28-95 8 28-210 2027  1- 4-77 11 28-94 12A 28-95 13 28-210 2064  8- 1-77 1 28-46 28-52 2065  8- 1-77 1 28-209 2124  2- 6-78 1 28-11 2246  5-21-79 3 28-46 2289  9- 4-79 28-94 2290  9- 4-79 28-209 2323 12-17-79 1 28-12 2390  5-19-80 28-207 2484  8-20-81 1 24-26 2627  6- 7-83 1, 2 28-210 3 28-94 4 28-71 2670 11- 7-83 1, 2 28-50 3 28-12 2798 12-27-84 3 16-51 3023 10- 5-87 1, 2 8-2, 8-3 3 8-1 4, 5 8-4, 8-5 6 8-28 7-9 8-6-8-8 11, 12 8-26, 8-27 13, 14 8-29, 8-30 15-19 8-46-8-50 3028 11- 2-87 1, 2 28-183 3044 11-16-87 1 28-71 2 28-94 3046 12- 7-87 1 28-71 2 28-95 3 28-94 3052 12-21-87 1, 2 28-94, 28-95 3057  1- 4-88 1 28-71 2 28-95 3 28-94 3063  2- 1-88 1 28-94 3074  5- 3-88 1(10-100) 28-146 1(10-200) 28-147 1(10-300) 28-148 1(10-400) 28-149 1(10-500) 28-150 1(10-600) 28-151 1(10-700) 28-152 1(10-800) 28-153 1(10-900(A)(1)) 28-154 1(10-900(A)(2-6) 28-155 1(10-900(B)) 28-156 1(10-1000) 28-157 3076  5- 3-88 1-3 28-94 3084  6-20-88 1 28-182 3086  7- 5-88 1 28-95 2 28-94 3 28-71 4 28-94 5 28-182 6 28-184 3088  7- 5-88 1 28-94, 28-95 3091  8-15-88 1 26-28 3095  9- 6-88 3 19-53 3104 10- 3-88 1 25-133 3105 10- 3-88 1 12-5 3112 11-21-88 1 4-4 3115  1-16-89 1 17-26 3116  1-16-89 1 28-97 28-210 3118  1-16-89 2 28-185 3122  2- 6-89 1 25-133 3127  2-20-89 1 19-55 3129  2-20-89 1 25-133 3131  3- 7-89 2 25-141 3132  3- 7-89 2 3-10 3134  3-20-89 2, 3 20-4 5 20-3 3139  4- 3-89 2, 3 20-4 4 20-7 5 20-4 3140  4-17-89 2 25-133 3141  4-17-89 2 26-243 3152  5-15-89 2 13-101 3156  6-19-89 2 7-171 3157  7-17-89 1, 2 13-121, 13-122 3-5 13-123 6 13-124 7 13-127 8 13-126 9 13-125 10 13-128 3160  8-21-89 1 9-27.1 3166  9- 5-89 1 25-146(a) 3167  9- 5-89 1 25-146(a) 3178 10- 2-89 1 19-56(3) 3179 10- 2-89 1 25-147(a) 3185 11-20-89 p. vii, Adopting 
Ordinance 3187 12-18-89 2       Rpld 26-26-26-32 26-46-26-55 26-71-26-81 26-96-26-99 26-111-26-124 3       Added 26-26-26-32 26-46-26-60 26-71-26-81 26-96-26-99 26-111-26-124 3188 12-18-89 1       Rpld 26-249 2       Rpld 26-250(a) 3       Added 26-249 3190 12-18-89 1 25-133(1) 3194  1-15-90 1 28-209(f) 3197  1-15-90 1 25-146(a) 3200  2-19-90 2 24-3 3203  2-19-90 1-9 5-351-5-359 3212  4- 2-90 1 28-71(46) 2 28-94 3213  4- 2-90 1 28-71(47) 2 28-94 3216  4-16-90 2 26-249 3224  5-21-90 1 2-1 3226  5-21-90 1 28-209(g) 3228  6-18-90 1 28-71 2 28-94 3229  6-18-90 1-8 6-1-6-8 3239  9-17-90 2 26-238(1)a.-d. 3241 10- 1-90 1 5-281 2 5-282(11) 3       Rpld 5-282(12) 4       Rnbd 5-282(13) as (12) 5       Added 5-282(13) 6 5-282(17) 7 5-282(19) 8 5-282(25) 3251 11-19-90 1, 2 2-221 3 2-223 4 2-222 5 2-224(a) 6, 7 2-225, 2-226 8 2-224(b) 9 2-227 10, 11 2-228 12-16 2-229-2-233 3268  4-15-91 1 28-94(8) 2 28-71(50), 28-95(50) 3       Added 28-95(50)a.-g. 3278  5-20-91 1 25-11 3282  6- 3-91 1 28-95(42)a.-i. 3 28-1 3285  7-15-91 1 7-86 3287  8- 5-91 1 Ch. 28, Art. V (tit.), Ch. 28, Art. V, Div. 1 (tit.) 2 28-165-28-174 3319  2- 3-92 Ch. 18, Art. II(note) 3326  3-16-92 1 26-238(1) 3327  3-16-92 1 26-242(1) 3329  3-16-92 1, 2 20-4(f) 3338  6-15-92 1 13-30 3339  7- 6-92 2, 3 20-1, 20-2 4       Rpld 20-9 5 20-9-20-13 3341  8- 3-92 1-3 28-94(5) 3349  9-14-92 1 2-206(a) 2, 3 2-206(c), (d) 3363  1-18-93 1 18-140 2 18-143, 18-144 3377  4-19-93 1 25-183 3378  4-19-93 1 5-206 3379  4-19-93 1 5-82(8) 3385  6- 7-93 1, 2 4-58(a) 3386  6- 7-93 I 29-1-29-23 3391  8- 2-93 1 28-91 2 28-94 3 28-98 3406  9- 7-93 1 26-238 3407  9- 7-93 1, 2 26-242 3408  9-20-93 1, 2 11-11 3410  9-20-93 1, 2 16-52 3411  9-20-93 1 2-48 3419 10- 4-93 1 29-2(12) 3435  1-10-94 1 5-27 3438  1-24-94 1-6 2-251-2-256 3443  2- 7-94 1       Rnbd 21-1       as 21-1(a) 2       Added 21-1(b) 3444  2-21-94 1 26-242(1) 3445  2-21-94 1 26-238(1) 3449  3-21-94 1 22-55(b) 2 28-97(c) 3451  3-21-94 1       Rpld 25-43(d) 3454  4- 4-94 1-3 24-4 3459  4-18-94 1 5-208(a)(3) 2 5-208(c) 3466  6-20-94 1 11-13 3470  7-18-94 1       Rpld 13-26-13-28, 13-34 2       Added 13-26-13-35 3       Rnbd 13-29-13-33       as 13-36-13-40 3471  7-18-94 1 11-12 3495 11- 7-94 1 20-1 2 20-3 3 20-4(a), (b), 20-4(d), (e) 4       Rpld 20-4(c) 3498 11-21-94 4-2, 4-3 3509  1-16-95 1 7-86 3517  3- 6-95 1 5-83 3520  3- 6-95 1       Rpld 7-170-7-181 2(31/2-1-31/2-11)       Add 7-181-7-191 3547  5-15-95 1, 2 8-1 3 8-5 4 8-27(10) 5 8-30 6 8-47(4)b. 7       Rpld 8-47(4)c.       Added 8-47(4)b.1., 2. 8 8-47(5) 9 8-50(2), (3) 3548  5-15-95 1 4-2, 4-3 2       Rnbd 4-2       as 4-2(a)       Added 4-2(b) 3 4-1 3550  5-15-95 1 28-185(g) 3551  5-15-95 2       Rpld 26-26-26-32, 26-46-26-60, 26-71-26-81, 26-96-26-99, 26-111-26-124 3       Added 26-26-26-32, 26-46-26-60, 26-71-26-81, 26-96-26-99, 26-111-26-124 3552  6- 5-95 1 4-1 3573  9-18-95 1 28-94 2 28-71(52) 3 28-71(53) 3593 11- 6-95 1 5-221 3598 12- 4-95 1 11-5 3608  1-22-96 1, 2 16-2 3613  2- 5-96 1, 2 24-5 3614  2- 5-96 1 28-94 2 28-71(54) 3637  4- 1-96 1-3 24-4 3648  5-20-96 1       Rpld 13-66-13-78       Added 13-66-13-85 3665  9-16-96 1 26-238 3666  9-16-96 1 26-242 3668  9-16-96 1 2-46 3674 10-16-96 1 18-139 3696  2- 3-97 1 2-46 3698  2-17-97 1 2-46 3700  2-17-97 1       Rpld 25-201 3703  3- 3-97 1 12-1 2 28-1 3 8-47(4)d.1.(i), 12-1-12-5, 12-26-12-29, 26-181(c), 26-238(4), 26-239, 28-1, 28-71(33)(37)(42), 28-91, 28-94, 28-95(5)(7)-(9) 28-97(a)(2), 28-117(b), 28-118(b), 28-119(b), 28-120(b), 28-121(b), 28-123, 28-125(4), 28-126, 28-181, 28-206(a) 3704  3- 3-97 1 28-1 2 28-95 3       Added 28-185(h) 4 12-5 3718  4-21-97 1 13-27(b)(2) 2       Rpld 13-36-13-38 3       Added 13-36 3723  5- 5-97 1 28-11(5) 3738  8- 4-97 1 19-51 2       Added 19-55(h) 3 19-56 4 19-57 3747  9-15-97       Added 25-136.1 3748 10- 6-97 1       Added 28-71(55) 2 28-94(7) 3       Added 28-95(51) 3758.1 11- 3-97 1 25-136.1 3759 11- 3-97 2 25-136.1 3761 11-12-97 1 5-82(7)(f)3. 1       Added 28-158 3767 11-17-97 1 28-94(3) 2       Added 28-95(52) 3 28-71(29) 4 28-1 3767-A 11-17-97 1 28-1 3774  1-19-98 1       Added 26-290-26-293 3775  1-19-98 1 25-136.1 3795  4-20-98 1, 3       Added 25-107.1 3824  9-21-98 1 24-47 3825 10-19-98 1 25-136.1 3831 11- 2-98 1       18-139(b)(7) 3841 12-14-98 1, 2, 4       Added 25-107.2 3843  1-19-99 1, 3       Added 25-141.1 3844  1-19-99 1       Added 25-153 3868  4- 5-99 1       Rpld 21-10(c) 3921 12-13-99 1       Added 26-148 3923  1-10-00 1 5-206 2       Dltd 5-207(4), (13) 3       Added 5-207(4) 4 5-231 5-7       Added 5-232(19)-(21) 8 5-281 9       Dltd 5-282(3), (5)-(7), (8)c., (9)e., (10)-(24) 10 5-282(1), (2) 11       Dltd 5-282(4),       Added 5-282(3) 12       Rnbd 5-282(8)       as 5-282(4),       Rltd 5-282(8)d.       as 5-282(4)c. 13       Rpld 5-282(9),       Added 5-282(5) 3929  2- 7-00 1 28-94(6) 3944  3-20-00 1 5-81 3977  8- 7-00 1 28-122 2 28-125 3989  9-18-00 1, 2 28-126 3 28-211-28-219 4 28-220-28-225 3994 10- 2-00 1 28-224(e) 4008 12-18-00 2 25-136.1 4009 12-18-00 1-10 9-26-9-35 4031  3-19-01 1       Added 11-14-11-16 4010  1-18-01 1       Rpld 13-81-13-85 2       Added 13-81-13-85 4019  2- 5-01 1 13-26(14) 2, 3 13-27(b)(4) 4035  4- 2-01 1-4       Added 2-266-2-269 4046  5- 8-01 1 11-12 4057  7-16-01 1, 2 28-94(7) 3       Added 28-95(53) 4       Added 28-71(56) 4068  9- 4-01 1 25-107.2 4071 10- 1-01 1 28-94(6) 4077 11-19-01 1, 2 4-6 4080 12-17-01 1, 2       Added 2-142 4087  2- 4-02 1       Added 11-11(1)c. 4103-B  5- 6-02 1, 2 Ch. 12 4104  5- 6-02 I 5-209 4105  5- 6-02 1 25-136.1 4106  5- 6-02 1       Added 25-133(14) 4113  5-20-02 1 28-94(1) 4114  5-20-02 1       Rpld 5-81, 5-82, 5-231, 5-232, 5-256, 5-257, 5-281, 5-282, 7-86, 7-88 2       Added 5-81, 5-82, 5-84, 5-231, 5-256, 5-281 3       Added 7-86 4118  6-17-02 1 25-136.1 4122  7-15-02 1-4 25-133 4126  8-19-02 1-3 9-28 4 23-2(d) 5, 6 23-3(b), (c) 7       Added 11-11(f) 8       Added 2-171 4128  8-19-02 1, 2 19-54(2), (4), (80 3 19-55 4 18-58(a) 4130 10- 1-02 2 26-238 4135  9-16-02 1 26-240 2 26-243(b), (d) 3 26-244 4136  9-16-02 1 24-47 4139 10- 7-02 1 26-55 4144 11- 4-02 1 17-26 4149 12-16-02 1       Added 28-95(54)-(56) 2 28-94(5) 4159  3- 3-03 1-3 25-136.1 4163  5- 5-03 2       Added 24-6 4165  6- 2-03 1 25-136.1 4168  7-21-03 1       Added 30-1-30-19 4172  7-21-03 1(A), (B) 25-136.1 4174  8- 4-03 1 11-13 4175  8- 4-03 1 28-94(6) 4182  9- 2-03 1, 2 26-238 4183  9- 2-03 1 26-242 4187  9-15-03 1, 2       Added 2-176, 2-177 4188  9-15-03 1, 3 25-107.2 4194 11-17-03 1A-D 25-136.1 4205  2-16-04 1       Added 2-36-2-45 4215  4- 5-04 1 28-94 4217  4- 5-04 1 25-107.1 4233  9- 7-04 1       Rpld 4-56-4-58 2       Added 4-56, 4-57 4235  9- 7-04 1       Rpld 7-41, 7-42 4246 10-18-04 1       Rpld 5-1-5-359 2       Added 5-1-5-909 4260 12-13-04 1       Rpld 19-54(5) 2-4       Rnbd (6)-(8)       as (5)-(7) 4261 12-13-04 1       Added 19-1 4262 12-13-04 1 25-107.1 4263 12-13-04 1 25-136.1 4281  5- 2-05 1, 2 25-136.1 4282  5- 2-05 1       Added 28-95(57) 2 28-94 4296  7-18-05 1 22-51(j)       Dltd (n) 4300  7-18-05 1 26-292(b)(2) 4301  7-18-05 1(A), 1(B) 24-26 4302  7-18-05 1, 2 24-26 4306  8- 1-05 1 22-4 2 22-8(b) 3 22-9(c) 4       Added 22-10 5       Added 22-11 6       Added 22-34 7       Added 22-35 8       Added 22-57 4307  8-15-05 1-3       Added 28-13-28-15 4308  8-15-05 1       Added 28-95(49) 2 28-94(6) 4310  8-15-05 1 25-136.1 4312  9- 6-05 1, 2 26-238 4313  9- 6-05 1, 2 26-242 4320  9-19-05 1(a), (b) 25-136.1 4324 11- 7-05 2 26-236, 26-238 26-242, 26-249 
26-250 4325 11- 7-05 1 26-249 4335  2- 2-06 1 30-6 2 30-7 4336  2- 6-06 1 26-26(a) 2 26-48(c) 3 26-48(d) 4 26-51 5 26-56 6 26-72(14) 7 26-74(b), (b)(16) 8 26-80(d) 9 26-80(e)-(g) 10 26-98 11 26-113(14) 12 26-123(a) 4341  3-20-06 1       Added 28-207(c) 4345  4- 3-06 1-3 24-4 4354  6- 5-06 1       Added 27-128-27-136 4356  6- 5-06 1 25-136.1 4357  6- 5-06 1 25-136.1 4358  6- 5-06 1 25-136.1 4359  6- 5-06 1 26-113(14) 4361  6-19-06 2       Rpld 2-61-2-80 4366  7-17-06 1, 2 14-32(a) 4373  9-18-06 1       Added 28-186 4379 11-20-06 1 28-186 2       Added 28-185(a)(5) 4430 11-19-07 1 25-107.1 4433 12-17-07 1 25-136.1 4435  1-21-08 1       Added 24-27 4456  4-21-08 1       added 26-95(58) 2 26-94(6) 4459  5- 5-08 1, 2 26-236-26-246 4474  8- 4-08 1, 2 7-49 4481 10- 6-08 1       Added 25-63 4487 11-17-08 1 25-133(4) 4495  2- 2-09 1 25-136.1 4496  2- 2-09 1 22-32(c) 2 22-33(a) 4499  2-16-09 1       Added 25-64 4500  2-16-09 1       Rpld 25-107.1 2       Added 25-107.1 4511  4-20-09 1 26-148 4515  5-18-09 1 25-107.2 4517  6-15-09 1       Added 11-21-11-26 4521  6-15-09 1 25-107.2 4536 11- 2-09 1 25-136.01 4537 11- 2-09 1 25-136.01 4539 11-16-09 1       Added 25-43(7) 4541  1-18-10 1 25-136.01 4547  2-15-10 1       Added 15-69-15-76 4548  3- 1-10 1       Added 5-325-5-341 4720  7-29-09       Rpld 28-1-28-225       Added 28.1-28.68 4555  5-17-10 1 25-136.1 4556  5-17-10 1 25-136.1 4557  5-17-10 1 25-136.1 4558  5-17-10 1 25-136.1 4559  5-17-10 1 25-136.1 4560  5-17-10 1 25-136.1 4561  5-17-10 1 25-136.1 4562  5-20-10 1       Added 24-51-24-54 4563  6- 7-10 2       Added 28.62 3A       Rnbd 28.62       as Ch. 28, Art. VI, § 28.63 3B       Rnbd 28.63       as Ch. 28, App. C 3C       Rnbd Ch. 28, Art. VI       as Ch. 28, Art. VII 4564  6- 7-10 2 29-1-29-15 3 29-16 4567  6-21-10 1       Rpld 8-1-8-9, 8-26-8-30, 8-46-8-50 2       Added 8-1-8-23 4569  8- 2-10 1 25-136.1 4582 12-13-10 1 25-136.1 4590  1-17-11 2       Added 11-27 4603  7-18-11 2       Added 25-133(18) 4604  7-18-11 1       Added 5-316 4610  8-15-11 1 28.39.1 2 28.39.5 B. 3 28.49 4612  9- 6-11 1       Rpld 30-16 2       Added 30-16 4617 10- 3-11 1       Rpld 13-96-13-101 2       Added 13-96-13-102 4624 10-17-11 1 25-133(14) 11-21-11       Rpld 24-4 4629 12-12-11 1 5-801-5-813, 5-830-5-840 4631  1-17-12 1       Rpld 5-204       Rpld 5-301-5-309       Rpld 5-401-5-405       Rpld 5-502-5-505       Rpld 7-86 2       Added 5-204       Added 5-301-5-309 (5-316)       Added 5-310       Added 5-401-5-405       Added 5-502-5-505       Added 7-92 3       Rnbd 5-310-5-316       as 5-311-5-317 4632  1-17-12 1       Rpld 18-86-18-93 2       Added 18-86-18-92 4643  3- 5-12 1       Added 21-121-21-126 4650  4-16-12 1 28.47.5 2 28.47.6 3 28.47.8 C. 4651  4-16-12 1 30-4 2 30-5 4665 10-15-12 2       Added 26-800-26-821 4678  2-18-13 1       Rpld 19-1, 19-26-19-31, 19-51-19-56       Rpld 28.59 2       Added 19-1, 19-2, 19-2.1-9-13, 19-25-19-39, 19-45-19-60, 19-65-19-74, 19-80-19-85, 19-90-19-94, 19-100, 19-101, 19-105-19-109, 19-115-19-118, 19-125-19-131, 19-135-19-141, 19-145-19-159 4681  2-18-13 1       Rpld 22-1-22-11, 22-31-22-35, 22-51-22-57 2(Exh. A)       Added 22-1-22-11, 22-12-22-57, 22-58-22-72, 22-73-22-113 4685  3-18-13 1       Added 5-1001-5-1006 4686  4-15-13 1       Rnbd 25-107.2       as 25-107.3 2       Added 25-107.2 4697  5-20-13 1 28.49 2 28.32.1 3       Rpld 28.32.3.F 4701  6-17-13 1(a)       Added 2-1  (b)       Rpld 2-46       Added 2-46  (c)       Rpld 2-171  (d)       Rpld 2-206       Added 2-206  (e) 2-224(a)  (f) 2-267(a) 2(a) 3-2(a)  (b)       Rpld 3-4       Added 3-4  (c)       Rpld 3-6-3-8  (d)       Rnbd 3-9       as 3-6  (e)       Rpld 3-10       Added 3-7  (f)       Rnbd 3-11       as 3-8 3       Rpld 4-34       Added 4-34 4(a)       Rpld 5-104       Added 5-104  (b) 5-212(b)  (c) 5-301(b)(4)  (d) 5-302(a)  (e), (f) 5-302(b)(4), (12)  (g) 5-304(b)  (h) 5-305(a)  (i) 5-305(b)(3)  (j) 5-306(a)  (k) 5-306(b)(3)  (l)       Rpld 5-307  (m) 5-308(a)  (n), (o) 5-308(b)(3), (8)  (p) 5-309(a)  (q)-(s)       Rpld 5-311-5-313       Added 5-311-5-313  (t), (u)       Rpld 5-314-5-317  (v)       Rpld 5-401       Added 5-401  (w) 5-402(a)  (x), (y)       Rpld 5-501, 5-502       Added 5-501, 5-502  (z)       Rpld 5-507       Added 5-507  (aa)-(dd)       Rpld 5-602-5-605       Added 5-602-5-605  (ee), (ff)       Rpld 5-701, 5-702       Added 5-701  (gg) 5-807(c), (m)  (hh), (ii)       Rpld 5-810, 5-811       Added 5-811  (jj) 5-812(tit.) 5-812(a)-(c)  (kk)       Rpld 5-813  (ll)       Rpld 5-833       Added 5-833  (mm) 5-834(b)  (nn)       Rpld 5-901-5-909       Added 5-901 5(a)       Rpld 7-1-7-3       Added 7-1-7-3  (b)       Rpld 7-43       Added 7-43  (c)       Rpld 7-49       Added 7-49  (d)       Rpld 7-51, 7-52       Added 7-51  (e)       Rpld 7-87, 7-89  (f)       Added 7-89  (g), (h)       Rpld 7-91-7-95       Added 7-91-7-94  (i)       Rpld 7-131-7-138       Added 7-131-7-138  (j)       Rpld 7-171       Added 7-171  (k)       Rpld 7-181       Added 7-181  (l)       Rpld 7-184, 7-185       Added 7-184  (m)       Rpld 7-187       Added 7-187  (n)       Rpld 7-191       Added 7-191 6(a)       Rpld 9-27-9-32  (b)       Added 9-27-9-31  (c)       Rpld 9-34       Added 9-34 7(a)       Rpld 10-1, 10-2       Added 10-1  (b)       Rpld 10-31       Added 10-31 8(a)-(c) 11-5(a)(1), (4), (6)  (d) 11-12(c)  (e) 11-13(c)(1)f.  (f) 11-14  (g) 11-22  (h) 11-24(d) 9       Rpld 13-26-13-36, 13-51, 13-52, 13-66-13-85, 13-96-13-102, 13-121-13-128       Added 13-10-13-19, 13-25-13-29, 13-40-13-53, 13-70-13-75, 13-96-13-102, 13-121-13-128 10(a) 15-29 15-61 15-62(a) 15-63-15-68  (b) 15-27(7)  (c) 15-30  (d)       Rpld 15-36       Added 15-36  (e) 15-62(a)  (f) 15-31 15-37, 15-38 11(a)       Rpld 16-26-16-31       Added 16-27, 16-28  (b) 16-51 12       Rpld 17-27 13(a)       Rpld 18-26-18-31       Added 18-26-18-29  (b)       Rpld 18-46-18-53       Added 18-46-18-52  (c)       Rpld 18-71, 18-72       Added 18-71, 18-72  (d) 18-111  (e)       Rpld 18-136       Added 18-136  (f)       Rpld 18-142-18-144       Added 18-142-18-144  (g)       Rpld 18-161-18-165       Added 18-161-18-165 14(a) 20-4(b), (c)  (b)       Rpld 20-7, 20-8       Added 20-7  (c) 20-10(a)  (d) 20-12(c) 15(a) 21-106 21-108 21-122  (b)       Rpld 21-7       Added 21-7  (c) 21-10(b)  (d)       Rpld 21-11 21-30-21-41 16(a)       Rpld 23-2       Added 23-2  (b)       Rpld 23-3(a), (b)       Added 23-3(a) 17(a) 24-6(d)  (b) 24-3 18(a) 25-1  (b) 25-5  (c) 25-62(tit.)  (d) 25-107.1  (e) 25-133(8)  (f) 25-150(b) 19(a) 26-26(a)(4)(a)  (b)       Rpld 26-29       Added 26-29  (c) 26-46(b)  (d) 26-47(e)  (e) 26-71(e), (f)  (f) 26-72(a)(6), (9)(C)  (g) 26-73(a)  (h)       Rpld 26-79       Added 26-79  (i) 26-80(a)  (j)       Rpld 26-81       Added 26-81  (k) 26-99(c)  (l) 26-113(14)  (m) 26-123(d)  (n)       Rpld 26-142       Added 26-142  (o)       Rpld 26-147(d)  (p)       Rpld 26-148       Added 26-148  (q)       Rpld 26-184-26-190, 26-192, 26-193  (r)       Rpld 26-191       Added 26-191  (s)       Rpld 26-211-26-217  (t)       Added 26-211  (u)       Rpld 26-236       Added 26-236  (v)       Rpld 26-238       Added 26-238  (w)       Rpld 26-240       Added 26-240  (x)       Rpld 26-242       Added 26-242  (y)       Rpld 26-244       Added 26-244  (z) 26-248(tit.) 26-248(b)(1)  (aa), (bb) 26-249, 26-250  (cc)       Rpld 26-276-26-283  (dd) 26-292(9) 20(a) 30-7  (b) 30-9(a)  (c) 30-14 4716 11-18-13 1(a)-(c)       Added 5-314-5-316  (d)       Rpld 5-508 4717 11-18-13 1       Added 28.48.A 4718 11-18-13 1       Added 22-58(d) 4728  2- 3-14 1 28.27.2.A, B, C.2 2       Added 28.43.2.J 4733  2-17-14 1 28.30.4.F 28.31.4.F 2 28.54.2.A.1.b 4736  3- 3-14 1 11-11(a) 2       Added 11-11.5 4740  4-21-14 1 28.49 2 28.63(40)       Added 28.63(40A) 4744  5-19-14 1 26-238 4745  6- 2-14 1 28.49 4753  9- 2-14 1       Added 26-276-26-283 4773  3-16-15 1 19-2.2(b) 2 19-4 3 19-54(4) 4 19-85(2) 5 19-117 6 19-138 4774  3-16-15 1-6       Added 16-91-16-96 4775  3-16-15 1 Ch. 21(tit.) 2       Added 21-130-21-199 3       Rpld 21-61-21-66 4781  4-16-15 1-7       Added 2-61-2-67 1 2-46(a)(3) 4800 12-14-15 1 9-26(a) 4802 12-14-15 1       Added 5-850-5-858 4804  1- 4-16 1       Added 2-108-2-114 4809  4-18-16 2 11-5(a)(4) 3 11-5(b), (c) 4813  5-16-16 2       Rpld 8-1-8-23       Added 8-1-8-24 4815  6- 6-16 1 7-186 4817  6-20-16 2       Added 18-53-18-59, Exh. A 4818  7-18-16 2(2.09) 2-109  (2.02, 2.03) 2-111, 2-112 4820  7-18-16 2(2.01) 28.23.3.B, C  (2.02) 28.23.4.B.3, 4, D-F  (2.03)       Added 28.23.5.F       Rnbd 28.23.5.F       as 28.23.5.G 28.24.3.B, C  (2.04) 28.24.4.B.3, 4, D-F  (2.05)       Added 28.24.5.F       Rnbd 28.24.5.F       as 28.24.5.G  (2.06) 28.25.3.B, C  (2.07) 28.25.4.B.3, D.1  (2.08)       Added 28.25.5.G       Rnbd 28.25.5.G       as 28.25.5.H 28.25.5.C  (2.09) 28.26.3.B, C  (2.10) 28.26.4.B.1-3, D.1., 4  (2.11) 28.27.4.A.1.c, d, 2.c, d, B.1.b, c  (2.12) 28.29.3.2, 3  (2.13) 28.29.4.C.2-4, D  (2.14)       Added 28.29.5.H, I       Rnbd 28.29.5.H       as 28.29.5.J 28.29.5.E  (2.15) 28.49  (2.16) 28.54.1.2.b.3 4821  7-18-16 2       Added 22-2(d)(6) 4827  8- 1-16 1 2-36-2-45 4830  8- 1-16 1       Added 25-21 4833  9- 6-16 2 25-107.3 4838  9-19-16 2 25-107.1 4841 10- 3-16 2(2.01) 28.23.4.F  (2.02) 28.24.4.F  (2.03) 28.54.1.a       Added 28.54.1.e  (2.04) 28.54.2.A.1.a 4857  2- 6-17 1       Rpld 27-26-27-45, 27-61-27-80, 27-96-27-102, 27-116-27-136       Added 27-26-27-39, 27-55-27-64, 27-75-27-86, 27-97-27-104, 27-115-27-121, 27-127-27-133 4861  4- 3-17 2(2.01)       Rpld 7-181       Added 7-181, 7-181.1  (2.02)       Rpld 7-186       Added 7-186  (2.03)       Rpld 7-171  (2.04)       Rpld 7-182  (2.05)       Rpld 7-187 4862  4- 3-17 2 11-11 4863  4-17-17 2(2.01) Ch. 26, Art. II(tit.)  (2.02)       Added 26-130-26-139  (2.03) 22-93 22-96  (2.04) 22-98 4866  5- 1-17 3 28.50.2.B 28.50.11.A., B       Rpld 28.50.11.C 28.63(6.) 4868  5- 1-17 3 28.29.4.A., B., D 4869  5- 1-17 3 28.48.A.4.A 4870  5- 1-17 3 28.21.1 28.21.4.A.1 28.22.4.A.1 28.23.1 28.23.4.A.1 28.24.1 28.24.4.A.1 29.43.5.D 4872  5- 1-17 3       Rpld 28.53.1-28.53.3       Added 28.53.1-28.53.6 Exh. A Ch. 28, App. A 4874  5-15-17 2 18-59, exh. A 4876  6-19-17 2(Exh. A)       Added 18-73 4879  6- 5-17 1       Rpld 5-830-5-840       Added 5-830-5-841 4881  6-19-17 2       Added 11-12.1 4882  6-19-17 2       Rpld 4-7 3 4-31 4, 5       Added 4-38, 4-39 4883  6-19-17 2       Rpld 18-136-18-144       Added 18-136-18-139 4887  8- 7-17 2 18-56(h), (i), 18-57(d), Ch. 18, Art. II, Exh. A 4888  8- 7-17 3       Added 7-171 4890  8- 7-17 3 28.48A.1 4891  8- 7-17 3 28.49.C, 28.63.1 4892  8- 7-17 3(3.01) 28.49.C  (3.02) 28.50.6.A  (3.03) 28.63.1 4893  8- 7-17 3(3.01) 28.49.C  (3.02) 28.50.6.A  (3.03) 28.63.1 4894  8- 7-17 2       Added 10-40-10-46 4895  8-21-17 II       Added 21-205-21-221 4896  8-21-17 II(Exh. A)       Added 21-231-21-241, 21-250 4897  8-21-17 2       Rpld 5-315 4901  9- 5-17 3(3.01) 28.49.C  (3.03) 28.50.6.A  (3.04) 28.63.1 4902  9-18-17 2(2.01) 26-142 2(2.02)       Added 26-243(e) 4911 10- 2-17 3 28.49.C 4921 12-11-17 2 5-303, 5-304 4924 12-11-17 2(2.01)       Rpld 28.13.1-28.13.12       Added 28.13.1-28.13.21  (2.02) 28.27.2  (2.03) 28.43.7, 28.43.8       Rpld 28.43.9       Rnbd 28.43.10, 28.43.11       as 28.43.9, 28.43.10       Rpld 28.43.12, 28.43.13 4926  1-16-18 3 22-11 4928  2- 5-18 2(2.01) 25-183  (2.02)       Added 25-184 4929  2- 5-18 2 11-13 4930  2- 5-18 3       Added 22-55A 4931  2-19-18 2       Added 31-1-31-3, 31-21-31-28, 31-31-31-37, 31-41, 31-42 4937  3-19-18 3       Rpld 30-1-30-19       Added 30-1-30-16 4       Rpld 28.47       Added 28.47 5       Added 2-115-2-122 4946  5- 7-18 3       Rpld 28.48A       Added 28.48A 4953  7-16-18 2 2-36-2-45 4958  8- 6-18 3(3.1)       Rpld 28.51.6.E.       Rnbd 28.51.6.F.       as 28.51.6.E.  (3.2)       Added 28.51.8 4959  8-20-18 2 11-11(a), (e) 4964  9-17-18 2(Exh. A)       Added 5-303(b) 4967 10- 1-18 2(2.01)       Added 2-46(a)(14)  (2.02)       Added 2-123-2-125 4971 10- 1-18 3       Rpld 22-12-22-41, 22-43-22-54       Added 22-12-22-49 4972 11- 5-18 3       Rpld 2-266-2-269       Added 2-266-2-276 4974 12-10-18 3 20-7(d) 4       Added 20-14 4975 12-10-18 2(2.01) 24-49  (2.02) 24-53  (2.03) 24-54 4976 12-10-18 4 17-26  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
State 
Constitution 
Article Section Section  
this Code 1 17 Char., § 10.07 XI V Char., § 1.02 5 Char., § 10.17  
Texas 
Administrative 
Code 
T.A.C. Section  
this Code tit. 25, ch. 228 9-26 tit. 30 26-130 tit. 30, ch. 288.20(b) 26-276 26-288 tit. 30, ch. 30 5-325 5-326 tit. 30, ch. 344 5-326 tit. 30, ch. 344.1(36) 5-337 tit. 30 5-339 285.91(10) 5-329 288.20(b) 26-276 26-280 344.50 5-329  
Vernon's 
Ann. 
C.C.P. Section  
this Code 2.131-2.136 2-142 Ch. 45 2-276 45.056 2-270 2-271 45.059 11-13 45.203 2-273 Ch. 62 11-22 102.0172 2-266 102.0174 2-270  
V.T.C.A. 
Agriculture 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code Ch. 63 26-134 Ch. 75 26-134 Ch. 76 26-134 142.001 et seq. Ch. 4 251.002 5-325 5-327  
V.T.C.A. 
Alcoholic 
Beverage 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code 11.38 3-2 Ch. 32 28.62 61.36 3-2 101.75 21-125 105.03(c), 105.03(d) 3-3 105.05(c), 105.05(d) 3-3 109.33 3-5 109.53 3-5(b), 3-5(c)  
V.T.C.A. 
Civil 
Practice 
and 
Remedies Code 
Section Section  
this Code 102.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 102.002(c) 2-183  
V.T.C.A. 
Education 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code 37.122 3-8 96.641 2-142  
V.T.C.A. 
Family 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code Ch. 31 11-13 51.08 11-13  
V.T.C.A. 
Finance 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code Ch. 371 15-69  
V.T.C.A. 
Government 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code Ch. 285 5-329 312.001 et seq. 1-2 Ch. 344 5-326 Ch. 365 5-326 Ch. 411, Subch. H 11-5 418.001 et seq. Ch. 6 418.152 6-7 442.001(3) 21-233 551.041 28.68 853.305 16-52  
V.T.C.A. 
Health 
and 
Safety 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code 355.002 5-327 371.024 26-134 Ch. 481 11-14 27-77 Ch. 483 27-77 Ch. 773 7-186 Ch. 822 4-39 Ch. 822D 4-39  
V.T.C.A. 
Human 
Resources 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code Ch. 42 28.62 42.041(b)(14) 18-73  
V.T.C.A. 
Labor 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code 407.001 et seq. 21-189  
V.T.C.A. 
Local 
Government 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code Ch. 42 12-3 43.001 et seq. Ch. 17 43.002 22-10 28.15.B Ch. 45 22-10 53.001 et seq. 1-1 54.001 1-12 Ch. 123 28.62 Ch. 143 2-142 143.001 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. II 143.003 16-27 143.006 16-28 143.021 et seq. 16-31 143.084 16-26 143.103 16-26 181.001 et seq. 2-141 Ch. 201 2-1 Ch. 211 28.2, 28.7 28.10 211.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 3 Ch. 17 211.001-211.013 2-103 211.006 28.10 211.007 Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 3 211.008 2-103 211.008- 211.01 28.8 211.011 28.8 Ch. 212 28.27, 28.62 212.001 et seq. Ch. 22 212.0065 22-22 212.011 et seq. Ch. 17 212.013 22-45 212.172 et seq. 22-46 213.001 et seq. Ch. 21 213.002 5-2 Ch. 214 13-19 214.003 5-835 215.031 Ch. 15 216.001 et seq. Ch. 19 Ch. 242 22-30 22-40 Ch. 243 29-1 Ch. 245 28.15B 245.001- 245.026 28.9 253.001 Ch. 21 Ch. 21, Art. IV Ch. 283 21-131 21-215 283.057 21-196 283.057(a), (b) 21-237 Ch. 284 21-205-21-207 21-209-21-212 21-215-21-217 21-221 21-231-21-241 Ch. 284, Subch. C 21-231, 21-232 Ch. 284, Subch. D 21-210 284.002 21-231, 21-232 21-234 284.002(12)(B)(1) 21-236 284.003 21-210 21-234 284.003(a)(1)(C) 21-234 284.003(a)(2)(C) 21-234 284.003(a)(3)(B) 21-234 284.054 21-215 284.101(a)(3), (b) 21-233, 21-234 284.102 21-234 284.102(1) 21-212 21-234 284.103 21-206, 21-210 21-232, 21-234 284.104(a) 21-233 284.104(b) 21-233 284.105 21-211 21-231-21-233 284.107 21-217 21-231, 21-234 21-238 284.108 21-231, 21-234 285.108(a)(1), (2) 21-234 284.109 21-210 21-233 284.110 21-233 284.157 21-210 284.301 21-231 284.302 21-216 21-237 284.304 21-234 285.056 21-233, 21-234 341.012 16-91 342.011 et seq. Ch. 7 342.012 5-1 7-49 Ch. 551 11-5 5-211 5-212  
V.T.C.A. 
Natural 
Resources 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code 85.001 et seq. Ch. 14 89.001 et seq. Ch. 14 113.001 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. IV, Div. 2  
V.T.C.A. 
Occupations 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1301 5-326 1903.002 5-326 1903.002(c)(1) 5-326 Ch. 1986 15-70 Ch. 2001 24-3  
V.T.C.A. 
Penal 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code Ch. 19 27-77 Ch. 20 27-77 Ch. 21 29-5 21.01 27-77 29-10 Ch. 22 27-77 29-5 Ch. 29 27-77 Ch. 30 27-77 Ch. 31 27-77 Ch. 32 27-77 Ch. 35 29-5 Ch. 37 27-77 38.10 2-273 Ch. 43 27-77 Ch. 46 11-5 27-77 49.031 21-125  
V.T.C.A. 
Tax 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code 11.13(d) Ch. 24, Art. II 24-26 11.3(e) 24-26 11.13(f) Ch. 24, Art. II 11.43(c) Ch. 24, Art. II 11.261 24-27 33.07 24-2 101.008 Ch. 24 302.101 et seq. Ch. 24 Ch. 312 24-4 321.001 et seq. 24-1 321.105 24-1 321.210(a), (b) 24-6 351.001 et seq. Ch. 24, Art. III 351.004 24-54  
V.T.C.A. 
Transportation 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code ch. 501 25-63 541.201 25-63 543.009 2-273 551.201 25-63 552.0071(a) 25-183 552.0071(g) 25-183 Ch. 601 25-21 25-63 601.124 21-189 683.001 13-40 13-70 683.011 13-44 683.013 13-45 683.014 13-47 683.015 13-48 683.016 13-46 683.031 13-49 683.032 13-50 683.034 13-52 683.071 13-70 683.074 13-72 683.077 13-70  
V.T.C.A. 
Utility 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code 11.003 21-206 21-232 51.002 21-206 54.024 21-215 Ch. 66 21-215 251.001 et seq. 21-131  
V.T.C.A. 
Water 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code 11.039 26-280 16.315 8-1 Ch. 26 13-121 26-132  
_____ 
Vernon's 
Ann. 
Civ. 
Stat. 
Article Section Section  
this Code 110B 61.001 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. III Tit. 110B 62.001 16-51 165-3 Ch. 9 165-3 et seq. Ch. 9 179(d) 3(d) 24-3 695g Ch. 16, Art. IV 717k 2-71 912a-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. II 969c Ch. 18, Art. II 18-29(b) 970a 12-3 Art. 1175 29-1 4413(29ee) 11-5 4436 Ch. 13 Ch. 13, Art. II 4474 et seq. Ch. 9 4476-5 Ch. 9 4476-10 9-38 4476-10b 9-38 4477-1 Ch. 13 13-121 2-4 Ch. 13 5, 6 Ch. 26, Art. II 10-14 Ch. 26, Art. III 15 Ch. 23 20 Ch. 26, Art. II 4477-6a Ch. 4 3.04 4-56(b)(1), 4-56(b)(2) 4477-7c Ch. 20 4477-7n 13-121 4477-9a Ch. 13, Art. III 4.03-4.07 Ch. 19 5221f 12-1, 28.62 5221f 4A 12-5 6243-101 5-282(5) 6687-1 27-129 6687-9a 28.41, 28.42 6701d 12-5 Ch. 25 25-141(c)(1) 1-20 25-1 22 25-5 24 25-17 24(a) 25-16 25 25-15 27(a)(1) Ch. 25, Art. V 27(a)(2) 25-3 27(a)(4) 25-49 27(a)(6) 25-135 27(a)(8) 25-43 36, 37 25-88, 25-89 38-41 25-14 49 25-177 52, 53 25-41, 25-42 59(c) 25-61 61(a) 25-55 62 25-51 65 25-43 68, 69 25-44 70 25-45 71 25-46 72 25-46, 25-47 73 25-135 75 25-52 79 25-182 81 25-180, 25-181 85 25-60 86 25-138 91(a) 25-135 91(c) 25-135 92 25-137 94 25-151 95 25-132 96 25-143 97 25-131 100, 101 25-56, 25-57 102, 103 25-12 104(a) 25-53 166 Ch. 25, Art. IV 169 Ch. 25, Art. IV 170(a) 25-110 172 25-111 6701h 15-2 8861 5-257(4)(a) 9201 Ch. 7 Ch. 7, Art. IV  
