CODE OF ORDINANCES OF EVERMAN, TEXAS 
____________ 
CHARTER AND GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Adopted, December 7, 1988 
Effective, December 7, 1988 
____________ 
Published in 1988 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
  
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Ray Richardson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Susan Mackey 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Johnnie Allen 
Miriam Davila 
Kelly Denison 
Michelle McIntire 
Judy Sellers 
City Council 
____________ 
Michael Box 
City Manager 
____________ 
Bojorquez Law Firm 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Mindi Parks 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code is a codification of the ordinances of the City of Everman, Texas, of a general and permanent nature. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the city's 1977 Code, as supplemented through Ordinance No. 313, adopted April 17, 1984, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1977 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinances included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the third section of Chapter 7 is 7-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 7-2 and 7-3 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 7-2.1, 7-2.2 and 7-2.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of James S. Vaught, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Bob Hurley, former City Manager, and Mr. Don Driver, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
	Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 393 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF EVERMAN, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF EVERMAN, TEXAS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Everman, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 20, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 1, 1987, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of, not exceeding, two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) in all cases arising under the ordinances of the city that govern fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, and not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) in all other cases; provided, however, that where the offense is one for which a penalty is fixed by state law, the penalty shall be the same as fixed by state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies, such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 1, 1987, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective December 7, 1988. 
Passed and adopted by the Everman City Council this 7th day of December, 1988. 
APPROVED: 
/s/ Joe Sample 
Mayor 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Jerry L. Schlangenstein 
City Secretary 
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city council of the City of Everman, Texas, held on the 7th day of December, 1988. 
/s/ Jerry L. Schlangenstein 
City Secretary 
(SEAL)  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This Part I of the Everman Code of Ordinances contains the Charter of the City of Everman, adopted by the electorate at an election held April 5, 1986. Material in brackets has been added where necessary to correct obvious errors or to facilitate indexing, except that obviously misspelled words (as opposed to incorrectly used words) have been corrected without notation. The original arrangement and numbering system have been retained. 
Ordinance No. 535, adopted July 15, 2003, called for an election on Sept. 13, 2003, to amend the City Charter to read as herein set out. 
 
ARTICLE I. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES 
 
Section 1.01. - Incorporation. 
The citizens of the City of Everman, Tarrant County, Texas do hereby declare that the City of Everman is incorporated as a political subdivision of the State of Texas under the name of "City of Everman," hereinafter referred to as the "City," and with the duties, rights, and powers provided in this Charter and State Law.  
Section 1.02. - Form of Government. 
The City government shall be a "Council Manager Government." Pursuant to the provisions of and subject only to the limitations imposed by this Charter and by the Constitution and statutes of the State of Texas, the City Council shall be vested with all the powers of the City. The City Council shall enact legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies and appoint the City Manager. The City Manager shall execute the laws and administer the government of the City. 
(Res. No. 1989-5-3)  
Section 1.03. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the City shall be the ones that exist when this Charter is adopted and shall remain in effect until changed.  
Section 1.04. - Change of Boundaries. 
The City Council may, by ordinance, annex territory lying adjacent to the City. The City Council may, by ordinance, deannex territory within the City, and/or exchange territory with other cities and towns. These actions are subject only to state law. In accordance with state law, the people who reside in annexed territory shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of citizens of the City, and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the City.  
Section 1.05. - Petition for Annexation. 
The City Council may provide for annexation upon petition from a majority of the voters residing in the area to be annexed, or upon petition from a majority of the landowners, such area to be annexed to be adjacent to the boundaries of the City.  
ARTICLE II. - RIGHTS AND POWERS OF THE CITY 
 
Section 2.01. - General. 
The City shall have all the rights and powers granted to municipalities and cities under the general laws, and all the rights and powers of self-government that now exist or may hereafter be granted to Home Rule Cities by the Constitution and the general and special laws of the State of Texas, together with all the rights and powers so granted as fully and completely as though they were enumerated in this Charter. Such rights and powers, whether express or implied, shall be exercised and enforced in the manner prescribed by applicable State Law or by this Charter, and when not prescribed herein, in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance or resolution of the City Council.  
Section 2.02. - Construction and Severability. 
The rights and powers of the City under this Charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the City in the event if [of] conflict between the City and other governmental agencies or bodies, corporations, or individuals, and the specific mention of particular rights or powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general rights or powers stated in this Article. In addition, should any phrase, clause, sentence, or provision of this Charter be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity and applicability of the remainder of this Charter shall not be affected.  
Section 2.03. - Enumerated Powers. 
A.  To enact, establish and enforce codes, licenses and ordinances for the maintenance of good government and the interest and well-being of its inhabitants. 
B.  To cooperate with the government of the State of Texas, or any agency or political subdivision thereof, the government of the United States or its agencies, for any lawful purpose for the advancement of the interest, safety, convenience and welfare of its inhabitants. 
C.  To exercise the right of eminent domain, the right of extraterritorial jurisdiction and to have exclusive dominion over all public property in any manner permitted by the Constitution and the laws of the State of Texas. 
D.  To contract and be contracted with; to sue; to buy, sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as its interests require. 
E.  To establish, maintain, improve, alter, abandon, or vacate public streets, right of way, sidewalks, alleys, squares, parks and other public ways, and to police the use thereof. 
F.  The City shall have the power to construct and maintain, within or without its corporate limits, streets, flood control facilities and sanitary, water and storm drainage facilities in, over, under or upon all public property or easements granted for that purpose and to levy assessments for the costs of such improvements. The City shall have the power to collect Attorney's fees for the collection of paving assessments in foreclosure cases as allowed under State Law. It shall have the power to cause liens to be established for the purpose of securing the payment of such levies and shall have the power to compel the use of such improvements by the inhabitants of the City.  
Section 2.04. - Transfer of Rights, Powers, and Obligations. 
A.  The City shall succeed to all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings pending or in process at the effective date of this Charter, except as modified pursuant to the provisions herein; and each matter shall be maintained, carried on, or dealt with by the City authority as appropriate under this Charter. 
B.  All City ordinances, resolutions, orders, and regulations in force on the date this Charter becomes fully effective are repealed to the extent that they are inconsistent or interfere with the operation of this Charter or of ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant hereto. To the extent that the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas permit, all laws governing this City or its agencies, officers, or employees at the time this Charter becomes fully effective are superseded and void to the extent that they are inconsistent or interfere with the operation of this Charter or of ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant hereto.  
Section 2.05. - Exclusive Domain of Public Ways. 
The City shall have exclusive domain, control and jurisdiction in, upon, over and under all alleys, streets, highways, gutters and sidewalks, and all public lands and rights-of-way (collectively for the purpose of this section referred to as "Public Ways") situated in the City, and regulate the use thereof, and require the removal from all Public Ways and other public property or places of all obstructions, telegraph, telephone or other poles, carrying electric wires or signs, encroachments of every nature or character. Such exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction in, upon, over or under the Public Ways of the City shall also include, but not be limited to, the right to regulate, locate, remove, or prohibit the location of utility pipes, lines, wires or other property of any sort. Any listing of a specific authority shall not limit or exclude any other power the City has over Public Ways. The right of control and use of the Public Ways is hereby declared to be inalienable to the City, except by ordinances not in conflict with this Charter.  
ARTICLE III. - THE CITY COUNCIL 
 
Section 3.01. - City Government. 
The governing body of the City shall be known as the "City Council of the City of Everman," hereinafter referred to as the "City Council." The City Council shall be composed of a Mayor and six (6) other Council members.  
Section 3.02. - Expense Reimbursement. 
The Mayor will receive the sum of fifty ($50) dollars and each member of the City Council shall receive the sum of twenty-five ($25) dollars for each regularly scheduled City Council meeting duly attended. In addition to the above, the City shall, upon receiving receipts and other appropriate documentation for authorized expenditures, reimburse the members of the City Council for other necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of their official duties.  
Section 3.03. - Mayor and Mayor Pro-Tem. 
The Mayor shall preside at City Council meetings, and shall be recognized as head of the City government, but shall have no regular administrative duties other than signing such documents as the City Council may require. The Mayor shall have all the rights, duties and responsibilities of a Council Member including the right to vote, but shall have no veto power. The City Council shall elect one of its members Mayor Pro-Tem to serve a 1-year term. The Mayor Pro-Tem shall act as Mayor in the absence of the Mayor and shall have the same duties and powers as the Mayor when doing so.  
Section 3.04. - General Duties and Powers. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or by this Charter, all powers of the City shall be vested in the City Council. The City Council shall exercise these powers to ensure the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the City by law and by this Charter. Specifically, the City Council is provided with, but not limited to, the following powers: 
A.  To enact municipal legislation. 
B.  To appoint and remove all persons appointed by the City Council. If removed from office a hearing shall be granted if requested by the removed person. 
C.  To fix the compensation for all appointed City officers. 
D.  To create, change, or abolish all offices, departments, and agencies created by this Charter; and to assign additional duties and powers consistent with this Charter to officers, departments, and agencies created by this Charter. 
E.  To establish operating policy. 
F.  To establish the boundaries of the City. 
G.  To create, abolish and establish the duties of any board or commission to assist in the business or interest of the City.  
Section 3.05. - Prohibitions. 
A.  Holding other office. Except where authorized by law, no member of the City Council shall hold any other City office or employment with the City during the term for which the Council member was elected to the City Council. No former member of the City Council shall hold any compensated appointed City office or employment with the City for a period of two years after the expiration of his term of office. 
B.  Appointments and Removals. Neither the City Council nor any of its members shall, in any manner, dictate the appointment or removal of any City Manager officer or employee whom the City Manager or any of his subordinates are empowered to appoint. The City Council may, however, express its views fully and freely, discussing with the City Manager anything pertaining to the appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
C.  Interference in Administrative Matters. Except for the purpose of inquiry or investigation, the City Council shall deal with the administrative departments and the personnel of these departments solely through the City Manager. Neither the City Council nor any of its members shall give an order, either publicly or privately, to any subordinate of the City Manager. 
(Res. No. 1989-5-3)  
Section 3.06. - Vacancies and Forfeiture of Office. 
A.  Vacancies. The office of a Council member shall become vacant upon the death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by law or by this Charter. All vacancies shall be filled in accordance with Article IV of this Charter. 
B.  Forfeiture of Office. A Council member shall forfeit office if the member: 
1.  Lacks at any time during the terms of office any qualifications for the office prescribed by law or by this Charter. 
2.  Violates any express prohibition of this Charter. 
3.  Fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the City Council without prior consent of the City Council, unless the absence is caused by illness or by the illness of a family member.  
Section 3.07. - Investigations. 
The City Council may investigate the affairs of the City and the official conduct of any City department, office, or agency. For this purpose, the City Council may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and compel the production of all pertinent evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued by the City Council shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, as provided by ordinance.  
Section 3.08. - Meetings of the City Council. 
A.  The City Council shall hold at least one regular meeting each month and as many additional meetings as it deems necessary to transact the business of the City. The City Council shall fix by ordinance the date and time of the regular meeting(s). 
B.  Except as provided by State Law, all meetings shall be open to the public and shall be held and notice given in accordance with the Open Meeting Act, as amended or superseded. 
C.  Special meetings may be called by the City Secretary on the written request of the Mayor or any City Council members. All City Council meetings shall be held at City Hall or at such place that will permit the attendance of the general public. 
D.  A closed or executive session must be conducted in compliance with state law. 
E.  Rules and Minutes. The City Council shall determine its own rules and order of business, and shall provide for keeping minutes of all its proceedings. The minutes shall be a public record. 
F.  Voting. Except on procedural motions, voting shall be by roll call. The ayes and nays shall be recorded in the minutes. Four (4) members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum. All matters may be passed by a majority of the quorum except when otherwise provided by state law or this Charter. 
(Res. No. 1989-5-3)  
Section 3.09. - Form of Ordinances. 
Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in substantially the form required for final adoption. The subject of the ordinance shall be clearly expressed in the title except ordinances or resolutions making appropriations or authorizing the contracting of indebtedness or issuance of bonds or other evidence of indebtedness. The enacting clause of every ordinance shall be: "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Everman," but the same shall be omitted when the ordinances of the City are codified and published in a book or pamphlet form by the City. Any ordinance which repeals or amends an existing ordinance or part of the City code shall clearly set forth the provision or provisions being repealed or amended and, if amended, shall further clearly set forth the amendment being made.  
Section 3.10. - Procedure for Enacting Ordinances and Resolutions; Publications. 
A.  Ordinances and resolutions may be passed at any regular meeting or special meeting called for that purpose provided notice has been given in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. It shall not be necessary to the validity of any ordinance that it be read more than one time or considered at more than one session of the City Council. 
B.  Every ordinance, resolution or motion shall require on passage the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present unless more is required by state law or this Charter. 
C.  The descriptive caption or title of an ordinance that imposes a penalty, fine or forfeiture and the penalty for violating the ordinance shall be published at least once in the official newspaper of the City. 
D.  An ordinance required to be published takes effect when the publication requirement is satisfied, unless the ordinance provides otherwise, and an ordinance that is not required to be published takes effect when adopted unless the ordinance provides otherwise. 
E.  All ordinances and resolutions may be admitted and received in all courts, subject to the rules of evidence and laws of jurisdictions where proof of such ordinances and resolutions are tendered, without further proof.  
Section 3.11. - Actions Requiring an Ordinance. 
A.  The Council shall legislate by ordinance. In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provision of this Charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of the Council shall be by ordinance which: 
1.  adopt, amend, or establish an administrative code; 
2.  alter or abolish any city board, department, office, or agency; 
3.  provide for a fine or other penalty or eatables a rule or regulation for violation of which a fine or penalty is imposed; 
4.  levy taxes, except as otherwise provided in Chapter 9 of this Charter with respect to the property tax levied by adoption of the budget; 
5.  grant, renew or extend a franchise; 
6.  regulate the rate charged for services by a public utility; 
7.  authorize the borrowing of money that cannot be repaid within the current fiscal year; 
8.  convey, lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands of the City; 
9.  adopt with or without amendment ordinances proposed under the initiative power; and 
10.  amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted, except as otherwise provided in Chapter 8 of this Charter with respect to repeal of ordinances reconsidered under the referendum power. 
B.  Acts other than those referred to in the preceding sentence may be done either by ordinance, resolution or minute order.  
Section 3.12. - Authentication and Recording, Codification, and Printing. 
A.  Authentication and Recording. The City Secretary shall record in full, in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose, all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the City Council. This record shall be authenticated by the signature of the City Secretary. 
B.  Codification. After adoption of this Charter, the City Council shall provide for the updating of the general codification of all City ordinances and resolutions having the force and effect of the law.  
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL ELECTION 
 
Section 4.01. - City Council Places and Terms. 
A.  The City Council shall be composed of a Mayor and six (6) Council members. All members of the City Council, other than the Mayor, shall be elected under the place system. 
B.  The Mayor and each member of the City Council shall hold office for a two (2) year term, with all places and the Mayor being elected in odd numbered years. The current terms of the Mayor, Place 2, Place 4 and Place 6, otherwise expiring in May of 2012, shall be extended to the May, 2013 general election date. 
(Res. No. 1989-5-3; Ord. No. 646, 2-7-12 (approved by voters 5-12-12))  
Section 4.02. - Annual Elections. 
The regular election for City Council members and Mayor, whose terms are expiring, shall be held on the May uniform election date occurring in odd numbered years or as otherwise permitted by state law. Qualified voters shall be entitled to vote for one (1) candidate for each place. The City Council shall give notice of the election. 
(Res. No. 1989-5-3; Ord. No. 646, 2-7-12 (approved by voters 5-12-12))  
Section 4.03. - Regulation of Elections. 
All elections shall be held in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas and this Charter. The City Council shall appoint the Election Judges and shall provide for all materials and pay all expenses in holding the elections. The Election Judges shall be authorized to prevent unlawful practices such as electioneering or loitering near voting places.  
Section 4.04. - Political Activities of Salaried Officers, Employees, and Candidates. 
A.  No salaried officer or employee of the City may campaign for or against any issue; influence the nomination, election, or defeat of any candidate for Mayor or Council member; or campaign for or against the recall of the Mayor or Council member. This provision shall not prohibit the ordinary exercise of the right to express opinions and to vote. 
B.  No candidate for municipal office may solicit the support, the endorsement, or the financial contributions of any City employee.  
Section 4.05. - Qualifications for Candidacy. 
Each member of the City Council, including the Mayor, shall be a qualified voter of the City, and shall have resided in the City for one (1) year before the date of election, The Mayor or any other member of the City Council who ceases to reside in the City shall immediately forfeit office. In addition, any person who is delinquent in payment of taxes to the City shall not be qualified to hold office on the City Council. Persons holding an elective City position whose position is not then currently up for election must first resign their current position before being eligible to file for another City elective position. 
(Res. No. 1989-5-3)  
Section 4.06. - Canvassing of Election and Declaration of Results. 
Returns of each municipal election shall be delivered by the Election Judge to the City Secretary and to the City Council. The candidate receiving a majority of the votes cast for each place shall be declared elected. If no candidate receives a majority of all votes cast for an office, the City Council shall, upon declaring the official results of the election, immediately order a run-off election for each office remaining to be filled. The City Council shall, on the first day following the completion of the official canvass, call a run-off election to be held on the second Saturday following such call. In the run-off election, the ballot shall list, as determined by lot, the names of the two (2) candidates receiving, at the first elections, the first and second highest number of votes for a given office. Any tie in the run-off shall be decided by lot.  
Section 4.07. - Vacancies. 
If one vacancy with less than one year in the unexpired term occurs on the Council then the remaining members shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term and may do so by appointment or by calling a special election. If two or more simultaneous vacancies occur, or if the unexpired term is more than one year, then the remaining members of the Council shall call a special election to fill the vacancies for the unexpired terms. 
(Res. No. 1989-5-3)  
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION 
 
Section 5.01. - City Administration. 
The City Council shall appoint a City Manager by affirmative vote of a majority of the Council. The City Council shall by majority vote determine and fix the City Manager's compensation. The City Manager shall be chosen solely upon the basis of executive and administrative training, experience, and abilities, without regard to political considerations. At the time of appointment, residence in the City shall not be required; however, the City Council should consider the driving time required of the applicant to respond to any City emergency. Neither the Mayor nor any Council member may be appointed City Manager or acting City Manager while holding office or for a period of two (2) years after term has ended. 
(Res. No. 1989-5-3)  
Section 5.02. - Disability or Termination of the City Manager. 
A.  The City Manager, within thirty (30) days after taking office, shall designate by letter filed with the City Secretary, a qualified administrative officer of the City to perform the duties of the City Manager in his absence or disability. Such designation shall be subject to approval of the Council. No member of the City Council shall serve as Acting City Manager. Upon resignation or termination of the City Manager, the Acting City Manager shall perform the duties of the City Manager until a new City Manager or Acting City Manager is appointed by the Council. 
B.  Should the need for an Acting City Manager occur prior to the City Manager submitting a designee or prior to the Council's approval of the City Manager's designee, the Council shall appoint an Acting City Manager. 
C.  The City Manager may select a different Acting City Manager by repeating the letter of designation and obtaining the Council's approval.  
Section 5.03. - Removal of the City Manager. 
The City Council, acting in its sound discretion, may suspend or remove the City Manager at any time by an affirmative vote of a majority of the Council. The City Council shall give the City Manager written reason for proposed removal at least one (1) month prior thereto; and shall, upon written request of the City Manager, provide a public hearing prior to removal to provide an opportunity for the City Manager to present a defense against any accusations made. The City Council shall not arbitrarily or capriciously remove the City Manager, but its decision in such matters shall be final. 
(Res. No. 1989-5-3)  
Section 5.04. - Duties and Powers of the City Manager. 
The City Manager shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the City, and shall be responsible to the City Council. Responsibilities of the City Manager shall include the following: 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, appoint, suspend, layoff, demote, or remove any directors or heads of administrative departments, or any other administrative officers, or employees of the City. 
B.  Supervise and control directly or indirectly all administrative departments, agencies, officers, and employees. 
C.  Attend all City Council meetings with the right to take part in the discussion, but have no vote. 
D.  Prepare and submit the annual budget and be responsible for its administration after it is adopted. 
E.  Submit to the City Council a report at the end of the fiscal year on the finances and administrative activities of the City for the preceding year. 
F.  Keep the City Council advised of the financial condition and the future needs of the City, and make such recommendations to the City Council on matters of policy and other matters as may seem desirable. 
G.  Combine, abolish, or create administrative departments subject to the approval of the City Council. 
H.  Have such other powers and perform such other duties as prescribed by this Charter and the City Council, in accordance with State Law. 
I.  See that all State Laws and City ordinances are effectively enforced. 
(Res. No. 1989-5-3)  
Section 5.05. - Administrative Departments. 
All administrative departments shall remain in effect as presently established unless changed by the City Council by ordinances.  
Section 5.06. - City Secretary. 
The City Council shall appoint the City Secretary by an affirmative vote of a majority of the City Council. The City Council shall by majority vote determine and fix the City Secretary's compensation. The City Secretary shall: 
A.  Give notice of all official public meetings of the City Council in a manner consistent with this Charter and State Laws. 
B.  Attend all public meetings and hearings of the City Council. 
C.  Keep the minutes of the proceedings of all public official meetings and hearings of the City Council in a manner prescribed by the City Council consistent with applicable law. 
D.  Act as custodian of all official records of the City Council. 
E.  Hold and maintain the seal of the City of Everman, and affix this seal to all appropriate documents. 
F.  Authenticate by signature and seal, and record all ordinances, resolutions and proclamations of the City. 
G.  Perform such other duties as may be required by the City Council, consistent with this Charter and the laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 5.07. - Removal of City Secretary. 
The City Council, acting in its sound discretion, may suspend or remove the City Secretary at any time by an affirmative vote of a majority of the Council. The City Council shall give the City Secretary written reason for proposed removal at least one (1) month prior thereto; and shall, upon written request of the City Secretary, provide a public hearing prior to removal to provide an opportunity for the City Secretary to present a defense against any accusations made. The City Council shall not arbitrarily or capriciously remove the City Secretary, but its decision in such matters shall be final. 
(Res. No. 1989-5-3)  
Section 5.08. - City Attorney. 
The City Council shall appoint a competent, duly qualified, and licensed Attorney, practicing law in the State of Texas and well versed in municipal law, who shall be the Attorney for the City (and may also be referred to as City Attorney). The City Attorney shall receive for his services such compensation as may be fixed by the City Council and shall hold his position at the pleasure of the City Council. If under contract, this contract will not exceed two (2) years. The City Attorney, or such attorneys selected by him, with the approval of the City Council, shall represent the City in all litigation and shall be the legal Advisor of, and Attorney and Counsel for the City and all officers and departments thereof. The City Attorney may be removed from office at the discretion of the City Council by a vote of at least four (4) Council members.  
Section 5.09. - Special Counsel. 
The City Council shall have the authority to retain special counsel for specific purposes.  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
 
Section 6.01. - Fiscal Year. 
The fiscal year shall begin on the first day of October and end on the last day of the following September.  
Section 6.02. - Capital Program. 
The City Manager, in work session with [the] City Council, shall propose annually a five (5) year capital program for consideration by the City Council on or before the first day of December. 
A.  Capital Program Contents. The capital program shall contain the following: 
1.  A summary of its contents. 
2.  A list of all capital improvements with supporting information as to the reason for each improvement. 
3.  Cost estimates, methods of financing, and recommended time schedule for each improvement. 
4.  Estimated annual cost of operation and maintenance for the proposed improvement. 
5.  The source or basis of the estimates. 
B.  Public Hearing(s) on the Capital Program. The City Council shall call a public hearing(s) on the proposed capital program and on annual revisions or extensions prior to final adoption. Public Notice of the hearing(s) shall be published in the official medium not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing(s). The City Secretary shall provide copies to the public at cost, upon request. 
(Res. No. 1989-5-3)  
Section 6.03. - Budget. 
A.  Submission of the Budget. On or before the first day of September of each year, and at least sixty (60) days prior to the adoption of a tax rate for the current fiscal year, the City Manager shall submit to the City Council a balanced budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying message. 
B.  Budget Message. The budget message shall explain the budget in fiscal terms and in terms of work programs for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the City, and shall include such other materials as the City Manager deems necessary. The budget message shall include a forecast of a five-year estimate of revenues and expenditures and an explanation of its effect on taxation. The source or basis of the estimates shall be part of the forecast. 
C.  Budget Contents. The budget shall contain the following: 
1.  Comparative figures for the estimated tax rate, revenues, and other income and expenditures for the ensuing fiscal years compared to the actual and estimated income and expenditures of the current and previous three (3) fiscal years. 
2.  The proposed expenditures of each office, department, or function. 
3.  A schedule showing the debt service requirement due on all outstanding indebtedness and on any proposed debt. 
4.  The source or basis of the estimates. 
5.  The total of the proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total estimated income and the balance of available funds. 
D.  Public Hearings on the Budget. The Council shall hold one or more public hearings on the proposed budget prior to the final adoption. Public Notice of the hearings shall be published in accordance with state law. The City Secretary shall provide copies of the proposed budget to the public at cost, upon request. 
E.  Adoption of the Budget. The City Council shall adopt the proposed budget, with or without amendment, after public hearings and before the first day of the ensuing fiscal year. Should the Council take no final action before the first day of the ensuing year, the amounts appropriated for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted on a month to month basis. Final adoption shall constitute appropriation of the expenditures proposed from funds so indicated. 
F.  Contingent Appropriation. Provision shall be made in the annual budget and in the appropriation ordinance for a contingent appropriation in an amount not more than three (3) percent of the total budget, to be used in case [of] unforeseen items of expenditure. Such contingent appropriation shall be under the control of the City Manager and shall be distributed after approval of the City Council. Expenditures from this appropriation shall be made only in case of established emergencies, and a detailed account of such expenditures shall be recorded and reported. 
G.  [Interfund Transfers.] Interfund transfers are permitted and allowed provided the City Council approves the same. 
H.  Defects in the Budget. Defects in the form or preparation of the budget or the failure to perform any procedural requirement shall not invalidate any tax levy, nor shall it invalidate the tax roll. 
(Res. No. 1989-5-3)  
Section 6.04. - Monthly financial reports. 
The City Manager shall present a monthly financial report. All income and expenses for the preceding month and for the year to date shall be shown, and shall be compared to the fiscal budget. This report shall be presented to the City Council as a part of the agenda at a Council meeting each month. The City Secretary shall provide copies of the monthly financial reports to the public at cost, upon request. 
(Res. No. 1989-5-3)  
Section 6.05. - Annual Audit. 
The City Council, by an affirmative vote of a majority of the Council, shall select and contract with a municipally oriented certified public accounting firm for the purpose of rendering an independent audit of all accounts and other financial records of the City government. The personnel of the firm conducting the audit shall not hold any public office in the City nor have any personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the City government or any of its offices. After completion of any audit of the City, the auditor shall prepare a report, and shall submit the report to the City Council as a part of the agenda, at a regular Council meeting, within one hundred twenty (120) days after the end of the fiscal year. The City Secretary shall provide copies to the public at cost, upon request.  
Section 6.06. - Indebtedness. 
The City shall have the right to issue and refund general obligation bonds, revenue bonds, and other evidence of indebtedness as is now permitted or as may be hereafter authorized to be issued by a Home Rule City in the State of Texas. All bonds of the City that have been issued, sold, and delivered to the purchaser shall be incontestable. All refunding bonds that have been exchanged shall be incontestable. 
A.  General Obligation Bonds. The City shall have the power to borrow money through the sale of general obligation bonds, which shall constitute direct and general obligations of the City, payable from ad valorem taxes levied against all taxable property located therein, within the limits prescribed by law or this Charter. 
B.  Revenue Bonds. The City shall have the power to borrow money for constructing, purchasing, improving, extending, or repairing public utilities, recreational facilities, or any other self-liquidating municipal function not prohibited by state law. Such borrowing shall be implemented through revenue bonds that are payable, both as to the principal and interest, solely from and secured by a first lien on and pledge from the income, or both, after deduction of reasonable operating and maintenance expenses as required by law. The holders of the revenue bonds shall never have the right to demand payment thereof of monies raised or to be raised by taxation. 
C.  Short Term Borrowing. The City may borrow funds on the credit of the City for a term not to exceed one year. Such obligations must be retired by the end of the budget year in which they were issued. All short term obligations are payable out of available current revenue. 
D.  Certificate of Obligation. The City shall have the power to issue Certificates of Obligation in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas.  
ARTICLE VII. - REVENUE AND TAXATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 646, adopted Feb. 7, 2012, presented Proposition No. 2, which provided for the deleting of §§ 7.01 and 7.03—7.08, and renumbering § 7.02 as § 7.01 to delete redundant provisions and those conflicting with state law. This was approved by voters on the election held May 12, 2012. 
 
Section 7.01. - Power of Taxation. 
The City Council shall have the power to levy and collect taxes for any municipal purpose not prohibited by State Law or restricted by this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 646, 2-7-12 (approved by voters 5-12-12))  
ARTICLE VIII. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
 
Section 8.01. - Boards and Commissions General. 
A.  In addition to the boards and commissions established by this Charter, the City Council shall be empowered to create additional boards and commissions. A board or commission member shall be a qualified voter, not delinquent in payment of City taxes, and shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses as approved by the City Council. 
B.  The City Secretary shall provide application forms to all qualified citizens who express interest in serving on the boards and commissions, and shall publish notices of this procedure and of impending vacancies. All such applicants shall receive due consideration by the City Council; however, the City Council may select and appoint any qualified person.  
Section 8.02. - Planning and Zoning Commission. 
A Planning and Zoning Commission shall be established in accordance with state law, with powers and duties prescribed by state law and ordinances of the City of Everman.  
Section 8.03. - Board of Adjustment. 
A Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be established in accordance with state law, with powers and duties prescribed by state law and ordinances of the City of Everman.  
ARTICLE IX. - MUNICIPAL COURT 
 
Section 9.01. - Establishment of the Municipal Court. 
A municipal court, known as the "Municipal Court in Everman, Texas," is hereby established. The Municipal Court shall have the jurisdiction, powers, and duties given and prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas. The City Council shall have the power to create and establish by ordinance additional Municipal Courts.  
Section 9.02. - Fines, Fees, and Costs. 
All fines, fees, or costs collected by the Municipal Court shall be deposited in the City treasury. No fee[s] or costs shall be charged except those authorized by State Law. Neither the compensation of the Judge of the Municipal Court, nor of any full or part-time employee of the City, shall be based upon a percentage of the fines imposed by the Municipal Court.  
Section 9.03. - Judge of the Municipal Court. 
The City Council shall appoint a Judge who shall be known as the "Judge of the Municipal Court." The Judge shall be appointed for a two (2) year term. The City Council shall fix the compensation for the Judge. The City Council shall have the authority to remove the Municipal Judge for good cause as determined by the City Council. A hearing must be held, and removal shall require an affirmative vote of at least four (4) members of the City Council. If for any reason the Judge is unable to act, the City Council shall either declare the office vacant, or appoint a temporary Judge to serve until the Judge is able to act. If the office of the Judge is declared vacant, it shall be filled by appointment by the City Council in accordance with this Section.  
Section 9.04. - Clerk of the Municipal Court. 
The City Manager shall appoint a "Clerk of the Municipal Court." The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall keep the records and the proceedings of the Court, issue all processes, and generally perform all of the duties prescribed by law for clerks of such courts, insofar as those duties are applicable.  
Section 9.05. - City Prosecutor. 
All cases in Municipal Court shall be prosecuted by the City Attorney or such attorneys as the Council may authorize.  
ARTICLE X. - UTILITY AND PUBLIC SERVICE FRANCHISES AND LICENSES 
 
Section 10.01. - Authority. 
The City shall have the power to buy, own, sell, construct, lease, maintain, operate and regulate public services and utility operations. The City shall not supply any utilities service outside the city limits, except by a written contract. The City shall have such regulatory and other power as may now or hereafter be granted under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 10.02. - Ordinance Granting Franchise. 
A.  Any ordinance granting, renewing, extending or amending a public service or utility franchise must be read at two (2) separate meetings of the City Council and shall not take effect until thirty (30) days after the final reading. Within fifteen (15) days following the first reading of the ordinance, a summary of the ordinance shall be published once in a newspaper designated as the official newspaper of the City. The expense of such publication shall be borne by the prospective franchisee. 
B.  No franchise shall be granted for a term of more than twenty (20) years from the date of the grant, renewal or extension of any franchise. 
C.  No franchise may be exclusive.  
Section 10.03. - Transfer of Franchise. 
No public service or utility franchise is transferable, except with the approval of the City Council. However, the franchisee may pledge franchise assets as security for a valid debt or mortgage.  
Section 10.04. - Franchise Value Not to be Allowed. 
Franchises granted by the City are of no value in fixing rates and charges for public services or utilities within the City and in determining just compensation to be paid by the City for property which the City may acquire by condemnation or otherwise.  
Section 10.05. - Right of Regulation. 
In granting, amending, renewing and extending public service and utility franchises, the City reserves unto itself all the usual and customary rights, including, but not limited to, the following rights: 
A.  To repeal the franchise by ordinance for failure to begin construction or operation within the time prescribed, or for failure to comply with terms of the franchise. 
B.  To require all extensions of service within the City limits to become part of the aggregate property of the service and operate subject to all obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter. Any such extension is considered part of the original grant and terminable at the same time and under the same condition as the original grant. 
C.  To require expansion and extension of facilities and services and to require maintenance of existing facilities to provide adequate service in the highest level of efficiency. 
D.  To require reasonable standards of service and quality of product and prevent rate discrimination. 
E.  To impose reasonable regulations and restrictions to insure the safety and welfare of the public. 
F.  To examine and audit accounts and records and to require annual reports on local operations of the public service or utility. 
G.  To require the franchisee to restore, at franchisee's expense, all public or private property to a condition as good as or better than before disturbed by the franchisee for construction, repair or removal. 
H.  To require the franchisee to furnish to the City, within a reasonable time, at the franchisee's expense, a general map outlining current location, character, size, length, depth, height and terminal of all facilities over and under property within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
I.  To require compensation, rent or franchise fees to be paid to the City as may be permitted by the laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 10.06. - Regulation of Rates. 
A.  The City Council has the power to fix and regulate the rates and charges of all utilities and public services, consistent with State Statutes. 
B.  Upon receiving written request from a utility or public service requesting a change in rates, or upon a recommendation from the City that rates for services provided by or owned by the City be changed, the City Council shall call a public hearing for consideration of the change. 
C.  The City, public service or utility must show the necessity for the change by any evidence required by the City Council, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Cost of its investment for service to the City. 
2.  Amount and character of expenses and revenues connected with rendering the service. 
3.  Copies of any reports or returns filed with any State or Federal regulatory agency within the last three years. 
4.  Demonstration that the return on investment, if any, is within State and Federal limitations. 
D.  If not satisfied with the sufficiency of evidence, the City Council may hire rate consultants, auditors and attorneys to investigate and, if necessary, litigate requests for rate changes, the expense of which shall be reimbursed to the City by the franchisee.  
Section 10.07. - Licenses. 
The City shall have the power to license, levy and collect fees in order to license any lawful business, occupation or calling subject to control pursuant to the police powers of the State of Texas and for any other purpose not contrary to the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas.  
ARTICLE XI. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, AND RECALL 
 
Section 11.01. - General Authority. 
A.  Initiative: The qualified voters of the City shall have power to propose ordinances to the City Council and if the Council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, the voters shall adopt or reject it at a City election. Such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of City officers or employees. 
B.  Referendum: The qualified voters of the City shall have power to require reconsideration by the City Council of any adopted ordinance and, if the Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, the voters shall approve or reject it at a City election. Such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to appropriation of money or levy of taxes. 
C.  Recall: The qualified voters of the City shall have power to remove any official serving in an elective office.  
Section 11.02. - Petitioners Committee. 
A.  Any ten (10) qualified voters may commence proceedings contemplated by this Article by filing with the City Secretary an affidavit stating that they will constitute the petitioners committee. They will be responsible for preparing, printing and circulating the petition. They will file it in proper form and specify the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent. The affidavit shall set out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or cite the ordinance sought to be reconsidered, or in the case of recall, state the identity of the official whose recall is being sought. 
B.  In the case of recall, the City Secretary shall immediately notify in writing the officer(s) to be removed that the affidavit has been filed.  
Section 11.03. - Petition Circulation. 
A.  All petition blanks used for circulation by the members of the petitioners committee or their designees shall be numbered, dated and bear the signature of the City Secretary. 
B.  No petition may be circulated and no signatures obtained until after the affidavit is filed.  
Section 11.04. - Form of Petition. 
A.  All pages of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signer of a petition must be a registered voter of the City of Everman and shall personally sign and print his own name thereto in ink or indelible pencil, and shall write after his name his place of residence within the boundaries of the City, giving name of street and number, or place of residences, voter registration number, and also shall write thereon the date, including the month, day and the year his signature was affixed. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered, or in the case of a recall petition, the identity of the official whose recall is being sought. 
B.  Each page of a petition shall have attached to it, when filed, an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be, and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered, or the identity of the official whose recall is being sought. 
C.  Locations for twenty (20) signatures shall be provided on each blank petition.  
Section 11.05. - Presentation of Petitions. 
A.  A petition to the City Council for initiative or referendum, containing the signatures of qualified voters equal in number to fifteen (15) percent of those who voted in the last general election, or two hundred, whichever is greater, shall be filed with the City Secretary not later than thirty (30) days following the filing of the affidavit by the petitioners committee. 
B.  A petition to the City Council for recall, containing the signatures of qualified voters equal in number to thirty-five (35) percent of those who voted in the last general municipal election, or four hundred (400), whichever is greater, shall be filed with the City Secretary no later than thirty (30) days following the filing of the affidavit by the petitioners committee. 
(Ord. No. 646, 2-7-12 (approved by voters 5-12-12))  
Section 11.06. - Suspension of Effect of Ordinance for Referendum Petitions. 
When a referendum petition is filed with the City Secretary, the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect unless such suspension will create an immediate breach of public health and safety as determined by resolution of the City Council. Such suspension shall terminate when: 
1.  There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition, or 
2.  The City Council repeals the ordinance, or 
3.  Upon the certification of election results by the election officials.  
Section 11.07. - Certification of Petitions and Presentation to the City Council. 
A.  Within ten (10) days after the petition is presented, the City Secretary shall complete a certificate of sufficiency or insufficiency. Sufficiency shall be determined by compliance to Section 11.03 of this Article. 
B.  If the petition is certified sufficient, the City Secretary shall present the certificate to the City Council at the next regular City Council meeting. The City Council shall verify determination of the sufficiency of the petition. 
C.  If a petition has been certified insufficient, the City Secretary shall send the committee a Certificate of Insufficiency by registered mail which shall include the particulars in which the petition is defective. The committee may, within five (5) working days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the City Council. The City Council shall review the certificate at its next regular meeting following such a request and approve or disapprove it. Such determination shall then be final. If no City Council review is requested within five (5) working days, the City Secretary's certification is final.  
Section 11.08. - Action on Initiative and Referendum Petitions. 
A.  When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, the City Council shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance in the manner prescribed for enacting ordinances or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the City Council fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within sixty (60) days, or fails to repeal a referred ordinance within thirty (30) days after the date the petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the voters of the City to be held on the first uniform election date allowing sufficient time to comply with the requirements of law following the failure of the City Council to act as specified herein. Any election order so issued shall comply fully with the Texas Election Code. 
B.  The called election may coincide with a regular City election should such City election fall within the specified period. No ordinance substantially the same as an initiated ordinance which has been approved at any election may be initiated by the voters within two (2) years from the date of such election. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls and shall be published at least once in the official newspaper of the City not more than fifteen (15) days immediately prior to the date of the election. 
(Ord. No. 646, 2-7-12 (approved by voters 5-12-12))  
Section 11.09. - Calling of Recall Election. 
If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign within thirty (30) days from the date the petition is presented to the City Council, the City Council shall call a recall election to be held on the next uniform election date allowing sufficient time to comply with requirements of law. If, after the recall election date is established, the officer vacates his position, the election shall be canceled, and the vacancy filled pursuant to Section 3.06 of this Charter. Any election order so issued shall comply fully with the Texas Election Code. 
(Ord. No. 646, 2-7-12 (approved by voters 5-12-12))  
Section 11.10. - Withdrawal of Petitions. 
An initiative, referendum or recall petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to determination of sufficiency by filing with the City Secretary a request for withdrawal signed by at least seven (7) members of the petitioners committee. Upon the filing of such request the petitions shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings shall be terminated and the election may be cancelled. 
(Ord. No. 646, 2-7-12 (approved by voters 5-12-12))  
Section 11.11. - Form of Ballots. 
A.  Initiative: Ordinances shall be submitted by ballot title, which shall be prepared in all cases by the City Attorney. The ballot title may be different from the legal title of any such initiated or referred ordinance and it shall be a clear, concise statement, without argument or prejudice, descriptive of the substance of such ordinance. Immediately below the ballot title shall be printed the following two (2) statements, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"For adoption of the ordinance" and 
"Against adoption of the ordinance" 
Immediately below or to the left of each statement shall appear a square in which the voter may cast his vote by making a mark. 
B.  Repeal: Ordinances being considered for repeal shall be submitted by ballot title, which shall be prepared in all cases by the City Attorney. The ballot title may be different from the legal title of any such ordinance and it shall be a clear, concise statement, without argument or prejudice, descriptive of the substance of such ordinance. Immediately below the ballot title shall be printed the following two (2) statements, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"For adoption of the ordinance" and 
"Against adoption of the ordinance" 
Immediately below or to the left of each statement shall appear a square in which the voter may cast his vote by making a mark. 
C.  Recall: Ballots used at recall elections shall, with respect to each person whose removal is sought, submit the question: 
"Shall (name of person) be removed from the office (name of office) by recall?" 
Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the two (2) following statements, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"For (name of person) being removed from the office of (name of office)." 
"Against (name of person) being removed from the office of (name of office)." 
Immediately below or to the left of each statement shall appear a square in which the voter may cast his vote by making a mark. 
(Res. No. 1989-5-3)  
Section 11.12. - Results of Election. 
A.  If a majority of qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the City Council. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, then [the] one receiving the greater number of affirmative votes shall prevail. 
B.  An ordinance adopted by initiative may be repealed or amended at any time after the expiration of two (2) years by a majority vote or after one (1) year by a unanimous vote of all Council members. 
C.  If a majority of the qualified electors on a referred ordinance vote against the ordinance, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance vote for the ordinance, the ordinance shall be considered in effect. 
D.  An ordinance repealed by referendum may be reenacted at any time after the expiration of two (2) years by a majority vote or after one (1) year by unanimous vote of all Council members. 
E.  If a majority of the votes cast on the question of recall at a recall election shall be against the removal of the elected official named on the ballot, he shall continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term, subject to recall as before within the limitations of Section 11.14 below. If a majority of the votes cast on the question of recall at a recall election shall be for the removal of the elected official named on the ballot, he shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of this Charter for the filling of vacancies.  
Section 11.13. - Limitations and Restrictions. 
A.  No recall petition shall be filed against any officer of the City within six (6) months after his election nor within six (6) months of such a petition being filed and found insufficient, nor within one (1) year after an election for such officer's recall. 
B.  In no instance shall an officer removed from office by recall election serve in an elective office of the City within a period of five (5) years following the date of the election at which he was removed from office. 
C.  Unless withdrawn, no petition shall again be filed on a proposed or referred ordinance of substantially the same content within a period of two (2) years of the failure of the petition at a City election.  
Section 11.14. - Failure of City Council to Call an Election. 
In case all of the requirements of this Charter have been met and the City Council shall fail or refuse to receive an initiative, referendum or recall petition, or order such initiative, referendum or recall election, or discharge other duties imposed upon said City Council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to initiative, referendum or recall, then the District Judge may discharge any such duties herein provided to be discharged by the City Secretary or by the City Council. In addition, any qualified voter in the City may seek judicial relief to have any of the provisions of this Charter pertaining to initiative, referendum or recall carried out by the proper official.  
ARTICLE XII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 12.01. - Public Meetings. 
Meetings of all elected commissions and all boards or commissions appointed by the City Council shall be open to the public in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas. Meetings of the City Council shall be held in accordance with provisions of Article III, Section 3.08 of this Charter. Minutes, transcriptions, and electronic recordings of all public meetings are public records, and shall be archived in accordance with state law.  
Section 12.02. - Public Record. 
Municipal records shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours, in accordance with State Law.  
Section 12.03. - Effective Date of this Charter. 
This Charter shall become effective on and after the date and time of the first meeting of the City Council following the election at which a majority of votes cast by qualified voters of the City affirms adoption of this Charter. The City Council shall, immediately after canvassing said election, declare by resolution that this Charter is adopted. The City Council shall then order that this resolution be recorded upon the records of the City of Everman, Texas, and the records of the Secretary of State of Texas, as prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 12.04. - Amendments to This Charter. 
Amendments to this Charter may be formulated and submitted to the voters as provided by State Law.  
Section 12.05. - Reserved.  
Section 12.06. - Conflict of Interest. 
Elected officials, officers, or employees of the City having a direct or indirect interest in any proposed or existing contract, purchase, work, sale, or service to, for, or by the City shall not vote or render a decision, or use that position, authority, or influence in any manner that would result in personal betterment, financially or otherwise, to any degree. Elected officials, officers, or employees shall publicly disclose any such interest upon assumption of office or prior to consideration of any such matters. Any elected official, officer, or employee who willfully conceals such interest or willfully violates the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position, and shall forfeit the office or position. Violation of this section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the City shall render such contract or sale voidable by the City Manager or City Council.  
Section 12.07. - Nepotism. 
Relatives of the City Council, City Manager, and department heads of the City shall not be employed or appointed for any compensated public service to the City if such kinship is closer than the second degree by marriage or the third degree by consanguinity. This prohibition shall not affect those who have been continuously employed by the City for one (1) year or more before the adoption of this Charter. 
(Res. No. 1989-5-3)  
Section 12.08. - Surety Bonds for City Employees. 
The City Council shall require bonds of all municipal employees and officers who receive or disburse any funds of the City. The amount of such bonds shall be determined by the Council, and the cost thereof shall be paid by the City.  
Section 12.09. - May Accept Governmental Aid. 
The City may accept monetary aid or other character of aid or benefit from the Federal Government, the State Government, the County Government, and from any agency thereof, and/or any individual, and/or a private agency; and shall have the full right, power and authority to do the things and perform the acts necessary to permit the City to receive such aid.  
Section 12.10. - No Officer or Employee to Accept Gifts. 
No officer or employee of the City of Everman shall ever accept, directly or indirectly, any gift, favor, privilege, or employment valued over twenty-five dollars ($25.00) from any firm, individual, or corporation doing business or proposing to do business with the City of Everman. Any officer or employee of the City who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by any fine that may be prescribed by Ordinance for this offense, and shall forthwith be removed from office. This section does not prohibit the giving of gifts where the donor and recipient are kin by blood or marriage.  
Section 12.11. - Guarantee of Funds. 
The City Council shall require that the depository or depositories holding all public funds shall pledge eligible securities or surety bonds against said funds to the extent of the total of such funds held by each and every depository in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 12.12. - Notice of Injury or Damage. 
Before the City of Everman shall be liable for damages for the death or personal injuries of any person or for damage to or destruction of property of any kind that does not constitute a taking or damaging of property under the Constitution of Texas, the person injured, or if deceased, his or her representative(s), shall give the City Council or City Manager notice in writing of such death, injury, damage, or destruction, duly verified by affidavit, within six (6) months after same has been sustained. Such written notice shall state specifically when, where, and how such death, injury, damage, or destruction occurred, the apparent extent of any such injury; the amount of damages sustained; the street and number of the actual residence of the claimant at the date the claim is presented; the actual residence of the claimant six (6) months immediately preceding the occurrence of such death, injury, damage, or destruction and the names and addresses of all witnesses upon whom it is relied to establish the claim for damages. The failure to so notify the City Council or City Manager within the time and manner specified herein shall exonerate, excuse, and exempt the City from any liability whatsoever. No act of any officer or employee of the City shall waive compliance or stop the City from requiring compliance, but the provision may be waived by resolution of the City Council, made and passed after the expiration of the six (6) month period herein provided and evidenced by minutes of the City Council. 
(Res. No. 1989-5-3)  
Section 12.13. - Official Medium. 
The City Council shall, by resolution, designate a local newspaper of general circulation in the City as the official newspaper for publication of official business. All ordinances, notices, and other matters that are required to be published officially by this Charter, the ordinance of the City, or the laws of the State of Texas, shall be publicized in said medium.  
Section 12.14. - Gender of Wording. 
The gender of wording used throughout this Charter shall be interpreted to mean either sex.  
Section 12.15. - Elected or Appointed Officers and City Employees. 
No person who is delinquent in the payment of taxes to the City shall be elected or appointed to City office or employed by the City.  
Section 12.16. - Qualified Voter. 
The word "voter," as referred to in this Charter, shall be defined as an individual who meets the requirements of thirty (30) days residency in the City of Everman, Texas and is a registered voter in the State of Texas.  
Section 12.17. - Reserved.  
Section 12.18. - City Exempt from Appeal Bonds. 
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit, or proceeding in which the City of Everman is a part of for any bond, undertaking, or security to be executed in behalf of said City. All such actions, suits, appeals, or proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking, or security had been given; and the City shall be liable as if such obligation had been given and executed.  
Section 12.19. - Funds not Subject to Garnishment. 
No funds of the City or within custody of the City or any of its officials in any official capacity shall be subject to garnishment, and the City shall not be required to answer in any garnishment proceedings, except where provided by State or Federal Laws.  
Section 12.20. - Certification and Submission to Voters. 
Pursuant to the obligations imposed on this Charter Commission by law, said Commission has determined and hereby certifies: 
A.  That this Charter is a true and correct copy of the Charter prepared by this Charter Commission. 
B.  That, in the submission of this Charter to the voters, it would be impractical to segregate each subject for a separate vote thereon, for the reason that the Charter is so constructed that, in order to enable it to work and function, it is necessary that it be adopted in its entirety; therefore it is submitted so as to be voted upon as a whole. 
C.  That the election for this purpose shall be held in the City of Everman on the 13th day of September, 2003. 
D.  That the Charter Commission completed its work on the ___ day of ________, 2003. 
Unanimously proposed, 
Everman Home Rule Charter Commission 
Jim Moews, Chairman 
Joan Stripling, Vice Chairperson 
Jo Ann Gibson, Secretary 
Philip Adams, Sergeant-at-Arms 
Ann Flories 	Steve Tindel 
Page Piland 	Gloria Harris 
Mildred Blalock 	Philip Smith 
David Bailey 	Vikki Hutchison 
Ruth Pittman 	James Gardiner 
Pat Bennett 	
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited; formal parts of ordinances continued in effect. 
(a)  The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Everman, Texas," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Everman Code." 
(b)  This Code shall not be deemed to repeal any preamble, recital or finding of fact contained in any ordinance included in this Code, but all such matters shall be deemed incorporated in the sections in this Code derived from such respective ordinances. 
Charter reference— Codification, § 3.10(B). 
State Law reference— Authority to publish a code of civil and criminal ordinances, Local Government Code, § 53.001.  
Sec. 1-2. - Catchlines of sections; chapter, article and division headings. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type and the headings of chapters, articles and divisions are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the chapter, article, division or section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the chapter, article, division or section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such chapters, articles, divisions or sections, including the headings or catchlines, are amended or reenacted.  
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules contained in this section shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council: 
Charter. The words "charter" or "city charter" shall mean the home rule charter of the city. 
City. The words "city," "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Everman, in Tarrant County, Texas. 
City secretary, manager, chief of police or other city officers or departments. The words "city secretary," "city manager," "chief of police" or words designating any other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city secretary, city manager, chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Everman, Texas. 
Code. The words "the Code" or "this Code" shall mean the "Code of Ordinances, City of Everman, Texas." 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding or step in a proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding or step in a proceeding is to be had shall not be counted; except as otherwise expressly provided in this Code. 
Council. The words "the council" or "the city council" shall mean the mayor and councilmen acting as the city council of Everman, Texas. 
County. The word "county" shall mean Tarrant County, Texas. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Highway. The word "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month, except as otherwise specified in this Code. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in the city. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Other words. All other words used in this Code shall be construed to have the meaning assigned to them in this Code and, where no specific meaning or definition is specified, they shall be construed to have the meaning assigned to them by article 23 and other articles of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land, except as otherwise defined in this Code. 
Person. The word "person" includes natural persons, corporations (private and public), partnerships, and all other unincorporated organizations, trusts, estates, government agencies and other legal entities, except when a contrary intention plainly appears. 
Personal property. The words "personal property" include every species of property, except real property, as defined in this section. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The word "property" includes real and personal property, and "mixed" if the sense used so indicates. 
Real property. The words "real property" include land, tenements and hereditaments. 
Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, all or a part of which is intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Sidewalk area. The words "sidewalk area" shall mean the space between the lateral line of the roadway and the boundary separating the public right-of-way and the adjacent private property. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
Street. The word "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, culvert, underpass, overpass, tunnel, causeway or other public way in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
V.A.C.S., V.A.T.S., V.T.C.S., V.A.P.C., V.T.P.C., V.A.C.C.P., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations shall mean and include Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, Vernon's Annotated Texas Statutes, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, Vernon's Annotated Penal Code, Vernon's Texas Penal Code, Vernon's Annotated Code of Criminal Procedure, Vernon's Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, Vernon's Texas Code Annotated and other portions of such codification of the Texas Statutes as indicated, and as amended from time to time. 
Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation, other than oral, of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, except as otherwise provided in this Code.  
Sec. 1-4. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  Containing any administrative provisions of the city council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise and establishing any rates therefor; 
(4)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(5)  Making any appropriation; 
(6)  Levying or imposing taxes not inconsistent with this Code; 
(7)  Establishing or prescribing grades in the city; 
(8)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Establishing subdivision regulations or dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(10)  Adopting, extending or contracting the boundaries of the city; 
(11)  Prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(12)  Prescribing traffic and parking restrictions for specific streets or portions thereof or for specific locations, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(13)  Establishing utility rates such as garbage, water and sewer, and providing procedures for the collection thereof, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(14)  Pertaining to zoning; 
(15)  Relating to abandoned property other than motor vehicles; 
(16)  Declaring certain vehicles and appliances a nuisance; 
(17)  Adopted after December 1, 1987; 
(18)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office.  
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section in this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.  
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, when necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections __________ to __________" (inserting sections numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required, other than duties of city officers and employees, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) in all cases arising under the ordinances of the city that govern fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, and not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) in all other cases; provided, however, that where the offense is one for which a penalty is fixed by state law, the penalty for such offense shall be the same as that fixed by state law. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city shall continue shall constitute a separate offense unless otherwise provided. 
Cross reference— Civil defense and disaster relief, § 5-1; municipal court, Ch. 12; offenses, Ch. 13; police, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal court, V.T.C.A. Government Code, § 29.003, V.A.C.C.P. arts. 4.01, 4.14, 43.09; penalty limits, V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, § 54.001.  
Sec. 1-8. - Liability of corporate officers for penalty. 
Whenever a corporation or association violates any provision of this Code, or other ordinance of the city, the president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, manager or any agent or employee of such corporation or association shall be severally liable for the penalty prescribed for such violation; provided, however, this section shall not be construed to apply to officers or employees of this city in the manner of performing their duties as municipal officers and employees.  
Sec. 1-9. - Use in evidence of copies of Code provisions. 
In any prosecution for a violation of any provision of this Code, the Code or a copy of such provision, certified by the city secretary, may be admitted in evidence without further proof and shall be prima facie evidence of the existence and regular enactment of such provision, without the necessity of introducing in evidence the entire Code.  
Sec. 1-10. - Injunction to enforce Code. 
Any violation of this Code can be enjoined by a suit filed in the name of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy shall be in addition to any penal provision in this Code or any other ordinance of the city.  
Sec. 1-11. - Relief from personal liability in enforcement of Code. 
All of the regulations provided in this Code are hereby declared to be governmental and for the health, safety and welfare of the general public. Any member of the city council or any city official or employee charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting for the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that might accrue to persons or property as a result of any required or permitted in the discharge of his duties.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— By Resolution No. 1986-7-1, the city council provided that the city administrator would thereafter have the title of "city manager." 
Cross reference— Appeal of electrical inspector's or building official's decision or ruling, § 4-2; administrative code generally, § 4-26 et seq.; administration of dangerous buildings code, § 4-76 et seq.; elections, Ch. 5; emergency management, Ch. 6; fire department, § 7-56 et seq.; fire marshal, § 7-81 et seq.; municipal court, Ch. 12; police, Ch. 16; police department, § 16-21 et seq.; arson investigator, § 16-46 et seq.; taxation, Ch. 18. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Administrative search warrants. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section. 
Enforcement order shall mean a written order issued by a magistrate authorizing entry by the city onto specified premises for the purpose of abating a nuisance or other condition which is in violation of city ordinance or state statute. 
Inspector shall mean any official inspector for any department of the city who is charged with the enforcement of city ordinances, including but not limited to inspectors for the departments of zoning, environmental control, housing, building inspection, fire inspection and health inspection. 
Magistrate shall mean the judge of the municipal court of the city or any other person or position designated as a magistrate by state law. 
Search warrant shall mean a written order issued by a magistrate and directed to any inspector or peace officer commanding him to a specified premises to determine the presence of a violation of any ordinance of the city. 
(b)  Conflicts; additional remedies. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to conflict with any state or federal law and shall be in addition to any rights granted thereby. The city or any inspector or peace officer may seek over available enforcement remedies, both civil and criminal, in addition to those allowed by this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city or any inspector from performing inspections or abatement work without the necessity of a warrant or order where authorized by law. 
(c)  Administrative search warrants. 
(1)  Search warrants authorized. Except as provided in subsection (2) below, inspectors are hereby authorized to seek and obtain search warrants from magistrates as provided in this section before making an inspection incidental to the enforcement of any provision of the zoning ordinance, building code, plumbing code, mechanical code, electrical code, fire code, or any ordinances related to the use or condition of property or a nuisance on the property. 
(2)  Authorized searches without a warrant. Search warrants shall not be required under the following circumstances: 
a.  When permission to inspect the premises has been granted by someone with apparent charge or control of those premises. For the purpose of this paragraph, permission to inspect may be granted either verbally, in writing or by some other action indicating consent; or 
b.  When there exists an imminent danger or peril to human life, limb or property and any delays resulting from the application for a search warrant would materially increase the likelihood of loss from such danger or peril; or 
c.  When the inspection can be executed by a person who is an invitee on premises held open to the general public. For the purposes of this paragraph, a person ceases to be an invitee when he has been instructed to leave the premises or otherwise terminate his inspection by someone having charge or control of those premises; or 
d.  When the inspection can be executed from public property or adjacent private property with the permission of someone with apparent charge or control of such adjacent private property; or 
e.  When the inspection is an open fields inspection of or from an unoccupied or undeveloped area. 
(3)  Probable cause for search warrant. No search warrant shall be issued pursuant to this section except on the presentation of evidence of probable cause to believe that a violation is present or that reasonable administrative standards for conducting an inspection are satisfied with respect to the premises sought to be inspected. A sworn affidavit setting forth substantial facts toward establishing probable cause or reasonable administrative standards shall be filed in every instance in which a search warrant is requested. In determining probable cause, the magistrate shall consider the totality of the circumstances behind the issuance of the search warrant and may consider and weigh evidence of specific knowledge or any other evidence that a substantial basis exists that a search warrant would uncover evidence of a violation. In determining whether reasonable administrative standards are satisfied for the issuance of a warrant, the magistrate may consider and weigh the following: 
a.  The age and general condition of the premises; 
b.  Previous violations or hazards found present on the premises and the scope and objects of the search; 
c.  The type of premises; 
d.  The purposes for which the premises are used; 
e.  The presence of hazards or violations and the general condition of premises near the premises sought to be inspected; or 
f.  The passage of time since a previous inspection. 
(4)  Content of search warrant. A search warrant issued pursuant to this section shall be sufficient if it contains the following requisites: 
a.  That it run in the name of the "State of Texas;" 
b.  That it identify as near as may be the premises to be inspected, and the scope and objects of the search; 
c.  That it command an inspector or peace officer to inspect forthwith the premises described; and 
d.  That it be dated and signed by the magistrate. 
(5)  Execution of search warrant. The inspector shall, upon going to the premises ordered to be inspected, give notice of his purpose to the person who has charge or control of the premises described in the warrant. If such person cannot be found, a search may be conducted in accordance with the search warrant provided that a copy of the warrant shall be affixed to the front door of the building or gate of the premises inspected. In every instance, entry shall be effected using the minimum force necessary according to the circumstances. 
(6)  Days allowed for search warrant to run. An inspector to whom a search warrant is delivered shall execute it without delay and forthwith return it to the proper magistrate. The time allowed for the execution of a search warrant shall be three (3) whole days exclusive of the day of its issuance and of the day of its execution, or such shorter period as may be ordered by the magistrate. The magistrate issuing a search warrant under the provisions of this section shall endorse on such search warrant the date and hour of the issuance of the same. Upon returning the search warrant, the inspector shall state on the back of same or on some paper attached to it, the manner in which it has been executed and shall likewise deliver to the magistrate a copy of the report resulting from that inspection. The magistrate shall keep a record of all proceedings had before him in the cases of search warrants as part of the official records of his court. 
(7)  Power of inspector executing search warrant. In the execution of a search warrant, the inspector may call to his aid any number of citizens in the city who shall be bound to aid in the execution of same. Any person interfering with the execution of a lawful search warrant, issued pursuant to this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The execution of a search warrant issued pursuant to this section shall not include any authority to seize tangible goods or any authority to make arrests without the assistance of a peace officer. 
(d)  Administrative enforcement orders. 
(1)  Enforcement orders authorized. Where civil enforcement by the city is authorized by ordinance or statute, inspectors are hereby authorized to seek and obtain an administrative enforcement order from the magistrate authorizing entry upon private property for the purpose of abating any public nuisance or other violation of an ordinance or statute which adversely affects the public health, safety or welfare. The inspector shall present to the magistrate a sworn affidavit setting forth substantial facts establishing that a violation of the city ordinance or state statute exists and that requisite notice has been given under the ordinance or statute. The magistrate shall issue an enforcement order if he determines: 
a.  That facts exist to show that a violation of a statute or ordinance has occurred; 
b.  That the abatement of the nuisance or violation is in the best interest of the public health, safety or welfare; and 
c.  That the proposed abatement action is reasonable under the circumstances. 
(2)  Content of enforcement order. An enforcement order issued by a magistrate pursuant to this section shall contain the following requisites: 
a.  That it identify as near as may be the premises which are in violation of ordinance or statute; 
b.  That it reasonably specify the scope of the work or improvements to be performed by the city in abating the violation; 
c.  That it set forth such other requirements or conditions as the magistrate deems necessary to assure that the premises will be adequately protected and that the work or improvements are no greater than is reasonably necessary to abate all conditions which adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare; 
d.  That is specify a reasonable amount of time in which to carry out such enforcement order. 
(3)  Authorized entry without an enforcement order. An administrative enforcement order shall not be required under the following circumstances: 
a.  When permission to perform the abatement work or improvements has been granted by someone with apparent charge or control of the premises. For purposes of this paragraph, permission may be granted either verbally, in writing or by some other action indicating consent; or 
b.  Where there exists an imminent danger or peril to human life, limb or property and any delays resulting from the application for an enforcement order would materially increase the likelihood of loss from such danger or peril; and 
c.  When the abatement work or improvements are on open fields or unoccupied or undeveloped areas. 
(4)  Power of inspector executing enforcement order. In the execution of an enforcement order, the inspector may call to his aid any number of citizens in the city who shall be bound to aid in the execution of same. Any person interfering with the execution of a lawful enforcement order issued pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(5)  Execution of enforcement order. The inspector shall, upon entering the premises for the purpose of abatement, give notice of his purpose to the person who has charge or control of the premises. If such person cannot be found, the work may be performed in accordance with the enforcement order provided that a copy of the order shall be affixed to the front door of the building or gate of the premises. In every instance, entry shall be effected using the minimum force necessary according to the circumstances. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for all violations involving fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping or refuse and shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00) for all other violations of this section. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 470, §§ 1—14, 17, 7-14-98) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 470, adopted July 14, 1998, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as § 2-1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; fire code, § 7-26; health, safety and nuisances, Ch. 10; planning and zoning, Ch. 15.  
Secs. 2-2—2-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City council, § 3.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-21. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings on the second Tuesday of each month at 6:30 p.m. and may hold as many additional meetings and workshops as it deems necessary to transact the business of the city. 
(b)  The meeting time and date of any specific regular meeting of the city council may be changed by a majority vote of the city council. 
(c)  Special meetings may be called by the city council on the request of the mayor and and four city council members. 
(Code 1977, § 1-31; Ord. No. 529, § 1, 10-8-02; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 673, § 1, 2-11-14; Ord. No. 674, § 1, 3-11-14; Ord. No. 714, § 2.A, 8-8-17; Ord. No. 726, § 1, 12-11-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 714, § 2.A, adopted Aug. 8, 2017, amended the catchline of § 2-21 to read as herein set out. Said catchline formerly read "Meetings; voting; quorum." 
Charter reference— Council meetings, § 3.08. 
State Law reference— Closed meetings of governmental bodies restricted, V.A.C.S. art. 6252-17.  
Sec. 2-22. - Policy on governance process adopted. 
(a)  Adoption of policy. The City of Everman Policy on Governance Process in the form attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived as Exhibit A ("the policy") is hereby adopted as the official policy of the City of Everman, Texas and shall be applicable to the city council and, to the extent set forth therein, all boards, commissions and committees created by the city. The policy is incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the policy shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. 
(b)  Policy amendments. The policy as adopted herein may from time to time be amended by ordinance through a majority vote of the city council. Such amendments shall be incorporated into this section by reference, but shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances. The amendments shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and made available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 714, § 2.B, 8-8-17)  
Sec. 2-23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 671, § 2, adopted Nov. 12, 2013, repealed § 2-23 which pertained to Robert's Rules of Order and derived from § 1-33 of the 1977 Code.  
Secs. 2-24—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 422, §§ 1-16, adopted Nov. 6, 1990, did not specifically amend the code; hence, its inclusion herein as Art. III, §§ 2-31—2-46 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Definition of municipal government records. 
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 1, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 2-32. - Additional definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when use in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly, indicates a different meaning:] 
Department head means the officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronics and other records storage systems. 
Records liaison officers means the persons designated under section 2-40 of this article. 
Records management committee means the committee established in section 2-36 of this article. 
Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-35 of this article. 
Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-37 of this article. 
Retention period means the minimum time that [is allowed to] pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 2, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 2-33. - Municipal records declared public property. 
All municipal records as defined in section 2-31 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 3, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 2-34. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 4, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 2-35. - Designation of records management officer. 
The council shall designate an individual, employed by the municipality, to serve as records management officer for the city. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the council of the individual so designated, the council shall promptly designate another individual to serve as records management officer. The individual designated as records management officer shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within thirty (30) days of the date of designation, as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 5, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 2-36. - Establishment of records management committee; duties. 
A records management committee consisting of the secretary to the city secretary, supervisors, and department heads is hereby established. The committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed; 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer; 
(4)  Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules; and 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 6, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 2-37. - Records management plan, to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the municipality, and to properly preserve those records of the municipality that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the city council the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 7, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 2-38. - Duties of records management officer. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster [plan for] the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the municipality. 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city. 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all municipal departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by onsite consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the municipalities records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of municipal records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the council on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13); and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the council noncompliance by department heads or other municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the local government records act. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 8, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 2-39. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 9, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 2-40. - Designation of records liaison officers. 
Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one (1) records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his or her department. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 10, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 2-41. - Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, record liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in the departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 11, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 2-42. - Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management programs of the city. 
(c)  Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and the members of the records management committee. 
(d)  Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 12, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 2-43. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-37 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for a additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 13, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 2-44. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
A record that has not been listed on the approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 14, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 2-45. - Records center. 
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 2-37, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 2-37. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 15, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 2-46. - Micrographics. 
Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the council, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of municipal records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming of local government records established in rules of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and compliance with commission rules. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 16, 11-6-90)  
Secs. 2-47—2-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 421, §§ 1—8, § 1, adopted Nov. 8, 1990, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as Art. IV, §§ 2-51—2-52 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-51. - Texas Municipal Retirement System—Adopted. 
(a)  The city council of the City of Everman, Texas, on behalf of said city, hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments now existing and those hereafter created participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in the TMRS Act. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the city covered in said system. 
(c)  Each person who becomes an employee of a participating city on or after the effective date of participation of such city whose position shall require more than one thousand (1,000) hours per year shall become a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as a condition of their employment. 
(d)  In accordance with the provisions of the TMRS Act, the deposits to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System on account of current service of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed at the rate of five (5) percent of the full earnings of each employee of said departments. 
(e)  Each employee who qualifies for such credit shall be allowed "prior service credit" (as defined in section 853.101 of the TMRS Act) at the rate of one hundred (100) percent of the "base credit" of such member, calculated in the manner prescribed in Section 853.105 of said Act. 
(f)  For each month of current service rendered to this city by each of its employees who are members of Texas Municipal Retirement System, the city will contribute top the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his or her retirement, a sum that is two hundred (200) percent (one hundred (100), one hundred fifty (150), or two hundred (200)) of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment; and said sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the municipality accumulation fund. 
(g)  The city secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by said board under the provisions of the TMRS Act, and the said official is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of this city the prior service rendered to the said municipality by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required of the city under the provisions of the TMRS Act, or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the Board of Trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(h)  That the city hereby elects to participate in the supplemental death benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System for the purpose of providing in-service death benefits for each of the city's employees who are members of said system, and for the purpose of providing post-retirement death benefits for annuitants whose last covered employment was as an employee of the city, in the amounts and on the terms provided for in Sections 852.004, 854.601 through 854.605, 855.314, 855.408, and 855.502 of Title 110B, Title 8 of the Government Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 421, §§ 1—8, 11-8-90)  
Sec. 2-52. - Same—Resumption of membership. 
Pursuant to Section 63.003 of Subtitle G of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, the City of Everman hereby elects to allow any member of Texas Municipal Retirement System who is an employee of the city on the 1st day of October, 1990(1), who has terminated a previous membership in said system by withdrawal of deposits while absent from service, but who has at least twenty-four (24) months of credited service as an employee of the city since resuming membership to deposit with the system in a lump sum the amount withdrawn, plus a withdrawal charge of five (5) percent of such amount for each year from date of such withdrawal to date of redeposit, and thereupon such member shall be allowed credit for all service to which the member had been entitled at date of termination of the earlier membership, with like effect as if all such service had been rendered as a employee of this city, whether so rendered or not. The City of Everman agrees to underwrite and hereby assumes the obligations arising out of the granting of all such credits, and agrees that all such obligations and reserves required to provide such credits shall be charged to this city's account in said municipality accumulation fund. The five (5) percent per annum withdrawal charge paid by the member shall be deposited to the credit of the city's account in said municipality accumulation fund; and the deposits of the amount previously withdrawn by the member shall be credited to his or her individual account in the employees saving fund of the system. 
(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-8-90)  
Sec. 2-53. - Same—Additional rights. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 854.202(g) of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the "TMRS Act," the City of Everman, Texas, adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (herein referred to as the "system"): 
(a)  Any employee of the city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity if the member has at least twenty (20) years of credited service in the system performed for one (1) or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under Section 854.202(g) of the TMRS Act. 
(b)  Prior to adopting this section, the governing body of the city has: 
1.  Prepared an actuarial analysis of member retirement annuities at twenty (20) years of service; and 
2.  Held a public hearing pursuant to the notice provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act, Chapter 551, Texas Government Code. 
(c)  The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. 485, § 1, 9-7-99)  
Sec. 2-54. - Same—Authorization of updated service credits. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act). 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said Section 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section. 
(c)  The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be one hundred (100) percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act). 
(d)  Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(e)  In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 486, 9-7-99)  
Sec. 2-55. - Same—Increase in retirement annuities. 
(a)  On terms and conditions set out in Section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of this section. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system. 
(Ord. No. 486, 9-7-99)  
Sec. 2-56. - Same—Dates of allowances and increases. 
The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 2000, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An allowance of updated service credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until sections 2-54 and 2-55 cease to be in effect under subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act. 
Subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system, sections 2-54 through 2-56 shall be and become effective on the first day of January 2000. 
(Ord. No. 486, 9-7-99)  
Sec. 2-57. - Five-year vesting. 
The city council elects not to provide five-year vesting under Section 854.205 of the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 9-11-01)  
Sec. 2-58. - Authorization of restricted prior service credit. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.305 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the entities described in said Section 853.305 provided that (1) the person does not otherwise have credited service in the system for that service, and (2) the service meets the requirements of said Section 853.305. 
(b)  The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits. 
(c)  A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this ordinance must take the action required under said Section 853.305 while still an employee of this city. 
(Ord. No. 595, § 1, 7-10-07)  
Sec. 2-59. - Texas Municipal Retirement System—Additional rights, credits and benefits. 
(a)  An employee of the city who is a member of the system may terminate employment and remain eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity at any time after that member attains an applicable age and service requirement, if that member has at least five (5) years of credited service performed for one (1) or more municipalities that have authorized eligibility under Section 854.202(c) of the Act or are subject to Section 854.102(e) of the Act. 
(b)  An employee of the city who is a member of the system may retire and receive a service retirement annuity if that member is at least sixty (60) years old and has at least five (5) years of creditable service performed for one (1) or more municipalities that either have authorized eligibility under this subsection or are subject to Section 854.102(e) of the Act. 
(c)  The rights, credits and benefits herein above authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. 690, § 1, 8-9-16)  
Secs. 2-60—2-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
 
Sec. 2-71. - Everman Events Board. 
(a)  Creation and purpose. There is hereby created and established an events board to be officially designated as the Everman Events Board (the "board"). The board shall serve at the pleasure of the city council to provide recommendations and advice on recreational, community or other types of events and projects and any other matters pertaining to such events or projects that are for the benefit of the citizens of the city or that serve a public purpose of the city. 
(b)  Membership. 
(1)  Members of the events board shall be appointed by a majority vote of the city council. The board shall consist of seven (7) regular members. The initial appointments shall be for seven (7) members to be appointed for a term of two (2) years and two (2) members to be appointed for a term of one (1) year. After the initial terms are completed, members will be appointed with seven (7) members appointed in odd years and two (2) members appointed in even years. 
(2)  Members of the events board must meet the following qualifications: 
a.  Be a qualified voter of the city; 
b.  Shall have resided in the corporate limits of the city for at least one (1) year; and 
c.  Continue residency in the city during the term of office. 
(3)  The city council shall appoint a replacement to fill any vacancy for the unexpired term of a member whose place becomes vacant. 
(4)  The city council shall have the authority to remove any member at any time, with or without cause. 
(c)  Organization, rules and requirements. 
(1)  On or before [January 9] of each year, the membership shall determine, by simple majority vote, a chair and a vice chair. The terms of the chair and vice chair shall be one (1) year. It will be the duty of the chair to preside over meetings and to assist in setting meeting agendas. If the chair is absent the vice chair shall assume the duties of that office. 
(2)  Members of the board shall meet at least one (1) time per year, on a regular day and time selected by its members. The chair may call special meetings as necessary. 
(3)  The board shall conduct meetings and govern its proceedings according to the city council's adopted rules of order, abide by the Texas Open Meetings Law, and shall keep a record of its proceedings, including votes and attendance, and shall submit these records to the city secretary's office. 
(4)  Members of the board shall not take any action unless a quorum is present. A quorum shall consist of four (4) members. Each member, including the chair, is entitled to one (1) vote, and action of the board shall require a majority of those members present. 
(5)  The city manager shall designate a city employee to serve as staff liaison to the board. 
(6)  Members of the board may receive reimbursement of authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties. 
(d)  Powers and duties. 
(1)  This board is advisory only and shall not have any decision-making authority. 
(2)  The board shall have the following duties: 
a.  To make studies and project plans for developing programs and events that will be beneficial to the residents of the city and to create a forecast schedule to aid in promotion of upcoming programs and events and to recommend all matters for the development and advancement of programs and events to the city council; 
b.  To aid and assist the city in the procuring of financial and other aids and assistance for the city from the state and federal governments and their agencies for each and all of the purposes herein enumerated; 
c.  To act with and assist all other municipal boards, agencies, regional associations and especially the city council in formulating proper plans for community programs and events; 
d.  To recommend programs and city/community events to the city council, and to originate, plan and coordinate such recreation and other programs and community events for all segments of the population, throughout all seasons of the year if approved by the city council. Efforts by the board should be made to assure that all recommendations will utilize existing facilities and organizations within the city in order to provide recreational, leisure, and community event activities to the residents of the city. If the board determines that using facilities or organizations outside of the Everman city limits is necessary, it shall include in its recommendation to the city council regarding the program or event an explanation as to why it is necessary to use such outside facilities or organizations. The board should also consider the possibilities of gaining cooperative use of noncity-owned facilities and implementing proven programs to attract participants for recreational activities and other events; 
e.  To accomplish these duties, the board may establish subcommittees as necessary. Any subcommittee shall be chaired by an events board member, and an unspecified number of community volunteers may be chosen by the commission as working subcommittee members. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 2, 6-13-17)  
Chapter 2.5 - AMBULANCE SERVICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Nonamendatory Ord. No. 389, §§ I—VII, X and Arts. I—X (and incorporated of amendments of July 12, 1988) adopted June 14, 1988, has been codified as Ch. 2.5, Arts. I and II at the editor's discretion; §§ VIII, IX and XI—XIII of said ordinance, pertaining to severability, conflict, repealer, emergency clause and effective date, respectively, have not been included herein. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; police, Ch. 16; police department, § 16-21 et seq.; traffic, Ch. 19; operation of vehicles, § 19-26 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2.5-1. - Purpose. 
The operation of the Everman Emergency Ambulance Service shall be to provide emergency service to the residents of the city and such unincorporated areas as may be required for emergency service only. 
(Ord. No. 389, § I, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 2.5-2. - Requests made to police department. 
Requests for emergency ambulance service shall be made to the police department, and ambulance attendants shall have the authority to pick up any injured or sick person(s) found on public or private property whenever the need arises, and also when and if requested to do so by some person responsible for the sick or injured person; providing that all person(s) thusly treated and transported, whether emergency life-threatening or nonemergency life-threatening, shall be charged in accordance with the established fee unless exempted through membership subscription fees. 
(Ord. No. 389, § II, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 2.5-3. - Subscription membership plan or user fee; exemption. 
A subscription membership plan or user fee shall be assessed each household on a per-water-connection-service basis and shall be billed through water bills monthly. Such amount of subscription or user fee shall be established by resolution by the city council and subject to annual review for adjustments upward or downward. Wherein exists multioccupancy per water connection service, there shall be charged, on the basis of the total number of dwelling units per water service connection, the same rate as for single-occupancy residential water service connection. All commercial water service connections shall be billed in the same manner as for residential on a per-business basis; or wherein more than one (1) business-per-water-service connection exists, the same multiple charge shall be made on a per-business basis in the same manner as for multiple-occupancy for residential multiple-occupancy. 
The exemption shall be provided, through the subscription plan, that any and all charges for ambulance service due and not collected nor covered through the billing and collection from the patient's insurance, medicare or medicaid payments, due or recoverable by the city, are hereby waived. 
(Ord. No. 389, § III, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 2.5-4. - Cost recovery fee. 
A cost recovery fee for ambulance service shall be charged to all patients who are not members of the subscription or user fee program and who may be transported from those rural areas outside the city or from those cities served through mutual aid response and agreements. Said cost recovery fee shall be established as that amount as administratively computed for the average cost per run and based upon the annual operational cost of the ambulance service. 
(Ord. No. 389, § IV, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 2.5-5. - Responsibility for fees or charges. 
When the person is transported, or in the event such person is a minor or incompetent, then such person's parent or guardian shall be responsible for the fees or charges incurred for emergency ambulance service. Such fees or charges shall be payable to the City of Everman, 212 North Race Street, Everman, Tarrant County, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 389, § V, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 2.5-6. - Supplemental service staff; supervision. 
The ambulance service staff may be supplemented with full-time paid members as needed for the purpose of fulfilling the operational commitment of the Everman Emergency Ambulance Service to operate on a twenty-four-hour basis. 
The responsibility for and supervision of all members of the Everman Emergency Ambulance Service shall be with the city manager and/or the appointed EMS supervisor. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VI, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 2.5-7. - Emergency lights allowed on authorized emergency vehicles. 
All certified emergency medical service volunteer members of the Everman Emergency Ambulance Service are hereby permitted to install and maintain flashing red emergency lights on their private automobiles, either of the dash-mounted or outside cab-mounted visabar-type, for the purpose of responding to medical emergencies as an authorized emergency vehicle, in accordance with and regulated by Texas V.A.C.S. Article 6701d, Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways. 
The flashing red light equipment shall not be used except when such vehicle is operated in response to a medical emergency. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VII, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 2.5-8. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation, or any agent or employee thereof, who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined, not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 389, § X, 6-14-88)  
Secs. 2.5-9—2.5-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EVERMAN EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE VOLUNTEERS 
 
Sec. 2.5-21. - Established. 
The name of this organization shall be the Everman Emergency Medical Service Volunteers, hereinafter referred to as the Everman EMSV and shall operate and function as a volunteer, nonpaid branch of the Everman Emergency Medical Service, which is a city-owned and operated emergency medical service enterprise governed by all applicable state laws, the Everman Home Rule Charter, and existing personnel rules, regulations and procedures, as adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 389, Art. I, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 2.5-22. - Purpose. 
(a)  The primary duty and purpose of the Everman Emergency Medical Service shall be to provide emergency ambulance service to the citizens of Everman. 
(b)  The secondary mission of the Everman EMS shall be to provide emergency ambulance service to those rural areas of Tarrant County in accordance with the Tarrant County Rural Fire District Contract, as well as mutual-aid response to those neighboring cities where mutual-aid agreements now exist or may be negotiated in the future. 
(c)  In providing emergency medical service, the basic mission and goals of the Everman EMS shall be to save human lives, relieve the suffering of the injured, promote safety and provide EMS training, as deemed necessary and directly by the city manager or his appointed representative. The mission and goal of the Everman EMS volunteer branch shall be to perform and participate in the same capacity, except on a volunteer basis, as paid EMS personnel in the primary and secondary missions of the Everman EMS as outlined above. 
(Ord. No. 389, Art. II, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 2.5-23. - Officers; duties, nomination and election. 
(a)  Officers of the Everman EMS volunteers shall consist of one (1) president, vice president and secretary/treasurer. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the president to attend and conduct all business meetings of the EMS volunteers, as well as drills, parades and training programs. He/she will assist and support the EMS supervisor in accomplishing the assigned mission of the Everman EMS through assistance, cooperation and support in the representation of all matters concerning the volunteer memberships but shall have no organizational or operational responsibilities relative to section 2.5-22 of these adopted bylaws. 
(c)  The vice president shall, in the absence of the president, assume those duties of the president and perform duties of the president until his/her return to duty. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the secretary/treasurer to record, maintain and file the minutes of all volunteer's business meetings and to notify all volunteer members of all meetings, drills and parades. It shall, further, be the duty of the secretary/treasurer to receive contributions from the volunteer members only collected at the regular business meetings to maintain the tender loving care (TLC) account and shall report at each volunteer meeting a statement of receipts and disbursements for the month, keeping a true and correct record of the same. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the president, vicepresident and the secretary/treasurer to be designated as the authority to cosign checks for the tender loving care (TLC) account. 
(f)  Nomination and election of officers. 
(1)  To be selected to the office of president, vice president or secretary/treasurer, a volunteer must have actively participated in the volunteer's membership in good standing for one (1) year preceding election to office. 
(2)  The nomination and election of officers shall be at the November business meeting. Nominations shall be made from the floor, and each office shall be voted on separately. 
(3)  The term of office for all officers shall be one (1) calendar year, with each officer assuming the duties of his/her office on the first day of January and serving through the thirty-first day of December. The only exceptions shall be if the officer resigns or is removed from office. 
(4)  All elections of officers shall be by secret ballot only. 
(5)  To be elected to any office, a member must receive a plurality of the votes cast for that office. 
(6)  During the election of officers, the number of votes accumulated by each candidate shall be made known to the members. 
(7)  In the event of a vacancy occurring for any elected position, it shall be filled for the unexpired term at the next regular business meeting by a vote of the eligible voting members present. 
(Ord. No. 389, Art. III, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 2.5-24. - Membership. 
The Everman EMS shall have three (3) classes of volunteer membership as hereafter described. Any applicant to the Everman EMS must be a resident of the city or live within three minutes' response time to the ambulance bay. Application for the membership will be made on a regular application form hereafter provided. A vote of the majority of the voting membership shall be required to accept any applicant to membership. 
(1)  A senior volunteer member shall meet the following qualifications: Eighteen (18) years of age or older, complete a six-month probation, complete the minimum Texas Department of Health standards for personnel on a basic life support unit (ECA), complete a course in CPR along with ECA. All training must be completed within a six-month probation period, or the applicant is actively enrolled in a training class, before the applicant will be considered for active membership. If training is not met, the applicant will be dropped from membership. Probationary volunteer members shall have all of the privileges extended to active members, except that of voting. All training requirements are subject to change, depending on the needs of the Everman EMS. 
(2)  A junior volunteer member shall be sixteen (16) years of age up to eighteen (180 years of age, shall have all the privileges of a senior member, except for voting and driving, and must meet all qualifications outlined in subsection (1) above for training and probation before being accepted into active status. 
(3)  Any person of good character who has given outstanding service or financial aid to the Everman EMS may be elected to honorary membership. 
(Ord. No. 389, Art. IV, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 2.5-25. - Duties of members. 
(a)  All members shall strictly obey all orders of the EMS supervisor or team leader, all safety regulations and operate under the standard operating procedures and protocols presently in force. 
(b)  Members will not leave from duty after joining the apparatus on a call without the approval of the team leader or the EMS supervisor. 
(c)  All members shall take an active interest in the Everman EMS and shall not absent themselves from more than three (3) consecutive meetings or drills without a legitimate reason tendered to the EMS supervisor. 
(d)  Any member who absents themselves from more than three (3) EMS-sponsored events without a legitimate reason given to the EMS supervisor, will be subject to termination from membership. 
(e)  No member under the influence of alcohol or drugs shall ride in or drive the ambulance, attend any EMS-sponsored event, attend any meeting or drill. In the event there is such an occurrence, the member involved shall be dismissed from the duty by the team leader or the EMS supervisor, whoever the most senior of the two (2) is present. 
(f)  All members shall have a valid Texas driver's license. 
(g)  All members, upon beginning a leave of absence or termination of membership, will return all equipment to the squad, i.e., pagers/charger, shirts or any other equipment belonging to the squad. 
(h)  No member shall exceed five (5) miles per hour over the speed limit while responding in the ambulance in a residential area. 
(i)  Any member who is on duty and wishes to be off duty shall secure for him/herself a proper replacement of equal training and notify the EMS supervisor no less than two (2) hours prior to the termination of duty. 
(j)  All donations received during a call or transport will require a receipt given to the donor, and the donation shall be taken to city hall immediately upon the completion of a run. 
(k)  A review board shall be elected from the volunteer membership from among those members in good standing for the purpose of regulating and enforcing all bylaws of the Everman EMS volunteers. 
This review board shall sit in review of all violations and infractions of these bylaws by volunteers, as well as deviations from operating procedures and protocol established and issued for the operation of the Everman EMS. All findings and recommendations shall be submitted to the Everman EMS supervisor for final disposition. 
The review board shall consist of three (3) volunteer members; one (1) of whom shall be at least a team leader, with the remaining two (2) being volunteer members. Allowance is made whereby more than one (1) team leader may be elected to the board, depending upon a simple majority of votes cast by all volunteer members, as determined by popular vote. 
(l)  Any volunteer member violating these bylaws, operating procedures or protocol may be brought before the review board to determine the recommended action to be taken against the member(s) involved. Member(s) in question shall be sent a letter by registered mail ten (10) days prior to regular volunteer meeting. Member(s) in question shall have the option of requesting a postponement to, but not beyond, the next regularly scheduled volunteer meeting. 
(m)  At the meeting in question, and after a full hearing of the member's reason for activity, a secret ballot of the review board shall be held to determine on the following actions: 
(1)  Exonerate member(s) of all charges. 
(2)  Terminate member(s) from membership. 
(3)  Place member(s) on three (3) months' probation with all privileges revoked for said time period. 
(n)  The findings of the review board shall be forwarded to the Everman EMS supervisor, with or without recommendations, and shall review the circumstances and findings reported by the review board with the city manager, who shall have the option of deciding the final action to be taken. 
(o)  The majority of the voting members shall decide on the action to be taken on any business matter involving volunteer service members' activities exclusive of the ambulance service volunteer operation. 
(p)  All drivers must be twenty-one (21) years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 389, Art. V, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 2.5-26. - Meetings. 
(a)  The Everman EMS volunteers shall hold at least one (1) monthly business meeting conducted by the elected president and attended by the Everman EMS supervisor. 
(b)  All meetings shall be recorded by the secretary/treasurer. 
(c)  Training meetings may be called by the Everman EMS supervisor as deemed necessary and shall be for the purpose of training only. 
(d)  The December meeting shall be known as "the annual meeting" and shall allow the installation of new officers for the coming year. 
(e)  A quorum at any meeting of the Everman EMS volunteers shall consist of a majority of the membership and is required to transact any business. 
(Ord. No. 389, Art. VI, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 2.5-27. - Team leaders. 
(a)  The Everman EMS supervisor shall appoint a team leader for each ambulance crew, based upon recommendations from the volunteer membership. A member's appointment as a team leader shall be then decided upon his or her leadership qualities, training, medical service, as described in section 2.5-22, and acting in the highest professional and ethical manner. All appointments are subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the team leader and crew on duty to respond to the station when an emergency call is received from the police dispatcher to assure the ambulance responds to the scene. After arriving on the scene, the team leader shall have the option of declining transport, as outlined in the SOPs. The team leader shall assume complete authority over the operation of the vehicle, actions of crew members and/or any and all conditions arising while said team leader is on duty. 
(Ord. No. 389, Art. VII, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 2.5-28. - Boards and committees. 
(a)  Any board, review board or committee may be created or established, based upon need or cause, to carry out any volunteer function exclusive of ambulance service operations and shall be by majority vote of volunteer members. All boards or committees shall be chaired by the president in cooperation with the EMS supervisor. In the event of infractions by volunteers of standard operating procedures and protocol, the EMS supervisor shall attend and be present at all review board hearings for the benefit of any and all information presented. 
(b)  All boards and committees shall be dissolved upon the completion of their designated purpose. 
(c)  There shall be no regular or standing boards or committees. 
(Ord. No. 389, Art. VIII, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 2.5-29. - Equipment generally. 
(a)  There shall be no disposal of squad property made without the authority of the city manager. 
(b)  In case of property donated to the squad, it shall be accepted with the understanding that it will be used as any other property belonging to the squad. 
(Ord. No. 389, Art. IX, 6-14-88)  
Sec. 2.5-30. - Order of business at meetings. 
The order of business at regularly scheduled meetings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Opening prayer; 
(2)  Roll call; 
(3)  Recognition of any guests; 
(4)  Reading of minutes of last meeting; 
(5)  Committee reports; 
(6)  Old business; 
(7)  New business; 
(8)  Adjournment. 
(Ord. No. 389, Art. X, 6-14-88)  
Chapter 3 - ANIMALS AND ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 712, § 3, adopted Sept. 12, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 3, §§ 3-1—3-203, and § 2(Att. A) thereof enacted a new Ch. 3 as set out herein. The former Ch. 3 pertained to animals and derived from Ord. No. 354, adopted June 10, 1986, as amended. See the Code Comparative Tables for comprehensive derivation. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Preamble. 
The animal control regulations as established in this chapter have been adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the city. This chapter contains standards regulating the use, type, location, maintenance, registration, confinement, destruction and harboring of certain animals. The intent of these regulations, prohibitions and provisions is to protect values within the city, to enhance the quality of life of persons, pets, and other animals and to protect the general public from damage and injury which may be caused by unregulated animals. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms, unless the context indicates a different meaning, shall be interpreted as follows: 
Abandoned animal means any animal that: 
(1)  Is left unattended for a period greater than twenty-four (24) hours on private property, thereby creating a threat to the animal's health; 
(2)  Has not been provided with one (1) or more of the necessities of life, including air, food, water or protection from the sun and other elements of nature; 
(3)  Has been released on public or private property with intent to discontinue care or to desert the animal; or 
(4)  Has been left in the custody of another person without such person's consent. 
Animal care and control center means a facility designated and/or operated by the city for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under authority of this chapter. 
Animal control authority means the city animal control department which has authority over the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and referenced state law in the city and throughout areas over which it has jurisdiction. 
Animal control officer means any person designated by the city as the primary enforcement officers of ordinances regulating animals and owners of animals and for the enforcement of sections of the Texas Statutes pertaining to the care and control of animals. 
Animal cruelty means to mistreat through intentional or knowing abuse, such as overloading, overworking, tormenting, beating, mutilating or teasing or other abnormal treatment as shall be determined by an animal control officer, or neglect, including abandonment or failure to provide basic care, of any animal in a manner that causes or is likely to cause stress or physical injury, as provided in V.T.C.A. Penal Code § 42.11, or as otherwise stated in this chapter. 
At large. 
(1)  Off-premises: 
a.  Any animal, except a cat, which is not restrained by means of a leash or chain of sufficient strength and length to control the actions of such animal while off the owner's premises. 
b.  Any cat which is off the owner's property. 
(2)  On-premises: Any animal not confined on the premises of the owner by a substantial fence of sufficient strength and height to prevent the animal from escaping therefrom. A dog intruding upon the property of another person other than the owner shall be deemed "at large." Any animal within an automobile or other vehicle of its' owner or owner's agent shall not be deemed "at large" except when left in such an automobile or vehicle in a manner that would not prevent that animal's escape or contact with other persons or animals. 
Basic care means to provide any animal in a person's custody or control with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, adequate shelter and protection from the weather, adequate space, humane care and treatment and reasonable veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering. 
Bite means any abrasion, puncture, or tear of the skin actually caused or suspected of being caused by the teeth or claws of any animal. 
Board means the Texas State Board of Health. 
Dangerous dog means a dog that: 
(1)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a person, that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(2)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own, and those acts cause a person reasonably to believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person; or 
(3)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a domesticated animal that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and which enclosure was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(4)  Is owned or harbored primarily, or in part, for the purpose of dog fighting, or that has been trained for dog fighting; or 
(5)  Has previously been declared to be a dangerous dog by the animal control authority or any equivalent designation made by any governmental entity or court. 
Dangerous wild animal means as defined in V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code § 822.101. 
Dog means a domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family. 
Domestic animal includes all species of animals commonly and universally accepted as being domesticated. 
Estray means any stray horse, stallion, mare, gelding, filly, colt, mule, jenny, jack, jennet, hog, sheep, goat, fowl, or any species of cattle. 
Exotic species means any mammal, amphibian, reptile or fowl, which is not naturally tame or gentle, and is generally not found in the wild in the continental United States, and those regulated and defined by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Code as exotic (excluding nonvenomous reptiles and fish). 
Exotic livestock/ratites means any species classified as exotic livestock by the Texas Animal Health Commission. 
Harboring means the act of providing any animal with food, water, or shelter, keeping and caring for an animal or providing a premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter, or care. 
Owner means any person or entity owning, having a property interest, keeping, or harboring one (1) or more animals. 
Pet animal means any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility and shall include dogs, cats, rabbits, rodents, birds, non-poisonous reptiles, and any other species of animal which is sold or retained as a household pet but shall not include skunks, non-human primates, and any other species of wild, exotic, or carnivorous animal that may be further restricted in this chapter. 
Poultry means all domesticated fowl and all game birds which are legally kept in captivity except those classified as exotic livestock/ratite as defined above. 
Proper or secure enclosure means a fenced area or structure that is locked, and is capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children; is capable of preventing the escape or release of an animal; is clearly marked as containing a quarantined/dangerous animal; and is in conformance with any additional requirements for enclosures, as established and provided in writing to the owner by the animal control authority. 
Rabies vaccination means the vaccination of a dog, cat or other domestic animal with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the state department of health and administered by a veterinarian licensed by the state. 
Registered dangerous dog means any dog registered with the city in compliance with V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code Chapter 822, Subchapter D, and with the article and sections of this chapter addressing registered dangerous dogs. 
Serious bodily injury means an injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping and tearing of muscle that would cause a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical treatment. An offense involving serious bodily injury is a class A misdemeanor with criminal jurisdiction for its enforcement in the Tarrant County Courts. 
Serious injury means bodily injury caused by an animal which produces severe pain, trauma, loss of blood or tissue, and which requires medical treatment of wounds inflicted by the animal, and shall include bodily injury resulting from victim whether human or animal, attempting to escape or prevent contact with injuring animal(s). 
Severe attack means [an attack] in which the animal repeatedly bites or vigorously shakes its victim, and the victim, or a person intervening, has extreme difficulty terminating the attack. 
Severe bite means a puncture or laceration made by an animal's teeth which breaks the skin, resulting in a degree of trauma which would cause most prudent and reasonable people to seek medical care for treatment to the wound, without considerations of rabies prevention alone. 
Stray animal (including estrays) means any animal, for which there is no identifiable owner or harborer, which is found to be at large within the corporate limits of the city. 
Unprovoked, with respect to an attack by an animal, shall include, but not be limited to, the fact that the animal was not hit, kicked, or struck by a person with an object or part of a person's body nor was any part of the animal's body pulled, pinched, or squeezed by a person. 
Veterinarian means any practitioner of veterinary medicine licensed by the state to practice such in Texas. 
Vicious animal means any animal (other than dogs which are covered under Article V, Dangerous Dogs) that constitutes a physical threat by reason of its behavior to human beings or other animals. 
Wild animal means all species of animals which exist in a natural unconfined state and are usually not domesticated. This includes any animal which is part wild animal. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-3. - Animal control duties; enforcement. 
(a)  The animal control officers of the city shall have the authority to issue citations for any violations of this chapter and any other power or duty stated within the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly prevent, interfere with, or obstruct any animal control officer in the performance of his/her duties. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any lawful order of the local rabies control authority officer or any animal control officer of the city. 
(d)  The local rabies control authority officer or any animal control officer, or any peace officer is authorized to: 
(1)  Kill an animal which poses an imminent danger to a person or property, or a real or apparent immediate necessity exists for the destruction of an animal. 
(2)  Impound an animal which is diseased or endangers the health of a person or another animal. 
(3)  Impound any animal hereinafter designated a continuing public nuisance or found to be running at large or to be a stray within the city. 
(4)  Euthanize an impounded animal if the animal is suffering from injury, disease, or illness. 
(5)  Euthanize any animal suspected of having rabies, or which animal manifests a disposition to bite, when such animal(s) is found at large or found to be a stray after having made a reasonable, but unsuccessful, effort to capture the animal. 
(6)  Euthanize any impounded dangerous animal, unless there is reason to believe that it has an owner, immediately upon impoundment. 
(7)  Euthanize any nursing baby animal, excluding livestock impounded without the mother, where the mother cannot or refuses to provide nutritious milk, to prevent further suffering. 
(8)  Euthanize an animal when an owner no longer wishes responsibility for an animal or believes the animal to be in an ill or injured condition upon the owner signing a waiver, supplied by the animal shelter. An owner may also authorize the adoption of an unwanted animal prior to the expiration of the seventy-two-hour impoundment period by signing a waiver. 
(9)  Euthanize or give to a nonprofit humane organization any impounded animal that is to be destroyed as a result of the animal being impounded for more than seventy-two (72) hours. 
(10)  Authorize the immediate euthanizing of any animal impounded and considered by the animal control officer to be feral or of a nature that would cause injury to a person, except when such animal has inflicted a bite to a human during the preceding ten (10) days. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-4. - Enforcement; entry on private premises, police powers. 
(a)  Any city animal control officer or other authorized employee of the city police department shall have, within the city and other areas within the jurisdiction of the animal control division, all of the powers and authority of peace officers to the extent only, and no further, of enforcing state statutes and regulations, this chapter and other ordinances relating to animals. No person shall interfere in any manner or give false information to the above-stated employees in the performance of their duties. 
(b)  An owner of any animal shall immediately comply with an order to surrender such animal issued by an animal control officer or police officer. 
(c)  If persons keeping animals within the city or other areas within the jurisdiction of the animal control authority, after request of the animal control authority or animal control officer, refuse to permit access to the areas or places of keeping of such animals, the animal control authority or officer may seek the necessary court authorization to enter the premises. 
(d)  Any animal observed by an animal control officer or peace officer, in the officer's opinion, to be in immediate danger of death or serious bodily injury, may be removed from such situation by the quickest and most reasonable means available. It shall be the responsibility of the animal's owner to repair any damage to their property or the property of others caused by the removal of the animal from the dangerous situation. 
(e)  The animal control officer or peace officer has the right to pursue and apprehend animals running at large onto private property while enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
ARTICLE II. - VACCINATION AND LICENSING 
 
Sec. 3-5. - Dog and cat vaccinations and licenses. 
(a)  Required. All dogs and cats four (4) months of age or older that are kept, harbored or maintained within the corporate limits of the city shall be licensed. Cat and dog licenses shall be issued by the animal control officer or his agent upon payment of the required fee for each cat or dog. The license fee for cats and dogs shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in this chapter. Before a city license will be issued, the owner of the cat or dog must present a certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing that the cat or dog has a current rabies vaccination. Such vaccinations must be in compliance with Article VII, Rabies Control of this chapter. The license shall be good for one (1)year from the date of issuance. 
(b)  Tag or collar. Upon payment of the license fee, the city shall issue to the owner a license certificate and a metal tag having stamped thereon the year for which it is issued and the number corresponding with the number of the certificate. Such tag shall at all times be securely attached to a collar or harness around the neck of the animal. In case a tag is lost, a duplicate will be issued by the animal control officer or his agent upon presentation of the receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the calendar year. Tags shall not be transferable from one (1) animal to another and no refunds shall be made. 
(c)  Revocation of registrations. 
(1)  The animal control authority or any animal control officer may revoke any cat or dog registration after a hearing for any one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
a.  Impoundment of a cat or dog by the city more than three (3) times during a twelve-month period; 
b.  More than three (3) final convictions of a person for violating this chapter when such convictions relate to the cat or dog that is being considered for revocation of its registration certificate; 
c.  Any combination of a. and b. of this subsection totaling three (3) incidents; 
d.  Upon a determination that the cat or dog is a vicious cat or dog, as defined in this chapter; 
e.  If a person falsifies information during the licensing process or refuses or fails to comply with this chapter or any state law or regulation governing the protection of animals, official notice shall be given to the license holder of the intention to suspend the license. If, within seven (7) days after official notice is given, evidence shows the person is not in compliance, the license shall be revoked. 
(2)  Upon revoking the registration of any cat or dog, the animal control officer shall notify the owner of the cat or dog of the action in writing. Written notification shall be deemed made when a certified letter, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known mailing address of the owner of the dog or cat is deposited in the U.S. Mail. 
(3)  Upon the expiration of ten (10) days after written notification or revocation is deposited in the U.S. Mail, as provided in subsection (2) above, no cat or dog that has had its registration revoked shall be kept, maintained, or harbored within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
ARTICLE III. - MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 3-6. - Animals at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, including, but not limited to, the animal's owner, to allow an animal to be at large. The owner of an animal is responsible at all times for ensuring that his or her animal is properly secured or restrained and is not at large. 
(b)  Any officer or citizen of the city is hereby authorized to take up and deliver to the office of the animal control authority any animal mentioned in this chapter that may be found "at large" in the corporate limits of the city, subject to the applicable provisions of the law. Failure to notify and/or turn over to an animal control officer or the animal control authority any such animal within forty-eight (48) hours may subject the person taking up the animal to civil and/or criminal action. 
(c)  The animal control officer or his agent and any peace officer are authorized to impound any animal found to be at large or otherwise in violation of this chapter. If the animal is on private property or property of the animal's owner, the animal control officer, his agent, or a peace officer may enter the property, other than a private dwelling, for the purpose of impoundment or issuance of a citation, or both, subject to the applicable provisions of the law. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-7. - Confinement during estrus. 
Any unspayed female dog or cat in the state of estrus (heat) shall be confined during such period of time in a house, building or other secure enclosure and the area of enclosure shall be so constructed that no other dog or cat may gain access to the confined animal. Owners who do not comply shall be ordered to remove the animal in heat to a boarding kennel, veterinary hospital or animal shelter. All expenses incurred as a result of this confinement shall be paid by the owner. Failure to comply with the removal order of the animal control officer shall be a violation of this chapter and the dog or cat will then be impounded as prescribed in this chapter.  
Sec. 3-8. - Harboring stray animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without the actual consent of the owner, to harbor, feed, keep in possession by confinement or otherwise have an animal which does not belong to the person unless he/she has, within forty-eight (48) hours, notified the animal control authority. Upon receipt of such notice, the animal control authority may impound the animal and its disposition will be in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-9. - Harboring wild animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any wild animal within the city without a permit, except commercial establishments dealing in the sale of such animals which have proper facilities for the restraint and care thereof. The animal control officer and the city manager or his assistant may issue a permit to allow wild animals to be kept or harbored in the city, and shall establish the conditions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-10. - Number of pets permitted. 
No person shall keep or harbor more than four (4) cats and dogs (when the number of cats and dogs are added together) in one residence or one business. Puppies and kittens under four (4) months of age shall not be counted for purposes of this section. A person fostering animals, including animals from the animal care and control center, must also comply with these limits. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-11. - Abandoned animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of an animal to abandon that animal. Such an offense is a class A misdemeanor in the State of Texas and punishable by up to a four thousand dollar ($4,000.00) fine and/or year in jail. 
(b)  Any owner of an unwanted animal, other than livestock or swine, may relinquish the animal to an animal control officer after paying the required fee and completing an owner release form. Disposition of the animal will be in accordance with this chapter. 
(c)  If an animal control officer finds that an animal has been abandoned, the animal may be impounded. If the animal has been abandoned in a house or within a fenced area, the animal control officer must make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or manager of the property. If the property owner or manager is not the animal's owner, then the animal control officer shall secure permission to remove the animal. If the property owner is also the animal owner and this individual cannot be located, the animal control officer shall secure an appropriate warrant to seize the animal. 
(d)  An animal seized pursuant to this section shall be impounded for a period of one-hundred-twenty (120) hours. If the owner contacts the animal care and control center to reclaim the animal, an explanation for the animal's abandonment must be provided to the satisfaction of the animal control authority before the animal is released to the owner and the release must also be in accordance with this chapter. If the animal is unclaimed its disposition will be in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-12. - Owner must reside on premises with animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a dog or cat to reside on property where an owner of the animal does not reside or currently operate a business so that the animal is attended to on a regular basis. 
(b)  In the event any person violates this section, the animal control authority may immediately issue a summons for such person to appear in municipal court for a hearing on such charges. If the municipal court judge issues an appropriate order, an animal control officer or the animal control authority may seize the animal and its disposition shall be in accordance with this chapter. In the event the owner of the animal is unknown, or after reasonable diligence the owner cannot be located, an animal control officer or the animal control authority may remove the animal and its disposition shall be in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-13. - Animal cruelty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly: 
(1)  Torture an animal or in a cruel manner kill or cause serious bodily injury to an animal; 
(2)  Fail unreasonably to provide necessary food, basic care and shelter for an animal in the person's custody. An animal enclosure shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair. Plastic air shipping containers and/or pet carriers shall not be used as outdoor shelters; 
(3)  Abandon unreasonably an animal in a person's custody; 
(4)  Transport or confine an animal in a cruel manner; 
(5)  Kill, seriously injure, or administer poison to an animal belonging to another without legal authority or the owner's effective consent, except when an animal is discovered on the person's property in the act of or immediately after injuring or killing livestock, fowl or any domestic animal; 
(6)  Cause one animal or fowl to fight with another; 
(7)  Use a live animal as a lure in dog race training or in a dog coursing on a racetrack; 
(8)  Trip a horse; 
(9)  Seriously overwork an animal; 
(10)  Tether an animal in a manner that causes injury or death; or 
(11)  Allow conditions that cause or permit unwarranted pain and suffering. 
(b)  This section applies to any person in possession of an animal regardless of ownership. It is a defense to prosecution that the conduct engaged in involved self-defense, or is a bona fide scientific experimentation, or is related to wildlife management. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-14. - Guard dogs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or maintain any dog solely for the protection of persons and/or property unless the dog is physically confined to a specific enclosed area. The enclosed area in which the dog is confined must be with a chain link fence of at least six (6) feet in height and is reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own. 
(b)  The area in which the dog is confined must be conspicuously posted with warning signs bearing letters not less than two (2) inches high, stating "Guard Dog" and placed not less than every twenty-five (25) feet, on each side for the structure or barrier confining the dog(s). No less than one (1) warning sign shall be posted. 
(c)  The fact that a dog is subject to this section shall not relieve the owner of any duties imposed by other provisions in this chapter, including any registration requirement. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-15. - Tampering with traps and equipment. 
No person shall remove, alter, damage, or otherwise tamper with a trap or equipment set out by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-16. - Animal care. 
(a)  No person shall fail to provide basic care as defined in this chapter for any animal the person owns or that is in his or her custody or control. 
(b)  No person shall give away any live animal, whether as a prize for or as an inducement to, entering any contest, game or other competition or as an inducement to enter a place of business; nor offer such animal as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(c)  Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner. If the owner cannot be ascertained and located, then such operator shall at once report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency or to the local humane society. 
(d)  No person shall expose an open trap or metal-jaw-type trap that shall be liable to injure any domestic animal or person. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-17. - Unlawful restraint of dog. 
(a)  No person shall leave a dog outside and unattended by use of a restraint that unreasonably limits the dog's movement: 
(1)  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; 
(2)  Within five hundred (500) feet of the premises of a school; or 
(3)  In the case of extreme weather conditions, including conditions in which: 
a.  The actual or effective outdoor temperature is below thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit; 
b.  A heat advisory has been issued by a local or state authority or jurisdiction; or 
c.  A hurricane, tropical storm, or tornado warning has been issued for the jurisdiction by the National Weather Service. 
(b)  In this section, a restraint unreasonably limits a dog's movement if the restraint: 
(1)  Uses a collar that is pinch-type, prong-type, or choke-type or that is not properly fitted to the dog; 
(2)  Is a length shorter than the greater of: 
a.  Five (5) times the length of the dog, as measured from the tip of the dog's nose to the base of the dog's tail; or 
b.  Ten (10) feet; 
(3)  Is in an unsafe condition; or 
(4)  Causes injury to the dog. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section does not apply to: 
(1)  A dog restrained to a running line, pulley, or trolley system and that is not restrained to the running line, pulley, or trolley system by means of a pinch-type, prong-type, choke-type, or improperly fitted collar; 
(2)  A dog restrained in compliance with the requirements of a camping or recreational area as defined by a federal, state, or local authority or jurisdiction; 
(3)  A dog restrained for a reasonable period, not to exceed three (3) hours in a twenty-four-hour period, and no longer than is necessary for the owner to complete a temporary task that requires the dog to be restrained; 
(4)  A dog restrained while the owner is engaged in, or actively training for, an activity that is conducted pursuant to a valid license issued by this state if the activity for which the license is issued is associated with the use or presence of a dog; 
(5)  A dog restrained while the owner is engaged in conduct directly related to the business of shepherding or herding cattle or livestock; or 
(6)  A dog restrained while the owner is engaged in conduct directly related to the business of cultivating agricultural products, if the restraint is reasonably necessary for the safety of the dog. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-18. - Filing of false claims or reports. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly initiates, communicates, or circulates a claim of ownership for an animal with the animal control manager that he knows is false or baseless. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly initiates, communicates, or circulates a report of a violation of city ordinance or state law with the animal control officer that he knows is false or baseless. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Secs. 3-19—3-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC NUISANCE 
 
Sec. 3-25. - Nuisance unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess, or maintain an animal, or property housing animals, in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance. By way of example, and not of limitation, the following conditions, events, acts or actions of an owner of an animal are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and are unlawful: 
(1)  Any animal that molests, chases, or attacks passersby or passing vehicles; 
(2)  Any animal that molests, chases, or attacks other animals; 
(3)  Any animal that trespasses on school grounds; 
(4)  Any animal that is repeatedly at large (e.g., three (3) or more times per twelve-month-month period) 
(5)  Any animal that damages or defiles private or public property or causes substantial inconvenience to another; 
(6)  Any animal that barks, whines, howls, crows or makes other noise in an excessive, continuous fashion so as to interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of neighboring premises. If such noise occurs between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. it shall be prima facie proof that it is unreasonable. It shall be a defense to prosecution if an individual, other than the owner, provokes or taunts the animal. 
(7)  Failing to confine a female dog or cat while in season in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that she cannot come into contact with another dog or cat, or create a nuisance by attracting other animals; provided this section shall not be construed to prohibit the intentional breeding of animals within an enclosed area on the premises of the owner of an animal which is being bred; 
(8)  Any animal that is a dangerous animal or dangerous dog not confined as required by this chapter or an animal that is diseased and dangerous to the public health; 
(9)  Maintaining animals or property in an environment of unsanitary conditions or lack of cleanliness that results in offensive odor or is dangerous to the public health, welfare, or safety or a failure to maintain animals in a condition of good order and cleanliness so as to reduce the probability of transmission of disease; 
(10)  An object, place, or condition (including, but not limited to, fecal matter, garbage or other organic wastes) that is a potential instrument or medium for disease transmission; 
(11)  Any dead animal not lawfully disposed of within twenty-four (24) hours of its death. Requests for disposal of small animals, including dogs and cats, may be made to the animal control authority or animal care and control center. If the animal dies on property owned by another person, the property owner may dispose of the carcass at the expense of the animal's owner. 
(12)  A condition or place that is a breeding ground for flies; 
(13)  A collection of water in which mosquitoes are breeding; 
(14)  A place or condition harboring rats; 
(15)  Any animal which damages, soils, defiles, urinates or defecates on private property other than that of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-26. - Animals for sale. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, exchange, barter, give away, or offer to sell, exchange barter or give away any animal from a public street, alley, easement, or right-of-way, or from property owned or controlled by a local, county, state or federal governmental entity within the city or other applicable animal control authority jurisdiction. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, exchange, barter, give away, or offer to sell, exchange, barter, or give away any animal on, in, upon, through or from any premises or space upon any private property within the city unless the person resides at such property or has a legal right of occupancy to such property for a period of six (6) months for the purpose of conducting such transactions. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, exchange, barter, give away, or offer to sell, exchange, barter, or give away a dangerous animal within the city or other applicable jurisdiction of the animal control authority. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, exchange, barter, give away, or offer to sell, exchange, barter, or give away a dangerous dog within the city or other applicable animal control authority jurisdiction except in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-27. - Vicious animals. 
Except for dangerous dogs which may be kept in accordance with article VIII, no person shall own or harbor a vicious animal within the city; such an animal shall be impounded as a public nuisance. If impoundment of said animal cannot be made with safety, the animal may be destroyed without notice to the owner. Any animal which kills another domestic or pet animal or kills or severely maims an individual shall be removed from the city within twenty-four (24) hours following the owner being notified, otherwise, said animal shall be impounded and destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-28. - Authority to destroy injured or diseased animals. 
The city police department, animal control officer, or authorized representative is authorized to destroy any injured or diseased animal, whether such animal is on public or private property, and when the recovery from such injuries or disease is in serious doubt, and after a reasonable effort had been made to locate the owner of such animal. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-29. - Breeding of livestock. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal listed in the definition of "estray" herein to knowingly permit or cause to be permitted the breeding of any such animal within the public view, whether such animal is on or off the premises of its owner. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-30. - Enclosures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any horse, cow, cattle, sheep, goat, or fowl within two hundred (200) feet of another person's residence or occupied building, or to keep any swine/pig within five hundred (500) feet of another person's residence or occupied building. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Secs. 3-31—3-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - IMPOUNDMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 3-41. - Impoundment. 
Any animal control officer or other designated official may take up and confine any animal found at large or that is owned or harbored or otherwise treated or kept in a manner or condition that violates this chapter or any other local, state or federal law or regulation. Any impoundment of animals authorized in this chapter shall be performed in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-42. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Notice. If the owner of any impounded animal is known, the animal control officer shall attempt to notify him or her not later than twenty-four (24) hours from the beginning of the next business day after such impoundment. 
(b)  Redemption by owner. Any owner of an impounded animal, except an animal that is being held on a complaint for violation of this chapter or other law or that is required to be quarantined, may redeem the animal by complying with all of the requirements of this article and payment of the impoundment fee, care and feeding charges, veterinary charges, rabies vaccination charges and such other costs as set by the animal control officer. 
(c)  If any animal is not redeemed within three (3) days after notification to owner, where owner is known, or after confinement if the owner is not known, it shall be deemed abandoned and may be placed for adoption, subject to payment of an adoption fee; or the animal control officer may humanely euthanize such an animal by injection or other means approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-43. - Disposition of impounded animal being held on complaint. 
If a complaint has been filed in municipal court for the city against the owner of an impounded animal for a violation of this chapter or any other law, the animal shall not be released except on the order of the court, which may also direct the owner to pay any penalties for violation of this chapter, in addition to all impoundment fees. Surrender of an animal by the owner thereof to the animal control officer does not relieve or render the owner immune from the decision of the court, nor to the fees and fines which may result from a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-44. - Removal of animals from confinement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any place of confinement any animal which has been confined as authorized, without the consent of the impounding agency. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-45. - Proof of rabies vaccination and tag required for release/second impoundment. 
(a)  If the owner of an impounded cat or dog takes possession of the animal from the animal care and control center, the owner shall provide proof of current rabies vaccination and city tag certification. If the animal does not have a current rabies vaccination and city tag certification, the owner shall have the animal vaccinated and provide proof to the animal control authority of vaccination and city tag certification no later than thirty (30) days after taking possession of the animal. 
(b)  If a cat or dog is impounded a second time, the owner must also sign a thirty-day spay/neuter contract and submit a prepaid surgery receipt from any vet in the area prior to release of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Secs. 3-46—3-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ESTRAYS 
 
Sec. 3-66. - Unattended estrays. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow an estray to be unattended upon any public street, alley, or thoroughfare or upon the private property of another in the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The person having ownership or right to immediate control of such estray shall have the burden to keep such estray off the public streets, alleys, and thoroughfares or the property of another in the city. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-67. - Impoundment of estrays. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer, in the absence of action by the county sheriff's office, to take up any estray that may be found in and upon any street or alley, or in or upon any unenclosed lot in the city or otherwise to be found at large, and to confine such estray for safekeeping. Upon impounding an estray, the animal control officer shall prepare a "notice of estray" and file such notice in the estray book located in the office of the animal control officer. Each entry shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the person who notified the animal control officer of the estray; 
(2)  The location of the estray when found; 
(3)  The location of the estray until disposition; 
(4)  A description of the animal including its breed, color, sex, age, size, all markings of any kind, and any other identifying characteristics. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-68. - Advertisement of impounded estrays. 
When an estray has been impounded, the animal control officer shall make a diligent search of the register of recorded brands in the county for the owner of the estray. If the search does not reveal the owner, the animal control officer shall advertise the impoundment of the estray in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least twice during the next fifteen (15) days following impoundment and post a notice of the impoundment of the estray on the public notice board of the city hall. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-69. - Recovery by owner. 
The owner of an estray may recover possession of the animal at any time before the animal is sold under the terms of this article if: 
(1)  The owner has provided the animal control officer with an affidavit of ownership of the estray containing at least the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the owner; 
b.  The date the owner discovered that the animal was an estray; 
c.  The property from which the animal strayed; 
d.  A description of the animal including its breed, color, sex, size, all markings of any kind, and any other identifying characteristics. 
(2)  The animal control officer has approved the affidavit; 
(3)  The affidavit has been filed in the estray book; 
(4)  The owner has paid all estray handling fees to those entitled to receive them; 
(5)  The owner has executed an affidavit of receipt containing at least the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the person receiving the estray; 
b.  Date of receipt of estray; 
c.  Method of claim to estray (owner, purchaser at sale); 
d.  If purchased at sale, the amount of gross purchase price; 
e.  Amount of estray handling fees paid; 
f.  The net proceeds of the sale. 
(6)  The animal control officer has filed the affidavit of receipt in the estray book. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-70. - Fees. 
For each and every estray taken and impounded there shall be paid to the city by the owner thereof or his agents the applicable fees set forth in the fee schedule contained in this chapter for each and every subsequent day that the animal shall remain in the custody of the animal control officer. Such fee being charged for the caring and feeding of such animal. The owner shall also pay for any veterinarian or drug fees incurred for the animal while it is in the custody of the city. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-71. - Sale of estray. 
(a)  If the ownership of an estray is not determined within fourteen (14) days following the final advertisement required by this article, title to the estray rests in the city and the animal control officer shall then cause the estray to be sold at a public auction. 
(b)  Title to the estray shall be deemed vested in the animal control officer for purposes of passing a good title, free and clear of all claims, to the purchaser at the sale. 
(c)  The purchaser of an estray at public auction may take possession of the animal upon payment thereof. 
(d)  The disposition of the proceeds derived from the sale of an estray at public auction will be as follows: 
(1)  Pay all handling fees to those entitled to receive them; 
(2)  Execute a report of sale of impounded stock; 
(3)  The net proceeds remaining from the sale of the estray after the handling fees have been paid shall be delivered by the animal control officer to the city treasurer. Such net proceeds shall be subject to claim by the original owner of the estray as provided in this division; 
(4)  If the bids are too low, the animal control officer shall have the right to refuse all bids and arrange for another public auction or sealed bidding procedure. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-72. - Recovery by owner of sale proceeds. 
Within six (6) months after the sale of an estray under the provisions of this division, the original owner of the estray may recover the net proceeds of the sale that were delivered to the city treasurer if: 
(1)  The owner has provided the animal control officer with an affidavit of ownership; 
(2)  The animal control officer has approved the affidavit; 
(3)  The approved affidavit has been filed in the estray book. 
(4)  After the expiration of six (6) months from the sale of an estray, as provided by this division, the sale proceeds shall escheat to the city. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-73. - Use of estray. 
During the period of time an estray is held by the person who impounded the estray, the estray may not be used by any person for any purpose. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-74. - Death or escape of estray. 
If the estray dies or escapes while held by the person who impounded it, the person shall report the death or escape to the animal control officer. The report shall be filed in the estray book. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Secs. 3-75—3-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - KENNELS 
 
Sec. 3-96. - Definition. 
As used in this article, "kennel" is defined as any lot or premises on which four (4) or more dogs, cats or other domestic animals at least four (4) months of age are housed or accepted for boarding, trimming, grooming and/or bathing for which remuneration is received. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-97. - Permit—Required. 
A kennel shall not be allowed until a kennel permit is issued by the city. The city animal control officer shall determine, after inspection, whether or not such permit shall be issued. No permit shall be issued for a kennel to operate within one thousand (1,000) feet of any residence. Grooming parlors where no dogs or cats are to be kept overnight and veterinary clinics shall not be considered kennels, nor subject to this article. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-98. - Same—Term; fee. 
Such permits shall be valid for one (1) year from date of issuance. The permit fee shall be as set forth in the fee schedule contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-99. - Same—Revocation or suspension. 
Any kennel permitted under this article which is found to be in violation of any zoning law, health law or any other applicable law of the city or the state, or any kennel that is maintained in such a manner as to be detrimental to the health, safety or peace of mind of persons residing in the immediate vicinity, may have its kennel permit suspended or revoked without prior notice by the city animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Secs. 3-100—3-118. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RABIES CONTROL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 3-119. - Adoption of rabies control measures. 
For the purpose of controlling and eradicating rabies, the city hereby adopts V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code Chapter 826 and 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 826 entitled "Zoonosis Control," as such may be amended or revised from time to time. These provisions shall govern all matters covered therein within the city or other area within the jurisdiction of the animal control division of the city, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-120. - Designation of local rabies control authority. 
The city hereby appoints the city animal control director to be the local rabies control authority for the city. The local rabies control authority shall enforce this chapter and other related ordinances of the city, V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code Chapter 826, and associated rules and the rules adopted by the executive commissioner under the area rabies quarantine provisions. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-121. - Reporting of rabies and bites or scratches. 
(a)  A person who knows of an animal bite or scratch to an individual that the person could reasonably foresee as capable of transmitting rabies, or who knows of an animal that the person suspects is rabid, shall report the incident or animal to the local rabies control authority of the city within twelve (12) hours of learning of such incident. 
(b)  The report must include: 
(1)  The name and address of the victim and of the animal's owner, if known; and 
(2)  Any other information that may help in locating the victim or animal, including the name, age, sex and precise location of the bitten person and such other information as the police department or animal control officer may require. 
(c)  The local rabies control authority shall investigate a report filed under this section. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-122. - Reporting suspected rabies. 
Every owner, custodian or veterinarian shall report to the local rabies control authority officer or his designee all cases of rabies or suspected rabies of which any of them has knowledge. The dog or cat having rabies or symptoms thereof, or suspected of having rabies, or which has been exposed to rabies, shall immediately be confined for observation and quarantine period. The local rabies control authority shall investigate a report filed under this section. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Secs. 3-123—3-155. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DOGS AND CATS 
 
Sec. 3-156. - Vaccinations. 
The Texas Rabies Control Act (V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code § 826.021) requires all pet owners to vaccinate and keep current the rabies vaccination in dogs or cats that are four (4) months of age and older. Every owner of a dog or cat four (4) months of age or older shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies. All such dogs or cats shall be revaccinated one (1) year after the date of the first vaccination, then annually thereafter if given a one (1) year vaccine or tri-annually thereafter if given a three-year vaccine. 
Any person establishing residence within the city shall comply with this division within ten (10) days of establishing such residency. If an unvaccinated dog or cat inflicts a bite or scratch, or otherwise attacks any person within the city limits, a rabies vaccine shall not be administered to the dog or cat until after a ten-day observation period has transpired, beginning with the date of the bite, scratch or attack. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-157. - Certificate of vaccination. 
(a)  Upon vaccination, the veterinarian shall execute and furnish to the owner of the dog or cat, as evidence thereof, a certificate of vaccination. The veterinarian shall retain a duplicate copy of the certificate and one (1) copy shall be filed with the owner. Such certificate shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the vaccinated dog or cat; 
(2)  The date of vaccination; 
(3)  The type of rabies vaccine used; 
(4)  The year and number of the rabies tag; 
(5)  The breed, age, color, and sex of the vaccinated dog or cat. 
(b)  Information contained in a rabies vaccination certificate or any record compiled from such information shall be confidential as set forth in V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code § 826.0211 and shall not be subject to disclosure under the Texas Public Information Act. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-158. - Rabies tag. 
Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of vaccination, the owner of the dog or cat shall cause to be attached to the collar or harness of the vaccinated animal a metal tag, serially numbered to correspond with the vaccination certificate number and bearing the year of issuance. The owner of a dog or cat shall ensure that the animal bears this vaccination tag at all times. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-159. - Use and sale of rabies vaccine. 
(a)  Rabies vaccine for animals may be administered only by or under the direct supervision of a veterinarian. 
(b)  A veterinarian may not administer or directly supervise the administration of rabies vaccine in this state unless the person is: 
(1)  Licensed by the state board of veterinary medical examiners to practice veterinary medicine; or 
(2)  Practicing veterinary medicine on an installation of the armed forces or National Guard. 
(c)  A person may not sell or distribute rabies vaccine for animals to any person except a licensed veterinarian or to a person working in a veterinary clinic who accepts the vaccine on behalf of the veterinarian. 
(d)  This section does not prohibit a pharmacy licensed by the Texas State Board of Pharmacy from supplying rabies vaccine for animals to a licensed veterinarian. 
(e)  This section does not prohibit a veterinarian licensed by the Texas State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners from selling or dispensing rabies vaccine to an individual with whom the veterinarian has a veterinarian-client-patient relationship as described by V.T.C.A. Texas Occupations Code Chapter 801, for the sole purpose of allowing that individual to administer the rabies vaccine to that individual's own livestock. 
(f)  A person commits an offense if the person: 
(1)  Administers or attempts to administer rabies vaccine in a manner not authorized by this section; 
(2)  Dispenses or attempts to dispense rabies vaccine in a manner not authorized by this section; 
(3)  Sells or distributes rabies vaccine for animals in violation of this section. 
(g)  An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Secs. 3-160—3-169. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - QUARANTINE 
 
Sec. 3-170. - Facilities. 
All quarantine and impoundment facilities shall be maintained in accordance with standards established by the V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code Chapter 826. Testing of quarantined animals and the procedures for and method of quarantine shall be as set forth in V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code § 826.042 and as set forth below. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-171. - Method and testing. 
(a)  When a dog or cat which has bitten a human being has been identified, the owner shall place the animal in quarantine. The observation period shall begin on the day of the biting. The dog or cat must be placed in the animal care and control center or in a veterinarian facility specified for this purpose; however, the owner of the dog or cat may request permission from the local rabies control authority to home quarantine, if the following criteria can be met: 
(1)  Secure facilities must be available at the home of the dog or its owner, and must be approved by the local rabies control authority or his designee; 
(2)  The dog or cat was vaccinated against rabies prior to the bite; 
(3)  The local rabies control authority or his designee, or a licensed veterinarian must observe the dog or cat at least on the first and last days of the quarantine period. If the dog or cat becomes ill during the observation period of the quarantine, the local rabies control authority must be notified by the person having possession of the dog or cat. At the end of the observation period, the release from quarantine must be accomplished in writing by the local rabies authority or his designee in accordance with this chapter; 
(4)  The dog or cat was not in violation of any provisions of this chapter at the time of the biting incident; and 
(5)  If the dog or cat cannot be maintained in secure quarantine, it shall be humanely destroyed and the brain be submitted to the state department of health's certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis. 
(b)  No wild animal shall be placed in quarantine. All wild animals involved in biting incidents will be humanely destroyed in such a manner that the brain is not mutilated. The brain shall be submitted to a state department of health's certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis. 
(c)  Quarantine procedures. 
(1)  Biting animals and animals suspected of rabies that are placed in confinement for observation must be separated from all other animals in such a manner that there is no possibility of physical contact between the animal under quarantine and animals not under quarantine. 
(2)  Unowned or owned animals may be destroyed for rabies diagnosis prior to the end of the quarantine period. 
(3)  The local rabies control authority may require a written agreement from the owner or the custodian of the animal at the time of quarantine agreeing to the terms of quarantine and providing for the disposal of the animal if the terms are violated or if the local rabies control authority deems it necessary at any time during the quarantine period. 
(d)  Quarantine by owner minimum requirements (if approved by the local rabies control authority): 
(1)  The animal must be kept in a secure enclosure and must remain there for ten (10) days. 
(2)  The animal must be kept away from other animals and people except those in the immediate household. 
(3)  The animal may not be removed from the corporate city limits of Everman while under quarantine. 
(4)  The owner shall notify the city animal control division immediately if the animal becomes sick, displays any behavioral changes or dies. 
(5)  The owner shall not subject the animal to any medical procedure (including vaccinations) without first notifying the animal control division. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-172. - Disposition of domestic animals other than dogs and cats exposed to rabies. 
(a)  Any disposition of a domestic animal exposed to rabies shall be in accordance with standards established in the V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code Chapter 826. 
(b)  The provisions of this section apply only to common domestic animals, other than a dog or cat, for which an approved rabies vaccine is available. Sufficient justification for quarantine rather than humane destruction of such an animal shall be determined by the local rabies control authority after consulting with two (2) disinterested veterinarians, after hearing the stated grounds for such justification in writing by the owner of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-173. - Violation of quarantine; killing of biting animal prohibited; surrender of carcasses of dead animals suspected of rabies. 
(a)  The violation of any condition of quarantine by any person shall be just cause for the seizure and impoundment of the quarantined animal by the city animal control officer if quarantined at a veterinarian office or at the owner's premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to interrupt the observation period. If a violation of quarantine occurs, it shall be just cause for humane destruction of the animal for the purpose of certified laboratory rabies diagnosis in the event that a person who was bitten by the animal is placed in a position that jeopardizes his health or welfare or if the local rabies control authority determines it is in the interest of public safety. 
(b)  All animal bite reports shall be investigated by the local rabies control authority or his designee. Without the permission of the local rabies control authority or his designee, it shall be unlawful for any person to kill or remove from the city any animal that has bitten a person or attacked or killed another animal, or that has been placed under quarantine, except when it is necessary to kill such animal to protect the life of any person or other animal. If such animal is killed, it shall be reported immediately to the local rabies control authority, an animal control officer, or a licensed veterinarian in order that the animal may be properly handled for the purpose of certified laboratory rabies diagnosis. 
(c)  It shall be the burden of the person killing any animal, as outlined in subsection (b) above, to show the necessity of killing such animal to protect the life of any person or other animal. 
(d)  The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies or suspected of having rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the local rabies control authority or an animal control officer. 
(e)  No person shall fail or refuse to surrender an animal for supervised quarantine or humane destruction, as required herein for rabies control, when demand therefor is made by the local rabies control authority or his designee. 
(f)  Any person having possession of or responsibility for any quarantined animal shall immediately notify the local rabies authority or an animal control officer if such animal escapes, or becomes or appears to become sick or dies, and, in the case of the death of the animal while under quarantine, shall immediately surrender the dead animal to the local rabies authority or an animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-174. - Release or disposition of quarantined animal at end of quarantine period. 
(a)  If a veterinarian quarantining an animal or the local rabies control authority determines that a quarantined animal does not show the clinical signs of rabies, the animal shall be released to its owner when the quarantine period ends if: 
(1)  The owner has an unexpired rabies vaccination and license tag for the animal; or 
(2)  The animal is vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian at the owner's expense and a vaccination certificate and license tag are issued before release. 
(b)  If a veterinarian determines that a quarantined animal shows the clinical signs of rabies, the veterinarian or local rabies control authority shall humanely destroy the animal. If an animal dies or is destroyed while in quarantine, the veterinarian or local rabies control authority shall remove the head or brain of the animal and submit it to the nearest department laboratory for testing. 
(c)  The owner of an animal that is quarantined under this chapter shall pay to the veterinarian or to the local rabies control authority the reasonable costs of the quarantine and disposition of the animal. The veterinarian or local rabies control authority may bring suit to collect such costs. 
(d)  The veterinarian or local rabies control authority may adopt the animal and retain the proceeds or keep, grant, or destroy an animal if the owner or custodian does not take possession of the animal before the fourth day following the final day of the quarantine period. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code § 826.043.  
Sec. 3-175. - Area rabies quarantine by state. 
(a)  If the state board of health declares an area rabies quarantine, the rules adopted by the state board of health supersede all other applicable ordinances or rules applying to the quarantine area and apply until the state board of health or its designee removes the quarantine by declaration or until the rules expire or are revoked by the state board of health. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person violates a rule of the state board of health adopted under V.T.C.A. Texas Health and Safety Code § 826.045 governing an area rabies quarantine. 
(c)  An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-176. - Limitation on liability. 
A veterinarian performing duties under this chapter is not liable to the owner of an animal for the death of or injury to the animal except in a case of willful misconduct or gross negligence. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-177. - Exemption from quarantine requirement for police service animals. 
(a)  In this section, "handler or rider" and "police service animal" have the meanings assigned by V.T.C.A. Penal Code § 38.151. 
(b)  A police service animal is exempt from the quarantine requirement of this article if the animal bites a person while the animal is under routine veterinary care or while the animal is being used for law enforcement, corrections, prison, or jail security, or investigative purposes. If after biting the person the animal exhibits any abnormal behavior, the law enforcement agency and the animal's handler or rider shall make the animal available within a reasonable time for testing by the animal shelter or a veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Secs. 3-178—3-189. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - DANGEROUS DOGS 
 
Sec. 3-190. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the city by providing for the disposition of dogs determined to be dangerous. 
(b)  The administrative procedures of this article shall apply to any dog required to be restrained in accordance with this article which, while running at large or while restrained in a public place, has bitten or attacked a person or, while running at large or while restrained in a public place, has bitten or attacked another animal. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-191. - Definitions. 
Words or terms used in this article shall have the following meanings, unless the context shall indicate another or different meaning or intent: 
Additional enclosure requirements means a house, building, structure, or pen which is, in addition to other proper or secure enclosure requirements in this chapter or state law: 
(1)  A house or a building, or in the case of a fence or structure/pen, the fence or structure/pen must be six (6) feet in height. The structure/pen must also have minimum dimensions of five (5) feet by ten (10) feet. The fence or structure/pen must form an enclosure suitable to prevent entry of young children, and must be locked and secured such that an animal cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape of its own volition. 
(2)  The enclosure shall be securely locked at all times. The structure/pen shall have secure sides to prevent the dangerous animal or registered dangerous dog from escaping from the enclosure. 
(3)  The structure/pen shall provide protection from the elements for the animal. The animal control division may require a fence higher than six (6) feet or require a secure top and/or a secure bottom to the structure/pen if the need is demonstrated. 
(4)  A structure such as a house, mobile home, apartment, travel trailer, or other habitation or similar structure is not a secure enclosure when any window is open, or when a screen window or screen door or other penetrable barrier is the only obstacle preventing the animal from exiting the structure, or when any door of another opening used for entry or exit by persons or animals is accessible to the dangerous animal 
Bodily injury means physical pain, illness, or any impairment of physical condition. 
Leash means secured on the owner's property by a leash, or other humane restraint, no longer than four (4) feet in length, held by a person of sufficient strength to restrain the animal, and muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent the animal from biting any person or any other animal. 
Menacing means the showing by a dog of a disposition, determination, or intent to attack or inflict injury or harm to a person or another domestic animal, such as anyone, or a combination, of the following or similar acts: biting, snarling, charging aggressively toward a person or another animal, growling with curled lips, popping of teeth, or barking with raised hackles. 
Register means to fully comply with and maintain all conditions of registration (section 3-194) and applicable orders, including the following: 
(1)  Provide the animal control authority with the name, address and telephone number of the person owning or harboring a dangerous dog; 
(2)  Provide the animal control authority with the name, general description and two (2) color photographs, one (1) depicting a frontal view and one (1) depicting a side view of the dangerous dog; 
(3)  Agree to inspections by animal control officers of the dangerous dog and the premises on which the dangerous dog is kept at any reasonable time to insure compliance with the provisions of this article; and 
(4)  Payment of any cost or fee assessed by the animal control authority related to the registration, seizure, acceptance, impoundment, or destruction of the dog. 
Serious bodily injury means an injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping and tearing of muscle that would cause a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical treatment. An offense involving serious bodily injury is a class A misdemeanor with criminal jurisdiction for its enforcement in the Tarrant County Courts. 
Sign(s) means a sign, at least eight (8) inches by twelve (12) inches, of a permanent nature stating "BEWARE OF DANGEROUS DOG" in red lettering on a white background. The lettering shall be no less than two (2) inches in height and made of a reflective material that is visible in low-light situations or at night. In addition, the sign shall include a symbol warning, understandable by small children, of the presence of a dangerous dog. 
Unprovoked or without provocation means the dog was not hit, kicked, or struck by the person or animal with any object or part of the attacked person's or animal's body nor was any part of the dog's body pulled, pinched or squeezed by the person or animal. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-192. - Reporting of incident/dangerous dog determination. 
(a)  If a person reports a dangerous dog incident, the animal control authority shall investigate the incident. The animal control authority may adopt appropriate forms to aid in the enforcement of this section. If, after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses, the animal control authority determines the dog is a dangerous dog, it shall notify the owner of the determination. 
(b)  Not later than the 15th day after the date the owner is notified that a dog owned by he/she is a dangerous dog, the owner may appeal the determination of the animal control authority to the Everman Municipal Court. An owner may appeal the decision of the Everman Municipal Court in the manner set forth in section 3-200 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-193. - Requirements for dangerous dogs. 
(a)  Not later than the 30th day after the owner learns that he/she is the owner of a dangerous dog, he/she shall: 
(1)  Register the dangerous dog with the animal control authority for the area in which the dog is kept; 
(2)  Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a secure enclosure as defined in this chapter and that also meets the additional enclosure requirements of this article; 
(3)  Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility to the animal control authority for the area in which the dog is kept; 
(4)  Conspicuously display signs, approved by the animal control authority at the property lines located on the front and rear of the property and on the secure enclosure of the dangerous dog; 
(5)  Post written notice to all persons residing within two hundred (200) feet of the owner's house of the presence of the dangerous dog; and 
(6)  The animal control official may require a secure bottom to the structure or pen if the need is demonstrated. 
(b)  The owner of a dangerous dog who does not comply with subsection (a) shall immediately deliver the dog to the animal control authority. 
(c)  If, on application of any person, the municipal court finds, after notice and hearing as provided by section 3-197, that the owner of the dog has failed to comply with subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the court shall order the animal control authority to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The animal control authority shall seize the dog or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions. 
(d)  The owner shall pay any cost or fee assessed by the city and or animal shelter. 
(e)  The court shall order the animal control authority to humanely destroy the dog if the owner has not complied with subsection (a) before the 11th day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered to the animal control authority. The court shall order the authority to return the dog to the owner if the owner complies with subsection (a) before the 11th day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered to the animal control authority. 
(f)  The court may order the humane destruction of a dog if the owner of the dog has not been located before the 15th day after the seizure and impoundment of the dog. 
(g)  For purposes of this section, a person learns that he/she is the owner of a dangerous dog when: 
(1)  The owner knows of a dangerous dog attack described in the definition of "dangerous dog" in section 3-2 of this chapter; 
(2)  The owner receives notice that the Everman Municipal Court has found that the dog is a dangerous dog; or 
(3)  The owner is informed by the animal control authority that the dog has been determined to be a dangerous dog under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-194. - Registration. 
(a)  The animal control authority shall annually register a dangerous dog if the owner: 
(1)  Presents proof of: 
a.  liability insurance or financial responsibility as required in section 3-193(a)(3); 
b.  Current rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog; 
c.  The secure enclosure in which the dangerous dog will be kept; 
(2)  Pays an annual registration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  The animal control authority shall provide a dangerous dog registration tag to the owner registering a dangerous dog. The owner must place the tag on the dog's collar and commits an offense if the tag and collar are not securely attached to the dog. 
(c)  If the owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address, the owner, prior to the sale or move, shall notify the animal control authority for the city or the area in which the new address is located. On presentation by the current owner of the dangerous dog's prior registration tag, compliance with registration and dangerous dog requirements, and payment of a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), the animal control authority shall issue a new registration tag to be placed on the dangerous dog's collar. Any dog declared dangerous moved into the city must register and meet the dangerous dog requirements prior to locating the dangerous dog in the city. 
(d)  The owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the office in which the dangerous dog was registered of any attacks the dangerous dog makes on people or domesticated animals. 
(e)  The owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the animal control authority if the dangerous dog dies during the term of the registration. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-195. - Making a false complaint. 
It shall be a class C misdemeanor for any person to file or sign a written complaint required by this section when the person knows that the complaint contains false information. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-196. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Any owner of any dog, which is subject to an investigation under this section, shall immediately notify the animal control authority if such dog escapes or becomes or appears to become sick or dies. In case of death of the dog under investigation, the person shall immediately surrender the carcass to the animal control authority for diagnostic purposes. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to impound a dog subject to this section, or harbor, hide or secret a dog subject to this section, for the purpose of preventing its impoundment. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, or secure the transport, of a dog subject to this section to any location outside the incorporated limits of the city if the person has knowledge that the dog is the subject of an investigation under this article. Nothing in this section shall preclude an animal control officer from immediately impounding a dog that poses an immediate threat to the health and safety of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-197. - Hearing. 
(a)  The jurisdiction for the hearing of a dangerous dog determination under section 3-192 or subsection 3-193(c) shall be the Everman Municipal Court, which shall set a time for a hearing to determine whether the dog is a dangerous dog or whether the owner of the dog has complied with section 3-193. 
(b)  The owner of a dog subject to a dangerous animal determination hearing under this section, or the person from whom the dog was seized, and the person who made the complaint shall be notified, in writing, of the date, time and location of the hearing within five (5) days after the impoundment of the dog. 
(c)  The determination hearing shall be held not later than the tenth day after impoundment of the dog. 
(d)  The municipal judge shall consider evidence provided by any interested party, including the city attorney, in making its determination. 
(e)  If the municipal judge determines that the dog, which is the subject of the hearing, is a danger to the community, the municipal judge shall issue an order as to the disposition of the dangerous dog and any conditions that may be placed upon the owner for the continued maintenance of the dangerous dog. 
(f)  Nothing in this section precludes the owner of a dangerous dog, which is the subject of the hearing, from waiving its right to a determination hearing. If a person waives the right to a hearing, the dog will be deemed to be dangerous and the owner shall immediately comply with any conditions imposed or authorize the destruction of the dangerous dog. If the dangerous dog is ordered destroyed and is impounded at the animal shelter, the owner shall release the dangerous dog to the animal shelter for destruction. If the dangerous dog is ordered destroyed and impounded at a veterinary clinic, the owner shall have the dangerous dog destroyed by the licensed veterinarian immediately and provide documentation of the destruction to the animal control authority. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-198. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous dog commits an offense if the dangerous dog makes an unprovoked attack or a menacing act on a person outside the dog's enclosure or the dangerous dog made an unprovoked attack, or menacing act on an animal outside the dog's enclosure. 
(b)  The owner of a dangerous dog commits an offense if the dangerous dog attacks a person who gains access to the dog's enclosure due to negligence on the part of owner or the owner's agent. 
(c)  The owner of a dog commits an offense if the owner fails to comply with any provision or any determination or order issued pursuant to this section. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with an animal control officer in the performance of the duties of the animal control officer. 
(e)  An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor, unless the attack causes serious bodily injury or death, in which event the offense is a class A misdemeanor. 
(f)  An offense under this section is a class B misdemeanor if it is shown on the trial of the offense that the defendant has previously been convicted under this section. 
(g)  If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the dangerous dog destroyed by a person listed in the V.T.C.A. Texas Health and Safety Code § 822.004 or as amended. 
(h)  In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense under this section is liable for a civil penalty not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). An attorney for the city may file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the penalty. Penalties collected under this subsection shall be retained by the city. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-199. - Affirmative defenses. 
It is a defense to prosecution for an attack by a dangerous dog or for complying with the requirements of a dangerous dog if the person is: 
(1)  A veterinarian, peace officer, a person employed by a recognized animal shelter, a person employed by the state or a political subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals that has temporary ownership, custody or control of the dog in connection with that positon, or an employee of the city in the performance of his/her duties; or 
(2)  An employee of the institutional division of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice or a law enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or corrections purposes; or 
(3)  A dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company, while in the performance of his/her duties, under V.T.C.A. Texas Occupations Code Chapter 1702, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-200. - Appeal from municipal court. 
Any appeal of the decision or order of the municipal court of Everman shall be made within twenty (20) days in the same manner as appeal from civil cases originating in the justice of the peace courts of this state. The municipal court shall order the appellant to post a supersedeas bond payable to the city in an amount not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The form of the bond shall be as prescribed in the laws pertaining to civil appeals originating in the justice of the peace courts in this state. The appellant shall be responsible for the cost of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Secs. 3-201—210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - FEES AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 3-211. - Fees. 
The following fees are established: 
(1)  Yearly license fee for each dog or cat: 
a.  Altered ..... $4.00 
b.  Unaltered ..... 7.00 
(2)  Impoundment fee per animal: 
a.  First impoundment ..... 35.00 
b.  Second impoundment ..... 50.00 
c.  Third impoundment ..... 75.00 
d.  Boarding fee, per day ..... 15.00 
(3)  Adoption fee per animal ..... 20.00 
(4)  Animal quarantine in city, per day ..... 20.00 
(5)  Corpse removal fee ..... 20.00 
(6)  Owner's request for pick up of personal pet ..... 35.00 
(7)  Estray impoundments fee, boarding fee 
a.  First day ..... 20.00 
b.  Each additional day ..... 40.00 
(8)  Euthanasia at owner's request 
a.  Owner disposes of corpse ..... 35.00 
b.  City disposes of corpse ..... 60.00 
(9)  Estrus at large ..... 35.00 
Impoundment fee, plus a prepaid spay receipt from any vet in Tarrant/Johnson County. Boarding fees apply after one (1) day. 
(10)  Kennel permit fee ..... 25.00 
(11)  Cat trap deposit (deposit refunded upon return of trap) ..... 80.00 
(12)  Dog trap deposit (deposit refunded upon return of trap) ..... 250.00 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Sec. 3-212. - Penalty. 
In addition to any other remedies or penalties set forth herein, any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 2(Att. A), 9-12-17)  
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administrative search warrants, § 2-1; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 8; garbage, trash and refuse, Ch. 9; health, safety and nuisances, Ch. 10; planning and zoning, Ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 17; utilities, Ch. 20. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the erection, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, use, equipment, height, area, size and maintenance of all buildings and structures in the city and to provide for the issuance of permits therefor, inspection thereof, and collection of fees therefor, by the adoption of published codes and other documents by reference as identified in this chapter and the provisions hereof are to be known collectively as "The Everman Building Codes." 
(Ord. No. 362, § 1, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-2. - Appeal of electrical inspector's or building official's decision or ruling. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision or ruling of the chief electrical inspector or building official may appeal in writing within five (5) days from the date of such decision or ruling to the city zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 362, § 5, 9-9-86) 
Cross reference— Administration generally, Ch. 2.  
Sec. 4-3. - Prerequisites to occupancy. 
No building of any kind in the city shall be occupied unless, and until, its construction and the installations therein are in conformity with the requirements of this chapter and the various codes adopted by reference, as parts hereof and unless, and until, the permits have been obtained, permit fees paid and inspection approvals obtained as required by this chapter, and the various codes adopted by reference as parts hereof. No public utility shall be connected to any building in the city, unless, and until, all inspection approvals required by this chapter and the various codes adopted by reference as parts hereof, have been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 362, § 6, 9-9-86) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 11.  
Sec. 4-4. - Amending codes. 
The City of Everman may from time to time determine that additional local modifications to the codes adopted herein are necessary and appropriate to meet the unique building needs of the City of Everman. To effectuate modifications, the city council may enact individual ordinances amending this chapter fully setting forth the change to be made in the specific code. Such subsequent amendments shall be consolidated as an exhibit to the ordinance, and shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 18, 1-8-02)  
Sec. 4-5. - Application fees. 
All persons, firms or corporations applying for licenses, inspections, permits or other city services, activities, or uses that require the applicant to pay a fee incident to such application shall pay the fees as prescribed in the Schedule of Fees, attached to Ord. No. 518, as Exhibit "I" and made a part hereof. It shall be a violation of this chapter to conduct any activity or commence any use for which payment of a fee is required until such fee has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 19, 1-8-02)  
Sec. 4-6. - Violations, fines. 
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined no more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for all violations involving zoning, fire safety or public health and sanitation, including dumping or refuse, and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for all other violations of this chapter. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 22, 1-8-02)  
Secs. 4-7—4-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration generally, Ch. 2; building code, § 4-51 et seq.; dangerous buildings code, § 4-76 et seq.; electrical code, § 4-103; residential code, § 4-246 et seq.; mechanical code, § 4-271 et seq.; plumbing code, § 4-321 et seq.; sign code, § 4-371 et seq.; solar energy code, § 4-391 et seq.; swimming pool code, § 4-411 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-26. - Adopted. 
The 1997 Edition of the Uniform Administrative Code published by the International Conference of Building Officials, attached to Ordinance No. 532 as Exhibit "A" is hereby adopted as the Administrative Code of the City of Everman. A copy of the 1997 Uniform Administrative Code shall be kept in the office of the building official and the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 362, § 2, 9-9-86; Ord. No. 532, § 1, 4-8-03)  
Secs. 4-27—4-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administrative code, § 4-26 et seq.; dangerous buildings code, § 4-76 et seq.; electrical code, § 4-103; residential code, § 4-246 et seq.; mechanical code, § 4-271 et seq.; plumbing code, § 4-321 et seq.; sign code, § 4-371 et seq.; solar energy code, § 4-391 et seq.; swimming pool code, § 4-411 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-51. - Building code adopted. 
The 2018 edition of the International Building Code is hereby adopted as the official building code of the City of Everman Texas. The 2018 International Building Code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the 2018 International Building Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinance but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 362, § 2, 9-9-86; Ord. No. 475, § 1, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 518, § 11, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 572, § 1, 1-10-06; Ord. No. 609, § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 651, § 1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 698, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 741, § 1, 9-10-19)  
Sec. 4-52. - Building code amendments. 
The 2018 edition of the International Building Code, as adopted herein, is hereby amended in accordance with the recommendations of the North Central Texas Council of Governments and as detailed on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated by reference. When there is an option A or option B in the North Central Texas Council of Governments recommendations, option B will be applicable to the City of Everman. The city council is adopting option B as recommended by the Everman Fire Chief. The material contained in Exhibit "A" to this ordinance, although adopted and fully incorporated by reference, shall not be included in the formal codification of the ordinances. The material shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and made available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. It may be further amended from time to time by individual ordinances with such amendments to be maintained as public records in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 362, § 2, 9-9-86; Ord. No. 475, § 2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 518, § 12, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 572, § 2, 1-10-06; Ord. No. 609, § 2, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 651, § 2, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 698, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 741, § 1, 9-10-19)  
Sec. 4-53. - Roof construction and materials. 
It shall be unlawful to place or construct wood shingles on buildings or dwellings within the city, and buildings or dwellings which presently have wood shingle coverings are permitted until such time as the owner replaces or improves such wood shingles with a new or different roof covering, at which time the existing roof covering shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 362, § 4(f)(1), 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-54. - Motor homes, trailer houses, mobile and modular homes—Residing in restricted. 
(a)  As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this section: 
Mobile home. A structure, transportable in one (1) of more sections, which is eight (8) body feet or more in width and is thirty-two (32) body feet or more in length, and which is built on a permanent chassis designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
Modular home. A structure or building module that is manufactured at a location other than the location where it is installed and used as a residence by a consumer, transportable in one (1) or more sections on a temporary chassis or other conveyance device, and designed to be used as a permanent dwelling when installed and placed upon a permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. The term does not include a mobile home as defined in this section, nor does it include building modules incorporating concrete or masonry as the primary structural component. 
Motor home. A motor vehicle containing normal living accommodations. 
Trailer house. A place of abode designed to be constantly pulled on a public roads behind an automobile or truck. 
(b)  No person may permanently reside in the city in any vehicle defined in paragraph (a) of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 3-13)  
Sec. 4-55. - Same—Legal remedies for abatement. 
All legal remedies provided in this Code for the abatement or termination of the use or maintenance of premises for purposes of human abode in violation of section 4-54 shall be available to and authorized to be used by the city to terminate the use or maintenance of any such premises in violation of section 4-54, in addition to the fine as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 3-14)  
Secs. 4-56—4-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DANGEROUS AND SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 523, adopted July 9, 2002, amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 467, adopted Feb. 5, 1998. 
Cross reference— Administrative code, § 4-26 et seq.; building code, § 4-51 et seq.; electrical code, § 4-103; residential code, § 4-246 et seq.; mechanical code, § 4-271 et seq.; plumbing code, § 4-321 et seq.; sign code, § 4-371 et seq.; solar energy code, § 4-391 et seq.; swimming pool code, § 4-411 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-76. - Purpose and scope. 
(1)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to provide a just, equitable and practical method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy provided by the Building Code, Chapter 214 of the Local Government Code, or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings, as defined herein, which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants and may be required to be repaired, vacated, demolished, removed or secured. The purpose of this article is also to provide minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all structures to safeguard life, limb, health, property and public welfare. 
(2)  Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings which are hereinafter defined as dangerous or substandard buildings whether now in existence or whether they may hereafter become dangerous. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-9-02)  
Sec. 4-77. - Definitions. 
(1)  Building means and includes any building, fence, awning, canopy, sign, shed, garage, house, tent or other structure whatsoever and the enumeration of specific types of structures shall not be deemed to exclude other types of structures to which the sense and meaning of the provisions hereof in context reasonably have application. 
(2)  Building board of appeals means the zoning board of adjustment of the City of Everman acting under the authority established by Ordinance No. 509. 
(3)  Building code is the International Building Code promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted and amended by the City of Everman. 
(4)  Electric code is the National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted and amended by the City of Everman; 
(5)  Fire code is the International Fire Code promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted and amended by the City of Everman. 
(6)  Housing code is the Uniform Housing Code promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted and amended by the City of Everman. 
(7)  Mechanical code is the International Mechanical Code as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted and amended by the City of Everman. 
(8)  Plumbing code is the International Plumbing Code as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted and amended by the City of Everman. 
(9)  Property maintenance code is the International Property Maintenance Code published by the International Code Council as adopted and amended by the City of Everman. 
(10)  Residential code is the International Residential Code as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted and amended by the City of Everman. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 637, § 1, 4-12-11)  
Sec. 4-78. - Enforcement. 
(1)  General. 
(a)  Administration. The building official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this article and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this article. 
(b)  Inspections. The building official and the fire marshal or their designees are hereby authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Right of entry. When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this article, or when the building official or his designee has a reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this article which makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building official or his designee may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this article, provided that if such building or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the building official or his designee shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  Abatement of dangerous or substandard buildings. All buildings or portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the building official to be dangerous or substandard as defined by this article are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, vacation, demolition, removal or securing in accordance with the procedures specified in this article. 
(3)  Unlawful to violate article. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, or use, occupy or maintain any building that is deemed herein to be a nuisance or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this article. 
(4)  Inspection authorized. All buildings within the scope of this article and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-9-02)  
Sec. 4-79. - Substandard buildings declared. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, any building, regardless of the date of its construction, which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a substandard building, and a nuisance: 
(1)  Whenever any building is dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  Whenever any building that, regardless of its structural condition, is unoccupied by its owners, lessees or other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children. 
(3)  Whenever any building that is boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner if: 
a.  The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or 
b.  The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use of the building in the manner described by subsection (a)(2) above. 
(4)  Whenever any building, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire hazard. 
(5)  Whenever any building is in such a condition as to make a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(6)  Whenever any portion of a building remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building. 
(7)  Whenever any building is abandoned so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
(8)  Any building constructed and still existing in violation of any provision of the building code, fire code, plumbing code, mechanical code, electrical code, property maintenance code, residential code or housing code of the City of Everman to the extent that the life, health or safety of the public or any occupant is endangered. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, any building, regardless of the date of its construction, which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof shall be deemed and hereby is declared to be a substandard building, and a nuisance: 
(1)  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(2)  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(3)  Whenever the stress in any materials, or members or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half (1½) times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(4)  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(5)  Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(6)  Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one half of that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings. 
(7)  Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction. 
(8)  Whenever the building, or any portion thereof, because of (a) dilapidation, deterioration or decay; (b) faulty construction; (c) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (d) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or (e) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse. 
(9)  Whenever, for any reason, the building, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(10)  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one third of the base. 
(11)  Whenever the building, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty-three (33) percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or fifty (50) or more percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings. 
(12)  Whenever the building has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, flood or other causes, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become (a) an attractive nuisance to children, or (b) a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons. 
(13)  Whenever any building has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction, as specified in the building code, or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings. 
(14)  Whenever any building which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any non-supporting part, member or portion less than fifty (50) percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than sixty-six (66) percent of the (a) strength, (b) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or (c) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location. 
(15)  Whenever a building, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the building official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease for reasons including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Lack of, or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit or lodging house. 
b.  Lack of, or improper water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or showers per number of guests in a hotel. 
c.  Lack of, or improper kitchen sink in a dwelling unit. 
d.  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel. 
e.  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit or lodging house. 
f.  Lack of adequate heating facilities. 
g.  Lack of, or improper operation of, required ventilating equipment. 
h.  Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by this Code. 
i.  Room and space dimensions less than required by the building code. 
j.  Lack of required electrical lighting. 
k.  Dampness of habitable rooms. 
l.  Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents. 
m.  General dilapidation or improper maintenance. 
n.  Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system. 
o.  Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities. 
(c)  Chapters 3 through 7 of the 2000 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., attached to Ordinance No. 523, and incorporated herein for all municipal purposes, are hereby adopted by the City Council of the City of Everman to the extent they do not conflict with other provisions of this article. For purposes of this article, any building, regardless of its date of construction, which exists in violation of Chapters 3 through 7 of the International Property Maintenance Code to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof shall be deemed and hereby is declared to be a substandard building and a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-9-02)  
Sec. 4-80. - Determination by building official. 
When the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined that the building is substandard, the building official may take any or all of the following actions, as he or she deems appropriate: 
(1)  Issue notice to the record owner that the building is substandard and must be repaired or demolished; or 
(2)  Issue citation(s) for violation(s) of this article; or 
(3)  Secure the building if permitted by subsection (1) of section 4-87 below; or 
(4)  Recommend to the board that abatement proceedings be commenced pursuant to section 4-81 below. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-9-02)  
Sec. 4-81. - Public hearing for abatement of substandard buildings. 
(1)  Commencement of proceedings. When the building official has found and determined that a building is a substandard building, the building official shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation, relocation of occupants, removal, demolition or securing of the building. 
(2)  Public hearing to be held. Except when the city council finds that a building is likely to immediately endanger persons or property, a public hearing before the board shall be held to determine whether a building complies with the standards set out in section 4-79 above. If the city council determines that the building constitutes an immediate danger, the procedures set forth in section 4-87 below shall be followed. 
(3)  Notice. Not less than ten (10) days prior to the date on which the hearing is set, the building official shall issue a notice of the public hearing directed to the record owner of the building, and to all mortgagees and lienholders. The city shall use diligent efforts to determine the identity and address of any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building through searching the county real property records of the county in which the building is located; appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the building is located; records of the secretary of state; assumed name records of the county in which the building is located; tax records of the city; and utility records of the city. The notice shall contain: 
(a)  The name and address of the record owner; 
(b)  The street address and legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building is located; 
(c)  A statement that the building official has found the building to be substandard or dangerous, with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous or substandard under the provisions of section 4-79 above; 
(d)  A statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the ordinance, and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work; 
(e)  Notice of the time and place of the public hearing; and 
(f)  A statement that if the building is found to be in violation of this article, the board may order that the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished within a reasonable time. 
(4)  Additional notice of public hearing. Prior to the public hearing, the city may file a copy of the notice mailed pursuant to subsection (3) of this section in the official public records of real property in the county in which the property is located. If such notice is not filed of record, each identified mortgagee and lienholder must be notified of any abatement order issued by the board at the public hearing, prior to any remedial action by the city. 
(5)  Burden of proof. At the public hearing, the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article, and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(6)  Conduct of public hearing. At the public hearing, the owner of the building, and all other interested persons may make their appearance and be heard. Any evidence may be received and considered by the board. The chairman of the board, or in his absence, any officer designated by rules adopted by the board to preside at meetings, shall preside and shall determine all questions of order. The hearing may be adjourned from day to day or continued upon a majority vote of the board. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-9-02)  
Sec. 4-82. - Order of building board of appeals. 
(1)  Findings of the board. If the board, by a majority vote, finds upon evidence presented at the public hearing that the building is in violation of standards set out in section 4-79, the board may order that the building be repaired, vacated, removed or demolished, secured, or the occupants relocated, by the owner, mortgagee or lienholder within a reasonable time as provided herein. 
(2)  Time allowed to complete work. 
(a)  The order must require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building to within thirty (30) days: 
1.  Secure the building from unauthorized entry; and/or 
2.  Repair, remove or demolish the building unless the owner or lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within thirty (30) days. 
(b)  If the board allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than thirty (30) days to repair, remove or demolish the building, the board shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined by the board. 
(c)  The board may not allow the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to repair, remove or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner lienholder or mortgagee: 
1.  Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and 
2.  Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot be reasonably completed within ninety (90) days because of the scope and complexity of the work. 
(d)  If the board allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove or demolish the building, the board shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the building official to demonstrate that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has complied with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee appear before the board or the building official to (i) demonstrate compliance with the time schedules and (ii) if the owner, lienholder or mortgagee, owns property, including structures and improvements on property within the cities boundaries that exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), to post cash or surety bond or letter of credit or third party guaranty to cover the cost of the work ordered by the board. 
(e)  All orders of the board must allow a lienholder or mortgagee at least thirty (30) additional days to complete the ordered work in the event the owner fails to comply with the order within the time provided for action by owner, prior to remedial action by the city. 
(3)  Contents of order. The order of the board must contain at minimum: 
(a)  An identification which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property on which it is located; and 
(b)  A description of the violation of minimum standards present in the building, and 
(c)  A description of the ordered actions, including a statement that the owner may repair, if feasible, or demolish or remove at his option; and 
(d)  A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or relocate the occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within the time allowed, and charge the cost to the property; and 
(e)  If the board has determined that the building will endanger persons or property and that the building is a dwelling with ten (10) or fewer dwelling units, a statement that the city may repair the building and charge the costs to the property if the ordered action is not taken within the time allowed. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-9-02)  
Sec. 4-83. - Notice of order of building board of appeals. 
(1)  Order shall be mailed. After the public hearing, the building official shall promptly mail, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the order to the record owner of the building, and each identified lienholder and mortgagee of the building. 
(2)  Order shall be filed with city secretary. Within ten (10) days after the date that the order is issued by the board, the building official shall file a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary. 
(3)  Order shall be published. Within ten (10) days after the date the order is issued by the board, the building official shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice containing: 
(a)  The street address or legal description of the property; and 
(b)  The date the hearing was held; and 
(c)  A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and 
(d)  Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(4)  The order may be filed in the official public records of real property in the county in which the property is located. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-9-02)  
Sec. 4-84. - Enforcement of the order of building board of appeals. 
(1)  If order not complied with, city may take action. If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished within the time specified by the order, the city may vacate, secure, repair, remove or demolish the building or relocate the occupants at its own expense, provided however: 
(a)  The city may not act to remove or demolish a building until after the board has found: 
1.  That such defects or conditions exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the building are endangered; and 
2.  The building is infeasible of repair; or 
3.  There is no reasonable probability that the building will be repaired within a reasonable period of time if additional time is given. 
(b)  The city may only repair a building as provided herein to the extent necessary to correct the conditions which render the building dangerous, and may not act to repair a building unless: 
1.  The board has made a determination that the building is likely to endanger person or property; and 
2.  The building is a residential dwelling with ten (10) or fewer dwelling units. 
(c)  In the event there are mortgagors or lienholders, the city may only repair, remove or demolish the building after allowing the lienholder or mortgagee an additional thirty (30) days after the time prescribed in the order has expired to complete the required work. 
(d)  Remedial action by the city does not limit the ability of the city to collect on a bond or other financial guarantee that may be required by section 4-82(c) of this article. 
(2)  Posting of notice to vacate building. If the order requires vacation or if compliance is not had with the order within the time specified therein, the building official is authorized to require that the building be vacated. Notice to vacate shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the occupant of the building and it shall be posted at or upon each entrance to the building and shall be in substantially the following form: 
"SUBSTANDARD BUILDING 
DO NOT ENTER 
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY 
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this 
building or to remove or deface this notice. 
_____
Building Official 
City of Everman" 
(3)  Remedial action by city. Any repair or demolition work, or securing of the building shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided. Any surplus realized from the sale of such building, or from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition and cleaning of the lot, shall be paid over to the person or persons lawfully entitled thereto. 
(4)  Failure to obey order. Any person to whom an order pursuant to section 4-82 is directed who fails, neglects or refuses to comply with such order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be prosecuted in municipal court in addition to any other remedies available to the city provided herein. 
(5)  Interference prohibited. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in the building which has been ordered repaired, vacated, demolished, removed or secured under the provisions of this article; or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this article, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, person having an interest or estate in such building, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing, removing or securing any such building pursuant to the provision of this article, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this article. 
(6)  Permit required. Any work of closure, repair, removal or demolition by the property owner or any lienholder or mortgagee or their agents must be performed pursuant to valid unexpired permits issued by the city. All permits issued pursuant to an order of the board shall expire upon expiration of the time for compliance set forth in the order. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-9-02)  
Sec. 4-85. - Performance of work by the city. 
(1)  Procedure. When any work of repair, removal, demolition or securing is to be performed by the city pursuant to the provisions of any order of the city council or the board, the work may be accomplished by city personnel or by private contract as may be deemed necessary. Rubble and debris shall be removed from any premises and the lot cleaned if removal or demolition is ordered. The building or building materials may be sold if removal or demolition is ordered, and the proceeds shall be used to offset other costs of the work. 
(2)  Costs. The cost of such work shall be paid from city funds and shall constitute a special assessment and a lien against such property to secure payment thereof, together with ten (10) percent interest on such amount from the date on which the work is performed. 
(3)  Repair to minimum standards only. The city may repair the building at its own expense and assess the expenses on the land on which the building stands or is attached to only to the extent necessary to bring the building into compliance with minimum standards. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-9-02)  
Sec. 4-86. - Recovery of cost of securing, repair, removal or demolition. 
(1)  Itemized account and notice of lien. In the event repair by the city is permitted by this article, the building official shall keep an itemized account of the expenses incurred by the city in the securing, repair, removal or demolition of any building pursuant to this article. Upon completion of the work, the building official shall prepare and file with the city secretary a sworn account and notice of lien containing the following information: 
(a)  The name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort; 
(b)  A legal description of the real property on which the building is or was located; 
(c)  The type of work performed; and 
(d)  The amount of expenses incurred by the city in performing the work and the balance due. 
(2)  Notice filed in county records. The city secretary shall file the notice of lien along with a copy of the order of abatement issued by the board in the deed records of the county in which the premises are located. 
(3)  Personal obligation of property owner. The expenses incurred by the city as set forth in the sworn account of the building official shall be a personal obligation of the property owner in addition to a priority lien upon the property. The city attorney may bring an action in any court of proper jurisdiction against the owner or property to recover the costs incurred by the city. 
(4)  Lien shall be valid and privileged. Upon filing of the notice of lien in the deed records of Tarrant County, Texas, the lien shall be valid against the property so assessed. The lien shall be privileged and subordinate only to tax liens, existing special assessment liens, and shall be paramount to all other liens. The lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest due and payable thereon has been paid. 
(5)  Assessment must be paid. No utility service, building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be allowed on any such property until the assessment is paid and such lien is released by the city. 
(6)  Release of lien. After the expenses incurred by the city, as set forth in the sworn account of the building official, have been fully paid with interest of ten (10) percent per annum from the date the work was performed, the building official shall execute a release of lien which shall be filed in the deed records of Tarrant County, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-9-02)  
Sec. 4-87. - Additional authority to secure certain substandard buildings prior to public hearing and secure, demolish, repair or remove certain dangerous buildings. 
(1)  Securing of unoccupied, substandard building. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article the city may secure a building if the building official determines: 
(a)  That the building violates the minimum standards set forth in section 4-79 above; and 
(b)  That the building is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have the right of possession to the building. 
(2)  If building creates immediate danger. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, if the city council finds that a building is likely to immediately endanger persons or property the city council may: 
(a)  Order the owner of the building, the owner's agent, or the owner or occupant of the property on which the structure is located to repair, remove, or demolish the structure, or the dangerous part of the structure, within a specified time; or 
(b)  Repair, remove, or demolish the structure, or the dangerous part of the structure, at the expense of the municipality, on behalf of the owner of the structure or the owner of the property on which the structure is located, and assess the repair, removal, or demolition expenses on the property on which the structure was located. 
(3)  Notice of action. Before the eleventh day after the date the building is secured pursuant to subsection of this section, or action is ordered pursuant to subsection (2)(a) of this section, or the building is repaired, removed or demolished pursuant to subsection (2)(b) of this section, the building official shall give notice to the owner by: 
(a)  Personally serving the owner with written notice; or 
(b)  Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address; or 
(c)  Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the building is located, if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown; or 
(d)  Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown; and 
(e)  In addition to the above, depositing notice in the United States mail to all lienholders and mortgagees who can be determined from a reasonable search of instruments on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(4)  Content of notice. The notice must contain: 
(a)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property on which it is located; 
(b)  A description of the violation of the minimum standards present in the building; 
(c)  A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the building, or that the city has taken or will take the action ordered pursuant to subsection (2) of this section; 
(d)  An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing about any matter relating to the city's securing, removing, demolishing or repairing of the building. 
(5)  Hearing. The city council shall conduct a hearing at which the owner may testify or present witnesses or written information about any matter relating to the city's securing, repairing, removing or demolishing of the building, if, within thirty (30) days after the date the city has taken action pursuant to subsections (2)(a) or (b) of this section, the owner files with the city a written request for the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted within twenty (20) days after the date the request is filed. 
(6)  Lien. If the city incurs expenses under this section, such expenses incurred shall be a personal obligation of the property owner in addition to a priority lien upon the property, and costs shall be recovered as provided by sections 4-85 and 4-86 of this article. 
(7)  Violation. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with an order issued pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-9-02)  
Sec. 4-88. - Civil penalty. 
(1)  Civil penalty authorized. In addition to any other enforcement authority provided for by law, the board may, by order, at an administrative hearing assess a civil penalty against a property owner as provided for herein for failure to comply with an order issued by the board pursuant to section 4-82 of this article. 
(2)  Showing required. The civil penalty may be assessed if it shown at the administrative hearing that: 
(a)  The property owner was notified of the contents of the order issued pursuant to section 4-82 of this article; and 
(b)  The property owner committed an act in violation of the order or failed to take an action necessary for compliance with the order. 
(3)  Amount of penalty. The civil penalty may be assessed in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) a day for each violation or, if the owner shows that the property is the owner's lawful homestead, in an amount not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) a day for each violation. 
(4)  Notice of administrative hearing. Not less than ten (10) days prior to the date on which the administrative hearing is set, the property owner shall be sent a notice of the hearing by certified mail/return receipt requested. The notice shall contain: 
(a)  A copy of the order issued by the board to section 4-82 of this article; 
(b)  A statement that the building official has determined that the property owner committed an act in violation of that order, or failed to take an action necessary for compliance with that order; 
(c)  A statement that at the administrative hearing the board may assess a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) a day for each violation or, if the owner shows that the property is the owners' lawful homestead, in an amount not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) a day for each violation; and 
(d)  Notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(5)  Copy of order filed with district clerk. After the civil penalty is assessed, the city secretary shall file with the district clerk of the county in which the property is located, a certified copy of the order assessing the civil penalty stating the amount and duration of the penalty. 
(6)  Enforcement. The civil penalty may be enforced by the city in a suit brought by the city in a court of competent jurisdiction for a final judgment in accordance with the assessed penalty. A civil penalty under this subsection is final and binding and constitutes prima facie evidence of the penalty in any suit. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-9-02)  
Sec. 4-89. - Authority not limited. 
Notwithstanding all other provisions of this article, nothing herein shall be deemed a limitation on the duty of the city to summarily order that a building or structure be demolished, removed, secured or vacated where it is apparent that immediate action regarding such building or structure is necessary to the protection of life, property or general welfare of the people in the city. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 7-9-02)  
Secs. 4-90—4-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-101. - Applicability of article; exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all installations of electrical conductors, fittings, devices, signs, fixtures, motors, generators, starters, controls, and raceways, hereinafter referred to as "electrical equipment, " within or on public and private buildings and premises, except that the provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Installations in mines, ships, railway cars, or to automotive equipment; 
(2)  Installations used by electricity supply agencies in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity, and located within or on buildings or premises used exclusively for that purpose by such an agency or on public thoroughfares; but the provisions of this article shall apply to installations and/or equipment used for light, heat, power, decoration, amusement, and for all other purposes located within or on such buildings or premises; 
(3)  Installations by or for communication agencies in connection with the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence, nor to the employees making such installations by or for such agencies, but the provisions of this article shall apply to installations for heat, decoration, amusement, elevators, ventilating equipment, and general lighting not attached to and power not directly used in connection with installations for communications, signals and the transmission of intelligence; 
(4)  The installations and/or equipment employed by a railway utility in the exercise of its functions as a utility, and, located outdoors or in buildings used exclusively for that purpose, but the provisions of this article shall apply to installations and/or equipment used for light, heat, power, decoration, amusement, and all other purposes located within or on such buildings or premises; 
(5)  Special radio equipment used exclusively for radio transmission by persons or organizations licensed to operate by the federal communications commission, but it shall apply to all electrical equipment used for power supply to radio transmitting equipment; 
(6)  The replacement of lamps or the connection of port-electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles; 
(7)  The installation, alteration, or repair of electrical equipment for the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence, or to installations of communications facilities by or for communications agencies; 
(8)  The installation, alteration, or repair of electrical equipment installed by or for an electricity supply agency for the use of such agency in the generation, transmission, distribution, or meeting of electricity; 
(9)  Any work involved in the manufacturing or testing of electrical equipment or apparatus, except that this exemption shall not include any permanent wiring. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 2, Art. 1, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-102. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this section: 
Commercial buildings shall be construed to mean all or any buildings or structures other than one- or two-family dwellings, and their appurtenant structures. 
Safe condition as applied to electrical installations and electrical equipment means installation and/or equipment which, in the opinion of the electrical inspectors, can be used in the service for which the same is intended or likely to be used with minimum hazard to life, limb, or property, thus being installations and equipment reasonably safe to persons and property. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 2, Art. 2, § 5, Art. 4, 9-9-86) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 4-103. - Electrical code adopted. 
(a)  The 2017 edition of the National Electrical Code is hereby adopted as the official electrical code of the City of Everman Texas. The 2017 National Electrical Code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the 2017 National Electrical Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinance but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. 
(b)  The 2017 edition of the National Electrical Code, as adopted herein, is hereby amended in accordance with the recommendations of the North Central Texas Council of Governments and as detailed on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated by reference. The material contained in Exhibit "A" to this ordinance, although adopted and fully incorporated by reference, shall not be included in the formal codification of the ordinances. The material shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and made available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. It may be further amended from time to time by individual ordinances with such amendments to be maintained as public records in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 1, Art. 1, 9-9-86; Ord. No. 475, §§ 3, 4, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 518, §§ 3, 4, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 575, §§ 1, 2, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 600, §§ 1, 2, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 649, § 1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 695, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 743, § 1, 9-10-19) 
Cross reference— Administrative code, § 4-26 et seq.; building code, § 4-51 et seq.; dangerous buildings code, § 4-76 et seq.; residential code, § 4-246 et seq.; mechanical code, § 4-271 et seq.; plumbing code, § 4-321 et seq.; sign code, § 4-371 et seq.; solar energy code, § 4-391 et seq.; swimming pool code, § 4-411 et seq.  
Sec. 4-104. - Electric fences prohibited. 
Electric fences, whether of battery or transformer type, shall not be installed or used. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 8, Art. 3(1), 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-105. - Connection to installations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make connection from a supply of electricity to any electrical equipment for the installation of which a permit is required or which has been disconnected by the electrical inspector, or except for private residences, which has been disconnected for any reason whatsoever, until such connection has been authorized by the electrical inspector. 
(b)  The electricity supply agency shall disconnect the electrical service to any building and/or premises except private residences and duplex apartments each time such building or premises changes occupants, and it shall not again supply electricity to such building or premises until authorized to do so by the electrical inspector. The owners and/or the new occupants of such buildings and/or premises shall make application to the chief electrical inspector for an inspection. The chief electrical inspector shall make the inspection within forty-eight (48) hours, exclusive of Saturday afternoons, Sundays and holidays, of the time such application is made or as soon thereafter as practicable. No charge shall be made nor fee collected for such inspections. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 11, Arts. 1, 2, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-106. - Liability for damages. 
This article shall be construed to affect the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling, or installing any electrical equipment for damages to persons or property caused by any defect in such equipment or in the installation thereof, nor shall either any electrical inspector or the city be held as assuming any liability by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized herein or the certificates of conformance or nonconformance issued as herein provided or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized herein. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 14, Art. 1, 9-9-86)  
Secs. 4-107—4-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 4-131. - Electrical inspectors. 
(a)  Chief inspector; qualifications. There is hereby created the office of chief electrical inspector. The person chosen to fill the office of chief inspector shall be of good moral character; shall be possessed of such executive ability as is requisite for the performance of his duties; shall have a thorough knowledge of the standard material and methods used in the installation of electrical equipment; shall be well versed in approved methods of construction for safety to persons and property, the statutes of the state relating to electrical work and any orders, rules, and regulations issued by authority thereof, and the National Electrical Code, as approved by the American Standards Association; shall have had at least five (5) years' experience as an electrical inspector or in the installation of electrical equipment, at least two (2) years of which have been in a responsible supervisory capacity; or, in lieu of such experience, shall be a graduate in electrical engineering of an accredited college or university, and shall have had two (2) years' practical electrical experience. 
(b)  Appointment of chief. The chief electrical inspector shall be appointed by the city manager with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(c)  Salary of chief. The salary to be paid to the chief electrical inspector shall be determined by the city manager. 
(d)  Chief's duties. It shall be the duty of the chief electrical inspector to enforce the provisions of this article. He shall upon application by any master electrician or any sign electrician (depending on the nature of the work) licensed by the city, grant permits for the installation or alteration of electrical equipment, and shall make inspections of electrical installations, all as provided in this article. He shall keep complete records of all permits issued, inspections and reinspections made and other official work performed in accordance with the provisions of this article. He shall become and remain a member of the International Association of Electrical Inspectors. 
(e)  Assistants. The chief electrical inspector is empowered to employ, after receiving the approval of the city manager, any electrical inspectors and clerical assistants necessary for the proper conduct of his office and the inspection of electrical installations as provided for in this article. The salaries of such assistants shall be determined by the city manager. 
(f)  Prohibited interests. It shall be unlawful for the chief electrical inspector or any electrical inspector to engage in the business of the sale, design, installation, or maintenance of electrical equipment, either directly or indirectly, and neither the chief electrical inspector or any electrical inspector shall have any financial interest of any nature in any concern engaged in such business in the city at any time while holding such office as herein provided for. 
(g)  Authority to enter and order repairs. The chief electrical inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building or premises in the discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection, or test of the electrical equipment contained therein, or its installation. When any electrical equipment is found by the electrical inspector to be dangerous to persons or property, the person responsible for the electrical equipment shall be notified in writing and shall make any changes or repairs which are required to put such equipment in safe condition and if such work is not completed within fifteen (15) days or any longer period that may be specified by the electrical inspector in such notice, the service to such electrical equipment and/or the premises in or upon which the same is located. 
(h)  Authority to disconnect immediately in cases of emergency. In case of emergency, where necessary for safety to persons or property, or where electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department, the chief electrical inspector shall have the authority to disconnect immediately and without notice to anyone, or to cause the immediate disconnection of, electrical equipment. 
(i)  Authority of chief to delegate powers and duties. The chief electrical inspector may delegate any of his powers or duties to any of his assistant inspectors, who shall be designated as electrical inspectors. It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with the chief electrical inspector or any of his assistants in the discharge of his duties under this article. The chief electrical inspector and all electrical inspectors shall have the power to cause the arrest of any person violating any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 363, §§ 3—5, Art. 1, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-132. - Appeal to planning and zoning commission. 
Any person may register an appeal with the planning and zoning commission for review of any decision of the chief electrical inspector, provided that such appeal is made in writing within five (5) days after such person shall have been notified of such decision by the chief electrical inspector. Upon receipt of such appeal the planning and zoning commission shall proceed to determine forthwith whether the action of the chief electrical inspector complies with this article, and make recommendations to the city council, which shall be the final authority. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 12, Art. 1, 9-9-86)  
Secs. 4-133—4-155. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LICENSES AND TEMPORARY WORKING PERMIT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 11. 
 
Sec. 4-156. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is not the holder of an unexpired, unrevoked license or temporary working permit to engage in any business or perform any work in connection with constructing, installing, maintaining, extending, repairing, or replacing any electrical wiring, apparatus, or equipment of any voltage in excess of twenty-four (24) volts, except that a helper or an apprentice electrician may perform work laid out for him by a holder of a license if he is in the presence of and being supervised by the holder of such license, and if the license is such as to permit the holder thereof to do such work. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of any license or temporary working permit issued under the provisions of this article to engage in any phase of the electrical trade other than such business or work authorized by the class of license or permit held by him, except that a helper or an apprentice electrician may perform work laid out for him by a holder of a license enabling the holder to do such work, and then only while he is in the presence of and being supervised by the holder of a license. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 13, Arts. 10, 11, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-157. - Grades. 
There shall be three (3) grades of licenses and one (1) grade of temporary working permit as follows: 
(1)  Master electrician's license, which shall entitle the holder to contract for and engage in the business of electrical wiring of any nature, and to employ and supervise journeymen electricians. 
(2)  Sign electrician's license, which shall only entitle the holder to contract for and engage in the business of manufacturing and installing luminous gas or electric discharge signs and luminous gas or electric discharge outline lighting, and to employ and supervise journeymen electricians in the performance of such work on such signs. But one holding only a sign electrician's license shall not perform or supervise the performance of primary wiring to transformers connected with signs and/or outline lighting equipment. 
(3)  Journeyman electrician's license, which shall entitle the holder thereof to perform any type of electrical work under the supervision of a master electrician, or to perform any type of sign work as outlined in subsection (2) of this section, under the supervision of a sign electrician, but in no case shall a journeyman electrician contract for or engage in the business of electrical work of any nature, except under the supervision of either a master electrician or a sign electrician. 
(4)  Temporary working permit, which shall entitle an unlicensed electrical worker with at least one (1) year's experience in the installation of electrical equipment to perform work in the capacity of a journeyman electrician until the next regular examination date, at which time such worker must appear before the electrical inspector and be examined in the manner required herein for a journeyman electrician's license. If such worker fails to pass the journeyman electrician's examination, he shall not be permitted to work in the capacity of a journeyman electrician until such later time as he is able to pass such examination. No temporary working permits shall be renewed. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 13, Art. 1, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-158. - Applications. 
Every person desiring to engage in any business or perform any work for which a license is required under the provisions of this division shall file his application for such license with the chief electrical inspector upon forms furnished by such inspector, who shall pass upon the qualifications and competency for the class of license desired by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 13, Art. 12, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-159. - Examinations. 
Any applicant for an electrical license of any grade shall pass an examination as a condition precedent to the issuance of such license. Such examination shall be administered by an approved testing agency through the North Central Texas Council of Governments. Upon receipt of notice or confirmation of the applicant's successful completion of the appropriate test, payment of the fee herein prescribed and presentation of the appropriate liability insurance as required, the applicant shall be issued a license of the grade for which he has been certified. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 13, Art. 2, 9-9-86; Ord. No. 455, § 1, 6-13-95)  
Sec. 4-160. - Fees. 
(a)  The first annual fee for a master electrician's license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first year, payable in full and in advance, and the annual renewal fee for such a license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), payable in full on the expiration of the annual period for which the license fee was paid theretofore. 
(b)  The first annual fee for a sign electrician's license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first year, payable in full and in advance, and the annual renewal fee for such a license shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00), payable in full on the expiration of the annual period for which the license fee was paid theretofore. 
(c)  The first annual fee for a journeyman electrician's license shall be five dollars ($5.00) for the first year, payable in full and advance, and the annual renewal fee for such a license shall be two dollars ($2.00), payable in full on the expiration of the annual period for which a license fee was paid theretofore. There shall be no fee for temporary working permits. 
(d)  Any holder of any license of any grade who shall fail to pay the annual renewal fee due for a renewal of such license within thirty (30) days of the date the same becomes due shall be required to pay as a renewal fee for such license the same amount as the fee for the first full year, being the amount set out in this section. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 13, Arts. 4—7, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-161. - Age restriction. 
No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall be issued a master electrician's license or a sign electrician's license. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 13, Art. 13, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-162. - Issuance limited to natural persons. 
No license shall be issued under the terms of this division to any other than a natural person. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 13, Art. 14, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-163. - Issuance of reciprocal licenses. 
(a)  When the chief electrical inspector has been furnished with a copy of an examination successfully passed in another Texas city by an applicant for an electrician's license in this city, and a copy of such examination so passed by such applicant requires as great a degree of knowledge and skill in the practice of the profession of an electrician as the test required to be passed for a similar electrician's license by this division, and such applicant then holds a valid license as an electrician in the other Texas city where such examination was passed, then the chief electrical inspector may issue an equivalent electrician's license of this city to such applicant without such applicant taking the examination required by this division provided that: 
(1)  Such applicant electrician shall satisfy the chief electrical inspector that such applicant's license was issued under conditions comparable to those required by this division; 
(2)  The city in this state which issued such applicant an electrician's license has a similar reciprocal condition in its ordinances permitting the holder of the type of electrical licenses issued by this city to obtain a license in such other city without an examination; 
(3)  The chief electrical inspector shall be satisfied with the applicant's qualifications and ability and agrees to grant such license; 
(4)  Payment is made of the license registration fee required by this division and any amendments thereto; 
(5)  Such applicant shall be subject to and comply with and adhere to all other requirements of this division; 
(6)  Such reciprocal license so issued by the city shall be subject to the renewal provisions of this division. 
(b)  Should any applicant be aggrieved by the refusal of the chief electrical inspector to grant such reciprocal license, as provided for in this section, such applicant shall have the right to appeal such decision to the city's planning and zoning commission, by the giving of notice to the planning and zoning commission within thirty (30) days of such decision to refuse such license, and upon hearing the planning and zoning commission shall determine whether or not there were reasonable grounds upon which such chief electrical inspector denied such license, and should the planning and zoning commission determine that reasonable grounds for such decision to refuse such license did not exist, the planning and zoning commission shall order such license to issue, otherwise such decision of the chief electrical inspector shall remain final. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 15, Art. 2, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-164. - Transfer or use by others prohibited. 
No license in effect, issued or renewed under the terms of this division, shall ever be transferred to or used by any other person other than the one to whom the same is or shall be issued. 
(Ord. No 363, § 13, Art. 15, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-165. - Allowing use of name or license by another prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any holder of any license of any grade issued under this division to allow his name or license to be used by any other person, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of obtaining a permit for performing work under his license. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 13, Art. 16, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-166. - Employment of unlicensed electricians by license holders prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for a master electrician or a sign electrician to send any person on any job requiring a license in the capacity of an electrician unless such person is the holder of and is in possession of a journeyman electrician's license or a journeyman electrician's temporary working permit, or is accompanied and supervised in his work by a person holding and in possession of a journeyman electrician's license, unless such person sent on such job in such capacity is himself the holder of an unexpired, unrevoked master or sign electrician's license entitling him to perform such work. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 13, Art. 17, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-167. - Journeyman electricians to carry licenses or permits at all times while working. 
Journeyman electricians who are not the holders of unexpired, unrevoked, master or sign electrician's licenses entitling them to perform such work shall carry their journeyman electrician's licenses or journeyman electrician's temporary working permits on their persons at all times while performing electrical work, and they shall produce and present such licenses or permits immediately upon the request of any electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 13, Art. 18, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-168. - Licensees to furnish inspectors with addresses and telephone numbers. 
Each holder of a license of any grade under this division shall furnish the electrical inspector with a written notice of his permanent address, and each holder of a master electrician's license and of a sign electrician's license shall furnish the electrical inspector with a written notice of the address and telephone number of his regularly established place of business. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 13, Art. 19, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-169. - Forfeiture for failure to renew. 
Any holder of any renewable license of any grade who shall fail to pay any renewal fee due for such license within sixty (60) days after the date such fee becomes due shall forfeit such license, and the same shall be and become null and void from and after the expiration of such sixty-day period. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 13, Art. 9, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-170. - Suspension. 
Upon final conviction of any violation of any provision of this article in any court having jurisdiction thereof of any holder of any license issued or renewed under the terms of this division, the city council may suspend the license of such person so convicted for any period up to six (6) months, and during the time of such suspension, such license shall be and become null and void. After the termination of such period of suspension, such license shall again be valid and effective, provided that renewal fees which may have become due thereon, as hereinafter set out, were paid when due. If any licensee is convicted three (3) times for a violation of any provision of this article, the city council may revoke and cancel his license. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 13, Art. 3, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-171. - Expiration. 
Any license issued under the terms of this division shall expire thirty (30) days after the annual renewal fee due thereon becomes due and payable unless such fee is paid before the expiration of such thirty-day period. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 13, Art. 8, 9-9-86)  
Secs. 4-172—4-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 11. 
 
Sec. 4-191. - Permits—Required. 
(a)  Within the corporate limits of the city, no electrical equipment shall be installed within or on any building, structure, or premises publicly or privately owned, nor shall any alteration or addition be made to any such existing equipment without first securing a permit therefor from the chief electrical inspector. 
(b)  A separate permit shall be required for each separate building, store space, or apartment, whether such unit is metered separately or conjunctively, and a service permit shall be taken on all such units whether supplied from a central metering station or directly from an electricity supply agency. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 8, Art. 1, § 9, Art. 2, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-192. - Same—Application; insurance; issuance. 
Application for the permit required by section 4-191, describing the work to be done, shall be made in writing to the chief electrical inspector by the licensed master electrician or licensed sign electrician installing the work. The applicant shall file a liability insurance policy with the city in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) property, two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) personal, with a maximum of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per incident, for liabilities incurred by the granting of a work permit and to the benefit of any person damaged by the work performed by the contractor, and for the use and benefit of any person having a cause of action arising out of the contractor's work, done by reason of failure to comply with the building code of the city, by such principal or any of his employees, agents, or subcontractors, except that an owner may make electrical installations, alterations or additions to his own home in which he resides, on first securing a homeowner's permit to do such work himself. Nothing about such homeowner having the right to do such work himself shall affect, or detract from, the obligation and duty of such homeowner to comply with all of the terms and provisions of this article. When required by the chief electrical inspector, the application shall be accompanied by such plans, specifications, and schedules as may be necessary to determine whether the installation as described will be in conformity with the requirements of this article. If it shall be found that the installation as described will conform with all legal requirements and if the licensed master electrician or sign electrician has complied with all provisions of this article, a permit for such installation shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 8, Art. 2, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-193. - Same—Issuance restricted. 
No permit for constructing, installing, altering, extending, maintaining, repairing, or replacing any electrical wiring, apparatus, or equipment of any voltage in excess of twenty-four (24) volts shall be issued to any person other than a holder of a license of the grade necessary to entitle such holder to lawfully do or supervise the work to be done by virtue of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 8, Art. 4, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-194. - Same—Fees. 
Before any permit is granted for the installation or alteration of electrical equipment, the licensed master electrician or sign electrician making application for such permit shall pay to the electrical inspector's office a fee in such amount as specified in the Uniform Administrative Code adopted under Article II of this chapter, which provides methods of calculation for such fees as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 9, Art. 1, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-195. - Same—Compliance with terms required. 
No deviation may be made from the installation described in the permit issued under this division without the written approval of the chief electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 8, Art. 3, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-196. - Same—Penalty for failure to obtain. 
When work is found to be in progress or completed for which no application for permit has been made or authorization to proceed with the work granted by the chief electrical inspector, an investigation fee of double the amount of the inspection fee shall be added to the inspection fee, the total amount of which shall be paid by the person doing such work, except that work done by licensed journeymen electricians under the supervision of licensed master electricians at night and on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays for which application for permit is made between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on the first regular working day after which work was done shall be charged with an investigation fee. Payment of such investigation fee shall in no way excuse such person from the penalty set forth in section 1-7 for any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 8, Art. 5, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-197. - Inspections and notices. 
(a)  Upon completion of any installation of electrical equipment, which has been made under a permit, it shall be the duty of the licensed master or sign electrician making the installation to notify the chief electrical inspector, who shall inspect the installation within forty-eight (48) hours, exclusive of Saturday afternoons, Sundays and holidays, of the time such notice is given or as soon thereafter as practicable. 
(b)  Where the chief electrical inspector finds the installation to be in conformity with the provisions of this article, he shall issue to the licensed master or sign electrician making the installation a notice of conformance, which shall be placed on the equipment or premises, authorizing the use of the installation, and shall send written notice of such authorization for connection to the supply of electricity to the agency supplying the electric service. 
(c)  When a certificate of approval is issued authorizing the connection and use of a temporary installation, such certificate shall be issued to expire at a time to be stated herein, and shall be revocable by the chief electrical inspector for good cause. 
(d)  When any electrical equipment is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of the building and/or equipment, the licensed master or sign electrician installing the equipment shall notify the chief electrical inspector, or until forty-eight (48) hours, exclusive of Saturday afternoons, Sundays and holidays, shall have elapsed from the time of such notification, provided that on large installations where the concealment of equipment proceeds continuously, the licensed master or sign electrician installing the electrical equipment shall give the electrical inspector due notice, and inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of the work. 
(e)  If upon inspection the installation is not found to be fully in conformity with the provisions of this article, the chief electrical inspector shall issue a notice of nonconformance and shall notify the licensed master or sign electrician making the installation of the defects which have been found to exist. All defective work shall be corrected and brought in conformity with the provisions of this article before any further electrical work will be permitted within or on the building or premises, and before the licensed master or sign electrician making the installation shall be issued any other permits to perform any other electrical work. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or place in operation any electrical equipment which has been disapproved or condemned by the chief electrical inspector unless and until the same has been so repaired or altered that it complies with all provisions of this article and has thereafter been approved by the chief electrical inspector. 
(g)  The chief electrical inspector shall have the authority to require any person to uncover any wiring or electrical equipment which has been concealed without the knowledge or permission of the electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 10, Arts. 1—7, 9-9-86)  
Secs. 4-198—4-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 4-221. - Installation of electrical equipment. 
(a)  All installations of electrical equipment made within the corporate limits of the city shall conform to the following specified requirements: 
(1)  All electrical wiring within or on all buildings hereinafter erected and all alterations in and additions to such wiring in or on buildings in existence on September 9, 1986, shall be installed in an approved metal raceway system, except that this provision shall not apply to single-family dwellings and duplex apartment buildings which are not located in fire zones or which may hereafter be designated and defined by the city council. 
(2)  All electrical wiring within or on all commercial buildings hereinafter erected which are used as a combination of living quarters and business, and/or industrial establishments, and alterations and additions to such wiring in or on buildings in existence on September 9, 1986, shall be installed in an approved metal raceway system. 
(3)  All electrical wiring for motors larger than two (2) horsepower within or on private residences and duplex apartments shall be installed in an approved metal raceway system. 
(4)  All electrical service conductors within or on any and all buildings hereinafter erected shall be installed in rigid metal conduit or electrical metallic tubing not smaller than one and one-quarter-inch trade size, which shall extend from the service head to the service entrance switch, or switches, except that this raceway for private single-family residences containing not more than three hundred (300) square feet and not more than two (2) two-wire circuits shall be not smaller than one-inch trade size. 
(5)  All electrical wiring in or on all residences having more than four (4) attached garages hereinafter erected, and all alterations and additions to buildings in existence on September 9, 1986, shall be installed in an approved metal raceway system. 
(6)  All electrical wiring installed on the outside surface of any building or landscaping within the corporate city limits, including private residences, shall be run in an approved and properly grounded metal raceway. This subsection shall not apply to the use of decorative holiday lighting or lighting displays during the period that begins on October 15 and ends on February 1 of each year. All decorative holiday lighting or lighting displays must be removed no later than February 1 of each year. 
(7)  Lead-covered conductors shall be installed in an approved raceway system. 
(8)  Metal raceways shall be cut by saws or metal-removing parting tools of the type which leaves a clean square cut. Pipe cutting tools of the type which spreads or crushes the metal shall not be used. 
(9)  Electrical services in the network zone shall be connected to the underground network system, and if serving more than eight (8) two-wire circuits, or four (4) three-wire circuits, shall be three-phase. 
(10)  The point of entrance of electrical service wires on underground services and the point of landing of electrical service drops on overhead services shall be designated by the electricity supply agency and approved by the chief electrical inspector. All facilities for the installation of meters shall meet the metering requirements of the electricity supply agency. 
(11)  Service entrance conductors within or on all buildings hereinafter erected or within or on all buildings in existence on September 9, 1986, on which the electrical wiring is altered, extended, revised or remodeled, shall be of sufficient size to carry the connected load and in no case shall be smaller than the following: 
a.  Three (3) conductors having a current-carrying capacity of one hundred twenty-five (125) amperes for buildings having one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of floor area and over, and not more than one hundred (100) amperes connected load. 
b.  Three (3) conductors having a current-carrying capacity of ninety-five (95) amperes for individual occupancy buildings having one thousand two hundred (1,200) or less square feet of floor area and not more than seventy-six (76) amperes connected load. 
c.  Three (3) conductors having a current-carrying capacity of fifty-five (55) amperes for individual occupancy of buildings having six hundred (600) or less square feet of floor area and not more than forty-five (45) amperes connected load and for billboards with not more than forty-five (45) amperes total connected load. 
d.  Two (2) conductors having a current-carrying capacity of fifty-five (55) amperes for buildings having one hundred (100) or less square feet of floor area and not more than two (2) twenty-ampere, two-wire circuits and for billboards with not more than two (2) twenty-ampere, two-wire circuits. 
e.  Two (2) conductors having a current-carrying capacity of forty (40) amperes for temporary services on construction poles. 
(12)  Exceptions to subparagraph (11) are as follows: If an existing structure is damaged by fire or other cause fifty (50) percent or more, or over fifty (50) percent is added to the floor area of the existing building, subparagraph (11) applies. If an existing structure is damaged less than fifty (50) percent, or less than fifty (50) percent is added to the building, the following will apply: 
When the wiring in old structures is altered, extended, revised or remodeled, the load will be figured on three (3) watts per square foot basis, plus a minimum of one (1) sixteen-ampere appliance circuit and separate circuits for each heavy or fixed appliance. See subparagraph (4) of this section. A minimum of one (1) duplex receptacle for every twelve (12) linear feet of each room, not including doors or windows that reach to the floor (picture windows), shall be installed. In new rooms added to old structures, subparagraph (a)(51) of this section shall apply. If the total load is over forty-five (45) amperes, a one and one-quarter-inch riser and three (3) Number 2 wires shall be used, provided the load does not exceed seventy-six (76) amperes; if the load is under forty-five (45) amperes, sixty-ampere wire, three (3) Number 6 wires, and one-inch electrical metallic tubing or conduit shall be used, provided the building is over three hundred (300) feet square and over two (2) circuits; if the building is under three hundred (300) square feet and requires two (2) circuits or less, a two-wire Number 6 service with one-inch electrical metallic tubing or conduit may be used. 
The city council recognizes the fact that the chief electrical inspector may exercise reasonable judgment in the application of this subparagraph. 
(13)  Service drop conductors shall be installed in such a manner that they shall not be within reach from any porch or stair landing, and shall be insulated at the point of connection to the service entrance conductors. 
(14)  The system common ground conductor shall be installed as approved by the chief electrical inspector. 
(15)  Meter bases, switches, and enclosures shall be firmly secured to mounting surfaces with approved type fastening devices independently of and in addition to fastening devices used to secure raceways to the surfaces. 
(16)  All service switches of whatever capacity or potential shall be installed at a location as near the point of entrance of service as may be possible, considering the character of the building and accessibility in case of fire or other reasons for opening the switch and disconnecting the premises from the electricity supply service. 
(17)  Brackets or other means of attachment shall be installed on buildings for service wires, unless such buildings are of wood construction and lend themselves readily to the installation by the electrical supply company of screw-mounting insulators without damage to the outside finish. 
(18)  Service entrance switches which are equipped with meter testing lugs and which are known to the trade as "meter-trim" switches shall be installed sixty-four (64) inches from the top of the switch to the floor. Immediately above and adjacent to this switch shall be installed a wooden meter board twenty (20) inches high and of the width of the switch. 
(19)  All sealed type meter bases shall be installed not less than four (4) feet and not more than six (6) feet, six (6) inches from the center of such bases to the finished grade level of the ground or from the floor. 
(20)  A current transformer metering board not less than twenty-four (24) inches by thirty (30) inches shall be installed at a maximum of seven (7) feet from the top of the board to the floor. 
(21)  Not less than three (3) feet of each conductor shall be left at the service head for connection to the service drop. 
(22)  Service entrance conductors shall not be run at a distance greater than twenty (20) feet within the hollow spaces of frame buildings, unless provided with automatic over-current protection at their outer ends. 
(23)  Service heads shall be installed at a location not more than two (2) feet from the service drops and if possible not less than three (3) feet from any door, window, or other opening in the building. 
(24)  Service entrance switches or any service equipment shall not be installed within a bathroom, toilet, closet, or cabinet, nor within eight (8) feet vertically or five (5) feet horizontally of any plumbing or grounded metal equipment. 
(25)  Service heads shall be installed not less than ten (10) feet, six (6) inches, nor more than twenty-two (22) feet above the ground and so situated that they shall not be within reach from any porch or stair landing, and if practicable shall afford direct unobstructed space for stringing service drops without the necessity of such drops passing over the property of others than the owner of the property being served. 
(26)  Where service heads cannot be installed not less than ten (10) feet, six (6) inches above the ground or platform and service drops cannot be installed at least ten (10) feet above the ground or platform, on account of the structural form of the building, an additional structure shall be erected to afford the necessary height. This structure shall be of sufficient strength to support the attached service drops and shall be of metal protected from corrosion by cadmium, tin, zinc, or equal coating on all surfaces. In no case shall this structure be of inferior strength to two-inch trade size, heavy-wall, rigid steel conduit or three-inch by three-inch by three-inch by one-fourth-inch angle iron. If this structure protrudes through the roof, it shall be of sufficient height to maintain between the bottom service drop and the highest point of the roof over which it passes a clearance of not less than eight (8) feet, except that where the voltage does not exceed three hundred (300) volts between conductors and the roof cannot be readily walked upon, this clearance shall be not less than three (3) feet; or if the structure protrudes through any roof within two (2) feet of the edge of such roof, this clearance shall be not less than one (1) foot. Where the service mast pierces the roof, the roof shall be reinforced by a two-inch by six-inch timber secured underneath and adjacent to the roof structure through the center of which the mast shall pass. 
(27)  Service heads shall be installed at a point above the level of the service drops. 
(28)  Where changes or additions are being made to existing electrical installations, necessitating changes or additions to the service equipment, such service equipment shall be changed to conform to the provisions of this article. 
(29)  Where changes or additions to services or service equipment are being made, all connected wiring and equipment shall be changed to conform to the provisions of this article. 
(30)  Any electricity supply agency, company, firm or corporation operating under a franchise granted by the city shall have the right to install and connect, or disconnect and remove its meters and protective devices without a permit, but it shall not connect any electrical equipment to a source of supply without first having been authorized in writing to do so by the chief electrical inspector. 
(31)  Where meters were originally or may be hereafter installed in inaccessible places in houses or buildings and the electricity supply agency desires to relocate such meters for its own convenience in rendering its service, or for the purpose of standardization of its service in the interest of the public, a licensed master electrician who does such work shall obtain the necessary permits before executing such work. 
(32)  Where meters originally installed in accessible places satisfactory to the electricity supply agency and are rendered inaccessible thereafter by virtue of alterations or new construction by the owner of the premises or his agent, such meters shall be reinstalled in accordance with the provisions of this article at the expense of the owner. 
(33)  Any electricity supply agency, company, firm, or corporation operating under a franchise granted by the city shall supply all three-wire, single-phase services with three-wire, single-phase service drops to premises whereon electricity furnished by such organization is used, and shall, when practicable, furnish the type and size of service needed and requested, except that it shall not be required to furnish three-phase service unless such service is available in the vicinity and unless in addition there is a power demand of at least seven (7) horsepower, at least five (5) horsepower of which is three-phase. 
(34)  Trailer courts shall be wired with weatherproof fittings and equipment, with not more than one (1) trailer to each twenty-ampere circuit, such circuit, to terminate in a heavy-duty, polarized, three-pole receptacle, shall be protected with a fuse disconnect switch. Each individual trailer disconnect switch shall be grounded. 
(35)  Temperature sensitive cut-out switches shall be mounted near the blower in all ventilating and air-conditioning ducts and in the air stream in attic fan installations. The switch shall be so designed that it will open the power circuit to the blower when the actuating air reaches a temperature of one hundred ninety-four (194) degrees Fahrenheit (or ninety (90) degrees Celsius) and shall remain in the open-circuit position until manually reset. 
(36)  Conductors supplying outlets for ranges shall be of sufficient size for the range connected, but in no case shall they be smaller than Number 6 for phase wires and Number 8 for neutrals. 
(37)  Not more than eight (8) current-consuming outlets shall be connected to a fifteen-ampere, general-use branch circuit. 
(38)  Not more than three (3) heavy-duty lamp holders shall be connected to a fifteen-ampere branch lighting circuit. 
(39)  Not more than ten (10) current-consuming outlets shall be connected to a twenty-ampere, general-use branch circuit. 
(40)  Not more than four (4) heavy-duty lamp holders shall be connected to a twenty-ampere lighting circuit. 
(41)  Not more than four (4) current-consuming outlets shall be connected to a twenty-ampere appliance circuit. 
(42)  Bell transformers shall not be installed in attics or underneath structures or buildings with combustible floors, walls, or ceilings. 
(43)  Control transformers for heating or cooling units of other equipment shall not be installed in attics or underneath structures or buildings unless such transformers are enclosed inside the metal enclosure of the unit and protected by the proper size primary fuses with such fuses and associated disconnecting switch or switches in sight of such transformers. 
(44)  Plug fuses and fuse holders shall not be used in ungrounded circuits supplied by delta connected transformers having one (1) phase with a voltage to ground greater than one hundred fifty (150) volts and known to the trade as the "high-leg-to-ground." 
(45)  Plug fuses installed in residential occupancies shall be of the time-delay type. 
(46)  Anesthetizing locations in hospitals and clinics using combustible anesthetic agents shall be wired with equipment which will operate safely in atmospheres containing ethyl ether vapor. Equipment approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. for group C locations and installed in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Code and the Recommended Safe Practice for Hospital Operating Rooms as adopted by the National Fire Protection Association will be prima facie evidence that such equipment and installation methods are safe for such locations. 
(47)  All electrical conductors running underneath streets, alleys, easements, and/or sidewalks shall be installed not less than eighteen (18) inches beneath the surface or have equivalent protection. 
(48)  All unused electrical equipment within or on public or private buildings or premises shall be removed. 
(49)  All metal noncurrent-carrying parts and enclosures of electrical equipment shall be grounded if within reach from the ground or from any grounded object. A distance of eight (8) feet vertically and five (5) feet horizontally shall be deemed out of reach. 
(50)  Receptacles within reach of the ground or from grounded objects shall be the grounding type and shall be effectively grounded. Receptacles of more than one hundred fifty (150) volts between conductors or to ground shall be the grounding type and shall be effectively grounded regardless of location. 
(51)  Noncurrent-carrying metal parts of electrical equipment and receptacles of the grounding type which are supplied by nonmetallic wiring systems shall be grounded by means of an equipment grounding conductor connected to a grounding terminal designed for the purpose and run with and within the same enclosure or covering as the current-carrying conductors to the main service equipment and attached to the system grounding electrode at or ahead of the service equipment. Such grounding type receptacles, when supplied by metallic wiring systems, shall be grounded in the manner required for nonmetallic wiring systems unless effectively bonded to and grounded by the metallic raceway systems. 
(52)  The motor disconnecting switch and the motor controller shall both be located within sight of the motor unless such disconnecting switch is capable of being locked in the open position by a padlock and then only when such padlocked switches installed out of sight would result in an installation equally as safe as when installed within sight. Toggle switches in series withholding coil circuit shall not be acceptable in lieu of the above requirements. 
(53)  Connected loads, after demand factors have been applied, shall not exceed eighty (80) percent of the rating of any conductor, switch, circuit breaker, panelboard, or switchboard. 
(54)  The total load connected to a branch circuit shall not exceed eighty (80) percent of the rated current-carrying capacity of the circuit. 
(55)  Electrical wiring shall not be installed inside of buildings until the interior of such buildings have been physically protected from the weather. 
(56)  Approved receptacle outlets shall be installed in sufficient number in walls, floors, and ceilings in every location including residential occupancies, to prevent the number of flexible cords greater in length than six (6) feet for plug-in appliances, fixtures and equipment. In no case shall any wall have less than one (1) receptacle for each twelve (12) linear feet or major fraction thereof measured horizontally along such walls parallel to the floor line after door openings have been deducted, except that such twelve-foot minimum requirement shall not be mandatory for churches, schools, auditoriums, hospitals, storage warehouses, parking garages, office buildings, and other such buildings where other provisions, such as underfloor raceways, have been made, or were it has been clearly established that unsafe substitute wiring will not be installed if such approved receptacles are omitted. On wall areas or work repair benches, behind bars or serving counters, or on which electric signs and similar devices are likely to be placed, not less than one (1) receptacle shall be installed for each six (6) linear feet or major fraction thereof measured horizontally along such walls parallel to the floor or ceiling line. For ceiling areas in lounges, bars, taverns, or other locations where signs, or similar electrical equipment, are likely to be attached, receptacles shall be installed in sufficient number that no point on such ceilings will be at a distance greater than twenty (20) feet from at least one (1) such receptacle. 
(57)  In residential occupancies, at least one (1) approved receptacle outlet shall be installed in each twelve (12) feet of wall space or major fraction thereof, after door openings have been deducted, in each wall other than in hallways and outside unenclosed porches; and at least one (1) fixed lighting fixture or lampholder shall be installed in each kitchen, bathroom, toilet, laundry, pantry, garage, store room, or other room not likely to be lighted with floor lamps. 
(58)  Any electrical appliance rated at six (6) amperes or more shall be supplied by a separate individual circuit. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements set out above, all installations of electrical equipment made within the corporate limits of the city shall be so made that the same will be in safe condition and shall be made in conformity with the provisions of this article and be applicable statutes of the state, and all orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof. 
(c)  If equipment and installations meet the requirements set out in paragraph (a) of this section, then conformity with all applicable regulations set forth in the National Electrical Code and in the National Electrical Safety Code shall be prima facie evidence that such installations are in safe condition. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 6, Arts. 1—3, 9-9-86; Ord. No. 622, § 1, 3-10-09)  
Sec. 4-222. - Electrical equipment. 
(a)  All electrical equipment installed or used shall be in safe condition and in conformity with the provisions of this article, the applicable statutes of the state and any orders, rules, or regulations issued by authority thereof. 
(b)  Conformity of electrical equipment with applicable standards of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., shall be prima facie evidence that such equipment is in safe condition. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to equipment owned and used by an electricity supply or communication agency in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity or for the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 7, Art. 3, 9-9-86)  
Secs. 4-223—4-245. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RESIDENTIAL CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Administrative code, § 4-26 et seq.; building code, § 4-51 et seq.; dangerous buildings code, § 4-76 et seq.; electrical code, § 4-103; mechanical code, § 4-271 et seq.; plumbing code, § 4-321 et seq.; sign code, § 4-371 et seq.; solar energy code, § 4-391 et seq.; swimming pool code, § 4-411 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-246. - Residential code adopted. 
The 2018 edition of the International Residential Code is hereby adopted as the official residential code of the City of Everman Texas. The 2018 International Residential Code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the 2018 International Residential Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinance but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 518, § 1, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 576, § 1, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 602, § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 652, § 1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 696, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 9-10-19)  
Sec. 4-247. - Residential code amendments. 
The 2018 edition of the International Residential Code, as adopted herein, is hereby amended in accordance with the recommendations of the North Central Texas Council of Governments and as detailed on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated by reference. The material contained in Exhibit "A" to this ordinance, although adopted and fully incorporated by reference, shall not be included in the formal codification of the ordinances. The material shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and made available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. It may be further amended from time to time by individual ordinances with such amendments to be maintained as public records in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 518, § 2, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 576, § 2, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 602, § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 652, § 2, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 696, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 9-10-19)  
Secs. 4-248—4-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - MECHANICAL REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-271. - Mechanical code adopted. 
The 2018 edition of the International Mechanical Code is hereby adopted as the official mechanical code of the City of Everman Texas. The 2018 International Mechanical Code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the 2018 International Mechanical Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinance but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 362, § 2, 9-9-86; Ord. No. 475, § 9, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 518, § 9, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 577, § 1, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 603, § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 655, § 1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 703, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 749, § 1, 9-10-19) 
Cross reference— Administrative code, § 4-26 et seq.; building code, § 4-51 et seq.; dangerous buildings code, § 4-76 et seq.; electrical code, § 4-103; residential code, § 4-246 et seq.; plumbing code, § 4-321 et seq.; sign code, § 4-371 et seq.; solar energy code, § 4-391 et seq.; swimming pool code, § 4-411 et seq.  
Sec. 4-272. - Mechanical code amendments. 
The 2018 edition of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted herein, is hereby amended in accordance with the recommendations of the North Central Texas Council of Governments and as detailed on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated by reference. The material contained in Exhibit "A" to this ordinance, although adopted and fully incorporated by reference, shall not be included in the formal codification of the ordinances. The material shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and made available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. It may be further amended from time to time by individual ordinances with such amendments to be maintained as public records in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 362, § 4(e), 9-9-86; Ord. No. 475, § 9, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 518, § 10, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 577, § 2, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 603, § 2, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 655, § 2, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 703, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 749, § 1, 9-10-19)  
Secs. 4-273—4-295. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONTRACTORS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 11. 
 
Sec. 4-296. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of mechanical construction, alteration, additions or repairs, without first presenting to the city a license issued by the state for the appropriate work being performed, and filing with the city proof of liability insurance as required. 
(b)  A class A state license is required if any single cooling source unit develops more than three hundred thousand (300,000) BTU's per hour (twenty-five (25) tons) of cooling capacity or if any single heating unit develops more than one and one-half (1.5) million BTU's per hour heating capacity. 
(c)  A class B state license is required if any single cooling source unit develops more than three hundred thousand (300,000) BTU's per hour (twenty-five (25) tons) or if any single heating source produces less than one and one-half (1.5) million BTU's per hour heating capacity. A combination of smaller units totaling more than twenty-five (25) tons of cooling or more than one and one-half (1.5) million BTU's of heating capacity shall not required a class A license. 
(Ord. No. 365, § 1, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-297. - Work permits required. 
Any person engaged in the installation, alteration or addition, to a mechanical system shall first obtain a permit from the city and pay the appropriate fees. 
(Ord. No. 365, § 2, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-298. - Registration permit. 
Each person applying for an air-conditioning permit shall obtain a registration permit at a cost of one hundred dollars ($100.00) renewable January first of each year at a cost of fifty dollars ($50.00). Any request for renewal after February first shall be processed as a first time request and charged accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 365, § 3, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-299. - Display of license number and class of license on vehicle required. 
Each contractor shall display the license number and class of license in letters not less than two (2) inches high on both sides of all vehicles, along with the company name. 
(Ord. No. 365, § 4, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-300. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  Each class A license holder shall furnish the city with proof of liability insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) property damage, two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) personal injury damage, for a combined amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence. 
(b)  Each class B license holder shall furnish the city with proof of liability insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily injury, property damage in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) aggregate. 
(Ord. No. 365, §§ 5, 6, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-301. - Homeowner's exemption. 
Nothing contained in this division shall prohibit any bona fide homeowner from personally performing the work described in this division, and such bona fide homeowner shall not be required to file proof of liability insurance if the work is totally and completely performed only by the bona fide homeowner, provided such homeowner first obtains a permit, provided that such homeowner installs such system in accordance with all codes of the city, and providing all work under this division shall be at the legal residence of such homeowner. 
(Ord. No. 365, § 7, 9-9-86)  
Secs. 4-302—4-320. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PLUMBING REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-321. - Plumbing code adopted. 
The 2018 edition of the International Plumbing Code is hereby adopted as the official plumbing code of the City of Everman Texas. The 2018 International Plumbing Code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the 2018 International Plumbing Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinance but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 362, § 2, 9-9-86; Ord. No. 475, § 5, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 518, § 5, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 578, § 1, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 610, § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 656, § 1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 704, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 748, § 1, 9-10-19) 
Cross reference— Administrative code, § 4-26 et seq.; building code, § 4-51 et seq.; dangerous buildings code, § 4-76 et seq.; electrical code, § 4-103; residential code, § 4-246 et seq.; mechanical code, § 4-271 et seq.; sign code, § 4-371 et seq.; solar energy code, § 4-391 et seq.; swimming pool code, § 4-411 et seq.  
Sec. 4-322. - Building code amendments. 
The 2018 edition of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted herein, is hereby amended in accordance with the recommendations of the North Central Texas Council of Governments and as detailed on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated by reference. The material contained in Exhibit "A" to this ordinance, although adopted and fully incorporated by reference, shall not be included in the formal codification of the ordinances. The material shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and made available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. It may be further amended from time to time by individual ordinances with such amendments to be maintained as public records in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 362, § 4(b), 9-9-86; Ord. No. 475, § 6, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 518, § 6, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 578, § 2, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 610, § 2, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 656, § 2, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 704, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 748, § 1, 9-10-19)  
Sec. 4-323. - Cross-connection control program. 
(a)  General. No water service connection shall be made to any establishment where a potential or actual contamination hazard exists unless the water supply is protected in accordance with the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems (TNRCC Rules) and this section. The City of Everman shall discontinue water service if a required backflow prevention assembly is not installed, maintained and tested in accordance with the TNRCC Rules and this section. 
(b)  Backflow prevention assembly installation, testing and maintenance. 
(1)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester and certified to be operating within specifications. Backflow prevention assemblies which are installed to provide protection against health hazards must also be tested and certified to be operating within specifications at least annually by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester. 
(2)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed and tested in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, the American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual M14) or The University of Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection Control. 
(3)  Assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the customer whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. Original forms of such test, repairs, and overhaul shall be kept and submitted to the city within five (5) working days of the test, repair or overhaul of each backflow prevention assembly. 
(4)  No backflow prevention assembly or device shall be removed from use, relocated, or other assembly or device substituted without the approval of the city. Whenever the existing assembly or device is moved from the present location or can not be repaired, the backflow assembly or device shall be replaced with a backflow prevention assembly or device that complies with this section, The American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual M14), current addition, University of Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection Control, current addition, or the current plumbing code of the city, whichever is more stringent. 
(5)  Test gauges used for backflow prevention assembly testing shall be calibrated at least annually in accordance with The American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual M14), current addition, or The University of Southern California's Manual of Cross-Connection Control, current addition. The original calibration form must be submitted to the city within five (5) working days after calibration. 
(6)  A recognized backflow prevention assembly tester must hold a current endorsement from the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (Commission). 
(c)  Customer service inspections. 
(1)  A customer service inspection shall be completed prior to providing continuous water service to all new construction, on any existing service when the city has reason to believe that cross-connections or other contaminant hazards exist, or after any material improvement, correction, or addition to the private water distribution facilities. 
(2)  Only individuals with the following credentials shall be recognized as capable of conducting a customer service inspection: 
a.  Plumbing inspectors and water supply protection specialists that have been licensed by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners. 
b.  Certified waterworks operators, and members of other water related professional groups who have completed a training course, passed an examination administered by the commission or its designated agent, and hold a current endorsement issued by the commission. 
(3)  The customer service inspection must certify that: 
a.  No direct connection between the public drinking water supply and a potential source of contamination is permitted. Potential sources of contamination shall be isolated from the public water system by a properly installed air gap or an appropriate backflow prevention assembly. 
b.  No cross-connection between the public water supply and a private water source exists. Where an actual properly installed air gap is not maintained between the public water supply and a private water supply, an approved reduced pressure-zone backflow prevention assembly is properly installed and a service agreement exists for annual inspection and testing by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester. 
c.  No connection exists which allows water to be returned to the public drinking water supply is permitted. 
d.  No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than eight (8) percent lead may be used for the installation or repair of plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use. 
e.  No solder of flux which contains more than 0.2 percent lead can be used for the installation or repair of plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use. A minimum of one lead test shall be performed for each inspection. 
(d)  Enforcement. The city public works director shall be responsible for the enforcement of this section. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000). Each day that one or more of the provisions in this section is violated shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is convicted of three (3) or more distinct violations of this section, the city public works director shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of the reasonable cost of reconnection and any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service. In addition suitable assurances must be given to the city public works director that the same action shall not be repeated while the section is in effect. Compliance with this section may also be sought through injunctive relief in state district court. 
(Ord. No. 514, §§ 1, 2, 9-4-01)  
Secs. 4-324—4-345. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PLUMBERS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 11. 
 
Sec. 4-346. - Licenses required. 
It shall be unlawful to install, construct, maintain, repair, alter, or modify any piping or fixtures used for conducting of water, gas or sewage within the city, except as follows: 
(1)  A master plumber's license issued by the state is required for obtaining a permit and contracting for plumbing installation, modification or repair. 
(2)  A master or journeyman plumber's license issued by the state is required for actual work on the plumbing. A journeyman shall be under the supervision of a master plumber. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 1, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-347. - Work permits required. 
Before a person shall repair, construct, install, alter, or modify any plumbing within the city, he shall first obtain a permit. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 2, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-348. - Registration permits required. 
Each person applying for a plumbing permit shall obtain a registration permit from the city at a cost of one hundred dollars ($100.00), renewable thereafter on January 1 of each year at a cost of fifty dollars ($50.00). Any request for renewal after February 1 shall be processed as a first-time request and charged accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 3, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-349. - Insurance requirements. 
Each master plumber shall furnish the city with proof of liability insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily injury, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage and two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) aggregate. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 5, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-350. - Display of license number and class of license on vehicles required. 
Each contractor shall display the license number and class of license along with the company name on both sides of all vehicles in letters not less than two and one-half (2½) inches high. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 4, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-351. - Persons exempted from license, registration and insurance requirements. 
Exempted from the license, registration and insurance requirements of this division are: 
(1)  Any person who performs plumbing work in a building owned solely by him and is his home residence. 
(2)  Any person as specified in Part 1, section 20.5 of the 1985 Uniform Plumbing Code. 
(3)  Any person or company engaged in the installation and repair of service mains and appurtenances. 
(4)  Any person working for an appliance company and installing an appliance to existing piping. 
(5)  Any person who performs maintenance work if the person is regularly employed as a maintenance man and if the work is performed in connection with the business in which the person is employed and does not engage in the occupation of plumbing contracting for the general public and no extension, alteration, or modification to the plumbing system occurs. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 6, 9-9-86)  
Secs. 4-352—4-370. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SIGN CODE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Administrative code, § 4-26 et seq.; building code, § 4-51 et seq.; dangerous buildings code, § 4-76 et seq.; electrical code, § 4-103; housing code, § 4-246 et seq.; mechanical code, § 4-271 et seq.; plumbing code, § 4-321 et seq.; solar energy code, § 4-391 et seq.; swimming pool code, § 4-411 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-371. - Adopted. 
The Uniform Sign Code, 1985 Edition, including any amendments thereto as adopted, recommended and published by the International Conference of Building Officials, at least one (1) copy of which is on file, and which shall remain permanently on file, in the office of the city secretary, is hereby adopted by reference as part of this article, the same as if set forth verbatim in full herein, subject, however, to the amendments and provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 362, § 2, 9-9-86)  
Secs. 4-372—4-390. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - SOLAR ENERGY CODE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Administrative code, § 4-26 et seq.; building code, § 4-51 et seq.; dangerous buildings code, § 4-76 et seq.; electrical code, § 4-103; residential code, § 4-246 et seq.; mechanical code, § 4-271 et seq.; sign code, § 4-371 et seq.; solar energy code, § 4-391 et seq.; swimming pool code, § 4-411 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-391. - Adopted. 
The Uniform Code for Solar Energy Installations, 1985 Edition, including the 1987 Accumulative Supplement thereto, as adopted, recommended and published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, at least one (1) copy of which is on file, and which shall remain permanently on file, in the office of the city secretary, is hereby adopted by reference as part of this article, the same as if set forth verbatim in full herein, subject, however, to the amendments and provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 362, § 2, 9-9-86)  
Secs. 4-392—4-410. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - SWIMMING POOL CODE[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Administrative code, § 4-26 et seq.; building code, § 4-51 et seq.; dangerous buildings code, § 4-76 et seq.; electrical code, § 4-103; residential code, § 4-246 et seq.; mechanical code, § 4-271 et seq.; pool fence, § 4-473; sign code, § 4-371 et seq.; solar energy code, § 4-391 et seq.; swimming pool code, § 4-411 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-411. - Swimming pool and spa code adopted. 
The 2018 edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is hereby adopted as the official swimming pool and spa code of the City of Everman Texas. The 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinance but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 362, § 2, 9-9-86; Ord. No. 601, § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 697, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 745, § 1, 9-10-19)  
Sec. 4-412. - Swimming pool and spa code amendments. 
The 2018 edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as adopted herein, is hereby amended in accordance with the recommendations of the North Central Texas Council of Governments and as detailed on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated by reference. The material contained in Exhibit "A" to this ordinance, although adopted and fully incorporated by reference, shall not be included in the formal codification of the ordinances. The material shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and made available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. It may be further amended from time to time by individual ordinances with such amendments to be maintained as public records in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 745, § 1, 9-10-19)  
Secs. 4-413—4-430. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - MOVING BUILDINGS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 11. 
 
Sec. 4-431. - Permit—Required; fees. 
No person shall hereafter move any structure or building, excluding portable buildings, within or through the limits of the city, where the same shall be moved in, through or upon the streets, alleys, avenues, or public grounds, without first obtaining a permit from the city. Any structure or building, excluding portable buildings, moved into the city shall require the owner or agent to first obtain a permit, and such permit cost shall be based upon new construction costs. Permits for moving a structure or building, excluding portable buildings, with a destination other than the city shall be charged one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first day and five dollars ($5.00) for each additional day that the building is in or upon the streets, alleys, avenues, or public grounds. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 1, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-432. - Same—Plot plan to accompany application. 
Before any building or structure moving permit may be issued for any building or structure with the ultimate destination and permanent location within the city, a plot plan shall be submitted with the application for permit, showing the shape and dimensions of the plot to be occupied by the structure, location of the structure on the lot and sufficient information to show that yard requirements, square footage requirements of the building, and all other subdivision, building and zoning requirements of the city, are to be complied with the same as for a built-on-the-site structure. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 2, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-433. - Same—Insurance prerequisite to issuance. 
Before a permit required by t his article is granted, the person or corporation shall provide proof of liability insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) property damage and two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) personal injury with an aggregate amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 367, § 4, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-434. - Same—Performance bond prerequisite to issuance; allowable time limit. 
Before a permit required by this article is granted, the person applying for a moving permit for a building or structure with a destination within the city shall give a performance bond in an amount as determined by the building official, to complete all work on the building or structure and bring all items to current city building codes. The bond shall be for a term of one (1) year. Further, the maximum time limit allowed within which to bring all items up to code standards shall be one hundred twenty (120) days. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 5, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-345. - Same—Conditions of route. 
A permit issued under this article by the city to a house, building or structure mover shall state specifically all conditions of the permit and designated route as determined by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 7, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-436. - Same—Revocation. 
The city shall revoke a permit if determination is made that the building or structure is being moved in a careless or reckless manner. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 10, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-437. - Structure size to be compatible with neighborhood. 
The moved-in structure, at the time of occupancy, must be of equal or greater size, quality, value and appearance to other structures located within two hundred (200) feet of the lot on which it is to be located, and must be located on a platted lot in a subdivision approved by the planning and zoning board, and be of record in the office of the county clerk. The accomplishment of these ends must be reflected by the submitted plans before a permit will be issued. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 3, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-438. - Utility company notification. 
Any person obtaining a moving permit under this article shall be responsible for coordinating the moving of such building or structure with all utility companies. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 6, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-439. - To be continuous. 
The moving of a building or structure shall be continuous as determined by the chief of police, with regard to the least amount of obstruction to traffic. All buildings or structures which are moved at night shall be sufficiently lighted so as not to be a hazard to the traveling public. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 8, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 4-440. - Reporting upon reaching destination. 
Any person receiving a moving permit under this article shall report within one (1) day after the building or structure reaches its destination, at which time the city shall inspect the route to determine if damage to city property has occurred. Any such damage shall be repaired and charged to such person's insurance carrier. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 9, 9-9-86)  
Secs. 4-441—4-449. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS 
 
Sec. 4-450. - Building board of appeals created. 
A building board of appeals, referred to in this article as "the board," is hereby created to accomplish purposes and perform functions set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 468, § 1, 1-29-98)  
Sec. 4-451. - Appointment and terms. 
The board shall be composed of five (5) members to be appointed by the city council. In addition, the city council shall appoint two (2) alternate members who shall serve in the absence of one or more regular members. Alternate members must meet the same qualifications as regular board members. An alternate member has voting privileges only when sitting in for an absent member. Regular members shall be appointed to places numbered 1 through 5 and alternate members shall be appointed to places numbered 6 and 7. Upon initial appointment pursuant to this article, members in the odd numbered places shall be appointed to serve terms expiring in the year 1999 and members appointed to the even numbered places shall serve terms expiring in the year 2000. Thereafter, the terms of office of the members shall be two (2) years beginning on February 1 of the year of appointment. The terms of the odd numbered places shall expire in the odd numbered years, and the terms of the even numbered places shall expire in the even numbered years. Board members may be appointed to succeed themselves. Vacancies shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first regular board meeting after their appointment. The building official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as secretary to the board, but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. All members of the board shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 468, § 1, 1-29-98)  
Sec. 4-452. - Qualifications of members. 
It is the intent of the city council that the board members shall, by reason of diversity of their individual areas of expertise, constitute a board which is broadly representative of various fields of building construction and building standards. In making appointments to the board, the city council if possible will give consideration to persons who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction, mechanical design, plumbing systems or electrical systems, or who have practical experience in matters relating to building construction or value such as a mortgage banker or licensed real estate agent. Members, except for the building official, may not be employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 468, § 1, 1-29-98)  
Sec. 4-453. - Organization. 
The board shall hold an organizational meeting in October of each year and shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among its members. The board shall meet when required to carry out the duties established by this article. The board shall adopt its own rules and procedures and shall keep a record of its proceedings consistent with the provisions of this article and the requirements of law. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall keep records of its decisions and other official actions, all which shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and kept as public records. 
(Ord. No. 468, § 1, 1-29-98)  
Sec. 4-454. - Duties and powers. 
(a)  The board is hereby charged with the duty and invested with the authority to: 
(1)  Inspect property and premises at reasonable hours where required in the discharge of its responsibilities under the laws of the state and the city; 
(2)  Hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the technical provisions of the following codes adopted by the city: 
a.  The Uniform Building Code; 
b.  The Uniform Plumbing Code; 
c.  The Uniform Mechanical Code; 
d.  The National Electrical Code; 
e.  The Uniform Administrative Code; and 
f.  The Uniform Housing Code. 
(3)  Enforce the provisions of Ordinance No. 468, as codified in Article IV of Chapter 4 of the Everman Code, the Substandard Building Ordinance, and carry out the functions established by that ordinance to abate substandard and dangerous buildings. 
(b)  The board shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of the codes listed in subsection (a)(2) of this section or the ordinance referenced in subsection (a)(3) of this section nor may the board waive requirements of any of the codes listed in subsection (a)(2) of this section or the ordinance referenced in subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 468, § 1, 1-29-98)  
Sec. 4-455. - Meetings and quorums. 
A quorum for the conduct of business shall consist of four members of the board. Each member is entitled to one vote and action of the board shall require a majority of those members present. The members of the board shall regularly attend meetings of the board and shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement of authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties. The members shall comply with all time limits and public notice requirements and all meetings of the board shall be held in compliance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 468, § 1, 1-29-98)  
Secs. 4-456—4-464. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - FENCING AND SCREENING 
 
Sec. 4-465. - Purpose. 
The requirements set forth in this article are intended to promote safety; protect the character and stability of residential, agricultural, commercial and industrial areas, conserve the value of land, buildings and neighborhoods, and enhance the aesthetic and visual image of the city. The construction, modification, and maintenance of fencing and screening devices shall comply with the requirements of this article. The city council may approve deviations from these requirements if it finds that adherence to the requirements of this article will be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-466. - Definitions. 
Building code: The Uniform Building Code as adopted and amended by the city council. 
Fence: Any construction greater than thirty (30) inches in height and of any material, the purpose of which is to provide protection from intrusion (both physical and visual), to prevent escape, mark a boundary, or provide decoration. A wall shall be considered a fence. Dikes and restraining walls for the purpose of diverting water and retaining soil are not classified as a fence. 
Multi-unit rental complex: Two (2) or more dwelling units in one or more buildings that are under common ownership managed by the same owner, managing agent, or management company, and located on the same lot or tract of land or adjacent lots or tracts of land. The term includes a condominium project but does not include: 
(a)  A facility primarily renting rooms to overnight guests; or 
(b)  A single-family home or adjacent homes that are not part of a condominium project. 
Owner: A person who owns, leases or manages or has a legal or equitable interest in a parcel or tract of land. 
Person: A person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity of any kind. 
Pool: A permanent swimming pool, permanent wading or reflection pool, hot tub or spa over eighteen (18) inches deep, located at ground level, above ground level, below ground or indoors. 
Screening device: Any of the following: 
(a)  A solid fence of metal, brick, masonry, or concrete, the vertical surface of which shall be without gaps, except openings for access; 
(b)  A dense screening shrub or plantings providing a visual barrier, and maintained and trimmed in a healthy growing condition; or 
(c)  Landscaped earth berms when approved and appropriate in scale, and used as a screening device in lieu of a fence, wall, hedge or other dense planting material. 
Visual barrier: Any fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery higher than thirty (30) inches above ground level measured at the property line, except single trees with single trunks. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-467. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to erect or cause to be erected a fence or any part thereof without obtaining a permit from the city. Any existing fence may be repaired or modified without obtaining a permit. Any existing fence may be replaced by a fence in the same location without a permit from the city if the replacement fence is completed within six (6) months from the date of removal of the existing fence, provided that no height will be added to the replacement fence. Any repair, modification or replacement performed without a permit shall be in accordance with all other requirements of the ordinances and regulations of the City of Everman. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-468. - Application for permit. 
A person shall apply for a permit at City Hall. The application shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The name, address and phone number of the applicant and the contractor who will perform the work, if different from the applicant; 
(b)  The name and address of the owner of the property, and a description of the property, by legal description or street address; 
(c)  A description of the fencing materials; 
(d)  A copy of the plans, specifications, and diagrams for the construction of the fence unless this requirement is waived by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-469. - Permit fee. 
A person shall pay a fee, as established by the city council by ordinance, resolution, or minute order, at the time the person submits an application for permit. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-470. - Duration of permit. 
(a)  The building official or his designee shall review the application and issue a permit to the applicant, if the building official or his designee finds that the work described in the permit application conforms to the requirements of this article and the building code, and if the application fee has been paid. 
(b)  The permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by the permit is not commenced within sixty (60) days from the date of the permit, or the work authorized by the permit is suspended for a period of sixty (60) days or more. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-471. - Denial of permit. 
The building official or his designee shall deny a permit if: 
(a)  The applicant fails to submit all information as required by this article; 
(b)  The application reveals that the proposed work does not comply with this Code; or 
(c)  The application reveals that the proposed work will be on the property line and is not approved by all adjacent property owners. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-472. - Appeal of denial of permit. 
A person may appeal the denial of a permit in accordance with the provisions of the building code. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-473. - Fence required—Swimming pool. 
Any person who owns or controls property upon which a swimming pool is located shall enclose the pool yard with a fence in accordance with the provisions of the building code and said person shall maintain such fence to prevent outside intrusion. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-474. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 553, § 1, adopted September 14, 2004, repealed § 4-474 which pertained to fencing of dumpsters and material which had derived from Ord. No. 506, § 1.  
Sec. 4-475. - Fence or screening required—Incompatible uses. 
(a)  A fence or screening device must be erected, placed and/or grown along the common boundary line of incompatible zoning districts before use is made of the property or before a building permit may be issued for construction on property which is adjacent to property that is zoned for a more restrictive use as defined in the city's Zoning Ordinance Number 433. The approved fence or screening device shall be of sufficient height to provide a visual screen, and in no event less than six (6) feet in height. 
(b)  Nonresidential uses in a residential district (as defined by the zoning ordinance) shall be suitably screened from view of any adjacent residential lot or dwelling use along the side and rear property lines of such nonresidential use. Said screening requirements shall not be mandatory for public schools, parks or churches, except where a parking lot or active outdoor intensive use area (such as a playground) is adjacent to a residential lot or dwelling. Parking lot screening need not be more than three and one-half (3½) feet in height. 
(c)  Where a multi-unit rental complex abuts a one- or two-family residence or residential area, the side and rear property lines of said multi-unit rental complex shall be suitably screened from view of any adjacent dissimilar residential dwelling or lot. 
(d)  Off-street loading areas shall be adequately screened from view of any residential dwelling lot or of any other adjacent residential land use, or of any adjacent public or semi-public land use. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-476. - Responsibility for fence. 
Every owner, tenant and agent, of any property upon where a fence or screening device is maintained, shall be jointly and severally responsible for installing and maintaining the fence or screening device. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-477. - Fence maintenance. 
(a)  Fences and screening devices shall be maintained in a good state of repair and free of vegetation in accordance with the city codes and ordinances. 
(b)  Screening devices composed of shrubs or plantings shall be maintained in a healthy, neat, live, growing condition. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-478. - Fence material. 
(a)  A person shall construct a fence using the following materials: wood, wrought iron, exposed aggregate tilt wall, fired masonry, approved wood rail construction or other material approved by the building official or his designee, including large screening shrubs. 
(b)  Wood fences may have metal framing. 
(c)  A person erecting a fence shall ensure that the smooth side faces adjoining streets and all posts and rails face the interior of the lot, unless otherwise approved by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-479. - Electric fences. 
A person may construct or maintain an electric fence or fence charging devices only if the fence or device is: 
(a)  UL approved; 
(b)  Used in conjunction with agricultural activities for the purpose of containing livestock, protecting water supplies, or for the security of crops grown on the property; and 
(c)  Plainly labeled or marked. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-480. - Security fences. 
(a)  A person may erect and maintain a barbed wire fence for: 
(1)  Agricultural or related activities; or 
(2)  Security purposes in nonresidential zoning districts if the barbed wire is mounted on the top of a fence at least six (6) feet in height. 
(b)  All other barbed wire fences are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-481. - Razor wire fences. 
A person may not use concertina wire or razor wire to construct a fence unless such is authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-482. - Placement of fence or screening device. 
(a)  A person shall not construct or maintain a fence or screening device in such a manner as would endanger the health or safety of the general public. 
(b)  No fence or screening device comprised of brick, masonry, concrete or solid metal shall be erected or placed which would interfere with the installation or maintenance of any public utility line, service, or drainage way, within the easements reserved therefore. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-483. - Front yard fence. 
A person shall not construct a fence exceeding thirty (30) inches in height which extends beyond the front building line of any permitted building in any district designated residential by the zoning ordinance, except that a person may construct a decorative fence, agricultural or security fence that is no more that twenty-five (25) percent solid above thirty (30) inches. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-484. - Side yard fence. 
A person shall not construct or maintain: 
(a)  A fence or screening device exceeding thirty (30) inches in height less than five feet from any side or rear property line that is adjacent to a public right-of-way except for a decorative fence, agricultural or security fence that is no more that twenty-five (25) percent solid above thirty (30) inches; or 
(b)  A fence over thirty (30) inches in height closer than fifteen (15) feet from the front corner property pin of an adjoining lot. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-485. - Visibility. 
(a)  A person shall not construct or maintain a fence, screening device, or other visual barrier so that it obstructs the vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching any street, alley or drive intersection. 
(b)  A person shall construct and maintain a fence, screening device, or other visual barrier in such a manner that a person, from all street intersections, has a clear field of vision across the corner lots for a distance of twenty-five (25) feet back from the property corner along both streets. 
(c)  In the event of a conflict between a provision establishing a minimum fence height and the provisions of this section, a person shall construct the fence so as to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-486. - Height. 
A person shall not construct a fence in a residential district, as defined by the zoning ordinance, which exceeds eight (8) feet in height above ground level at the fence line. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-487. - Public property. 
A person shall not construct a fence, guy wire, brace or any post in such a manner that it protrudes over property that the city or the general public has dominion and control over, owns or has an easement over, under or through except upon utility easements, which are permitted to be fenced. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-488. - Perimeter fencing. 
Subdivision perimeter fencing shall conform to the requirements and provisions for screening and fencing contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
Sec. 4-489. - Requirements cumulative. 
A person who erects or maintains a fence shall comply with the applicable provisions of this Code, the building code and the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 2-13-01)  
ARTICLE XV. - FUEL GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 4-490. - Fuel gas code adopted. 
The 2018 edition of the International Fuel Gas Code is hereby adopted as the official fuel gas code of the City of Everman Texas. The 2018 International Fuel Gas Code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the 2018 International Fuel Gas Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinance but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 13, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 573, § 1, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 604, § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 654, § 1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 702, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 750, § 1, 9-10-19)  
Sec. 4-491. - Fuel gas code amendments. 
The 2018 edition of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted herein, is hereby amended in accordance with the recommendations of the North Central Texas Council of Governments and as detailed on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated by reference. The material contained in Exhibit "A" to this ordinance, although adopted and fully incorporated by reference, shall not be included in the formal codification of the ordinances. The material shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and made available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. It may be further amended from time to time by individual ordinances with such amendments to be maintained as public records in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 14, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 573, § 2, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 604, § 2, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 654, § 2, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 702, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 750, § 1, 9-10-19)  
Secs. 4-492—4-494. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 
 
Sec. 4-495. - Energy conservation code adopted. 
The 2018 edition of the International Energy Management Code and the energy provisions of the International Residential Code are hereby adopted as the official energy management code of the City of Everman Texas. The 2018 International Energy Management Code and the energy provisions of the International Residential Code are fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the 2018 International Energy Management Code and the energy provisions of the International Residential Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinance but shall be maintained as a public records in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 15, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 574, § 1, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 606, § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 653, § 1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 699, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 744, § 1, 9-10-19)  
Sec. 4-496. - Energy conservation code amendments. 
The 2018 edition of the International Energy Management Code and the energy provisions of the International Residential Code as adopted herein, is hereby amended in accordance with the recommendations of the North Central Texas Council of Governments and as detailed on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated by reference. The material contained in Exhibit "A" to this ordinance, although adopted and fully incorporated by reference, shall not be included in the formal codification of the ordinances. The material shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and made available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. It may be further amended from time to time by individual ordinances with such amendments to be maintained as public records in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 16, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 574, § 2, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 606, § 2, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 653, § 2, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 699, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 744, § 1, 9-10-19)  
Secs. 4-497—4-499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - EXISTING BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 4-500. - Existing building code adopted. 
The 2018 edition of the International Existing Building Code is hereby adopted as the official existing building code of the City of Everman Texas. The 2018 International Existing Building Code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the 2018 International Existing Building Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinance but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 700, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 746, § 1, 9-10-19)  
Sec. 4-501. - Existing building code amendments. 
The 2018 edition of the International Existing Building Code, as adopted herein, is hereby amended in accordance with the recommendations of the North Central Texas Council of Governments and as detailed on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated by reference. The material contained in Exhibit "A" to this ordinance, although adopted and fully incorporated by reference, shall not be included in the formal codification of the ordinances. The material shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and made available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. It may be further amended from time to time by individual ordinances with such amendments to be maintained as public records in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 746, § 1, 9-10-19)  
Secs. 4-502—4-504. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
 
Sec. 4-505. - Property maintenance code adopted. 
The 2018 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby adopted as the official property maintenance code of the City of Everman Texas. The 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinance but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 608, § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 650, § 1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 705, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 742, § 1, 9-10-19)  
Sec. 4-505.1. - Property maintenance code amendments. 
The 2018 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted herein, shall be Exhibit "A" to this ordinance. Exhibit "A" may be further amended from time to time by individual ordinances with such amendments to be maintained public records in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 742, § 1, 9-10-19)  
ARTICLE XIX. - VACANT BUILDINGS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-506. - Definitions. 
Building means a structure for the support or shelter of any use or occupancy. 
Building official means the person designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article and includes any representatives, agents, or department employees designated by the official to enforce the terms of this ordinance. 
Certificate of registration means a certificate of registration issued by the building official under this article to the owner or operator of a vacant building. 
Dwelling unit means one (1) or more rooms designed to be a single housekeeping unit to accommodate one (1) family and containing one (1) or more kitchens, one (1) or more bathrooms, and one (1) or more bedrooms. 
Nonresidential use means any principal use of a building, structure, or portion thereof which is an occupancy type or use group other than a residential use group having less than four (4) dwelling units. 
Occupied means that one (1) or more persons lawfully conduct business in or reside in at least fifty (50) percent of the total area of a building (excluding stairwells, elevator shafts, and mechanical rooms) as the legal or equitable owner, operator, lessee, or invitee on a permanent, nontransient basis pursuant to and within the scope of a valid certificate of occupancy; or within an occupancy use that is authorized for the building or structure. 
Owner means a person in whom is vested the ownership or title of real property: 
(1)  Including, but not limited to: 
a.  The holder of fee simple title; 
b.  The holder of a life estate; 
c.  The holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five (5) years or more; 
d.  The buyer in a contract for deed; 
e.  A mortgagee, receiver, executor, or trustee in control of real property; and 
f.  The named grantee in the last recorded deed; and 
(2)  Not including the holder of a leasehold estate or tenancy for an initial term of less than five (5) years. 
Person means any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
Premises or property means a lot, plot, or parcel of land, including any structures on the land. 
Registrant means a person issued a certificate of registration for a vacant building under this article. 
Residential structure means a structure that is located in an area zoned residential or last utilized for residential purposes. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
Vacant building means a building located in the city that, regardless of its structural condition, is not occupied. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 4-507. - Authority of building official. 
The building official shall implement and enforce this article and may by written order establish such rules, regulations, or procedures, not inconsistent with this article, as the building official determines are necessary to discharge any duty under or to effect the policy of this article. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 4-508. - Delivery of notices. 
Any written notice that the building official is required to give an applicant or registrant under this article is deemed to be delivered: 
(1)  On the date the notice is hand delivered to the applicant or registrant; or 
(2)  Three (3) business days after the date the notice is placed in the United States mail with proper postage and properly addressed to the applicant or registrant at the address provided for the applicant or registrant in the most recent registration application. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 4-509. - Violations and penalty. 
(a)  Offense. A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to perform an act required of the person by this article, commits an offense. A person commits a separate offense each day or portion of a day during which a violation is committed, permitted, or continued. 
(b)  Fine. An offense under this article is punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(c)  Remedies cumulative. The penalties provided for in subsection (b) are in addition to any other enforcement remedies that the city may have under city ordinances and state law. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 4-510. - Issuance and denial of certificate of registration. 
(a)  Issuance. Upon payment of all required fees, the building official shall issue a certificate of registration for a vacant building to the applicant if the building official determines that: 
(1)  The applicant has complied with all requirements for issuance of the certificate of registration; 
(2)  The applicant has not made a false statement as to a material matter in an application for a certificate of registration; and 
(3)  The applicant has no outstanding fees assessed under this article. 
(b)  Denial. If the building official determines that the requirements of subsection (a) have not been met, the building official shall deny a certificate of registration to the applicant. 
(c)  Notice of denial. If the building official determines that an applicant should be denied a certificate of registration, the building official shall deliver written notice to the applicant that the application is denied and include in the notice the reason for denial and a statement informing the applicant of the right of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 4-511. - Revocation of registration. 
(a)  Grounds for revocation. The building official shall revoke a certificate of registration for a vacant building if the building official determines that: 
(1)  The registrant failed to comply with any provision of this article or any other city ordinance or state or federal law applicable to the building; 
(2)  The registrant intentionally made a false statement as to a material matter in the application or in a hearing concerning the certificate of registration; or 
(3)  The registrant failed to pay a fee required by this article at the time it was due. 
(b)  Notice of consideration for revocation. Before revoking a certificate of registration under subsection (a), the building official shall deliver written notice to the registrant that the certificate of registration is being considered for revocation. The notice must include the reason for the proposed revocation, action the registrant must take to prevent the revocation, and a statement that the registrant has ten (10) days after the date of delivery to comply with the notice. 
(c)  Notice of revocation. If, after ten (10) days from the date the notice required in subsection (b) is delivered, the registrant has not complied with the notice, the building official shall revoke the certificate of registration and deliver written notice of the revocation to the registrant. The notice must include the reason for the revocation, the date the building official orders the revocation, and a statement informing the registrant of the right of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 4-512. - Appeal. 
(a)  Procedure. If the building official denies the issuance or renewal of a certificate of registration or revokes a certificate of registration, the action is final unless the registrant files a written appeal to the vacant property registration appeal board within seven (7) calendar days of delivery of the notice of revocation. 
(b)  Vacant property registration appeal board. The zoning board of adjustment shall serve as the vacant property registration appeal board unless the city council creates and appoints a separate vacant property registration appeal board. 
(c)  Appeal hearing. If a written request for an appeal hearing is filed with the building official within the seven-day period, the vacant property registration appeal board shall hear the appeal within thirty (30) days from the city's receipt of the appeal unless otherwise agreed by the city and the appellant. 
(d)  Waiver. Failure to file an appeal in accordance with this section is a waiver of appeal and the building official's decision shall be final. 
(e)  Stay. The revocation of a certificate of registration is stayed pending appeal. 
(f)  Relief. At the appeal hearing, the vacant property registration appeal board is limited to affirming or reversing the denial or revocation based upon proof by the appellant that there was error as of the date of the revocation or denial. Subsequent repair, renovation, correction, or payment of a fee shall not form the basis of the board's decision. The decision of the board is final as to administrative remedies, and no rehearing or appeal may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 4-513. - Expiration and renewal of registration. 
(a)  Expiration. A certificate of registration for a vacant building expires the earlier of: 
(1)  One (1) year after the date of issuance; 
(2)  The date the vacant building changes controlling ownership, as determined by the building official; 
(3)  The date the vacant building becomes occupied, as determined by the building official; or 
(4)  The date the vacant building is demolished, as determined by the building official. 
(b)  Renewal. A certificate of registration may be renewed by making application in accordance with this article and paying the registration fee and inspection fee required by this article. The building official shall notify a registrant in writing at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of an existing certificate of registration of the impending expiration and the process for renewal. A registrant shall apply for renewal at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of an existing certificate of registration. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 4-514. - Transfer of certificate of registration. 
A certificate of registration for a vacant building is not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 4-515. - Inspection. 
(a)  Authorized. For the purpose of ascertaining whether violations of this article or any other city ordinance or state or federal law applicable to the building exist, the building official is authorized at a reasonable time to inspect: 
(1)  The exterior of a vacant building; and 
(2)  The interior of a vacant building, subject to the conditions provided by this article. 
(b)  Frequency. The building official shall inspect a vacant building at least as frequently as provided in this article. 
(c)  Registrant cooperation. An applicant or registrant shall permit representatives of the police department, the fire department, the department of code compliance, and the building official to inspect the interior and exterior of a vacant building, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at reasonable times upon request, and to attend, in person or by representative, such inspection. 
(d)  Warrant. If the owner refuses to allow inspection, the building official is authorized to obtain an administrative search warrant. 
(e)  Compliance inspection. Whenever a vacant building is inspected by the building official and a violation of this article or any other city ordinance or state or federal law applicable to the building is found, the building or premises will, after the expiration of any time limit for compliance given in a notice or order issued because of the violation, be reinspected by the building official to determine that the violation has been eliminated. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 4-516. - Emergency response information. 
(a)  Emergency contact. An owner, operator, or other person in control of a vacant building shall provide the building official with the name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address (if applicable), and telephone number of a person or persons who can be contacted twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, in the event of an emergency condition in or on the premises of the vacant building. An emergency condition includes any fire, natural disaster, collapse hazard, burst pipe, serious police incident, or other condition that requires an immediate response to prevent harm to property or the public. 
(b)  Updates. The owner, operator, or other person in control of the vacant building shall notify the building official within five (5) days after any change in the emergency response information. 
(c)  Emergency response. The owner, operator, or other person in control of a vacant building, or an authorized agent, must arrive at the premises within one (1) hour after a contact person named under this section is notified by the city or emergency response personnel that an emergency condition has occurred on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 4-517. - Vacant building plan. 
(a)  Vacant building plan required. Within thirty (30) days after the date a certificate of registration is issued for a vacant building, the registrant shall submit to the building official a vacant building plan complying with this section. 
(b)  Contents. The vacant building plan must contain the following: 
(1)  A plan of action and a time schedule for correcting all existing violations of this article or any other city ordinance or state or federal law applicable to the building or its premises. 
(2)  A plan of action for maintaining the building and its premises in compliance with this article and all applicable city ordinances and state and federal laws. 
(3)  A plan of action for maintaining the building and its premises in a safe and secure manner, including, but not limited to, provisions for pest control, securing the building from unauthorized entry, and, for buildings zoned for nonresidential uses or last utilized for nonresidential purposes, lighting, security, and maintenance of any existing alarm systems and fire suppression systems. 
(4)  A plan of action and time schedule for any repair, renovation or demolition of the building. 
(c)  Updates. A registrant may update the vacant building plan at any time, but shall provide the building official with an updated vacant building plan at least once every six (6) months that the building is required to be registered under this article. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
DIVISION 2. - BUILDINGS ZONED FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USES OR LAST USED FOR NONRESIDENTIAL PURPOSES 
 
Sec. 4-518. - Registration required for vacant buildings zoned for nonresidential uses or last utilized for nonresidential purposes; defenses. 
(a)  Offense. A person commits an offense if the person owns a vacant building zoned for nonresidential uses or last utilized for nonresidential purposes without a valid certificate of registration. A certificate of registration is required for any vacant building, regardless of any separate occupied buildings that may also be located on the same property or at the same street address. If more than one (1) vacant building is located at the same street address, only one (1) certificate of registration is required for all of the vacant buildings. Also, only one (1) certificate of registration is required for a single vacant building that has more than one (1) street address. Suite numbers or unit numbers will not be considered in determining the street address of a vacant building. 
(b)  Presumed vacancy. A building designated for nonresidential use or last utilized for nonresidential purposes is presumed vacant ninety (90) days after the earlier of the following: 
(1)  The date a valid certificate of occupancy expires; 
(2)  The date one (1) or more necessary utilities are disconnected; 
(3)  The date of a water bill for that address which shows no water usage; or 
(4)  The date the building appears unoccupied based on a physical inspection by the city. 
(c)  Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1)  The building was occupied within ninety (90) days preceding the date of the alleged offense; 
(2)  At the time of the alleged offense, the building was in the process of being renovated, rehabilitated, repaired, or demolished (pursuant to appropriate and valid permits issued by the building official, if required) and had been occupied at any time within ninety (90) days preceding the date of the alleged offense; 
(3)  Within sixty (60) days preceding the date of the alleged offense, the building suffered damage or destruction from a fire, flood, storm, or other casualty that rendered the building incapable of being occupied, except that this defense does not apply if the building was rendered incapable of being occupied by the intentional act of the owner, operator, lessee, or other invitee or an agent of the owner, operator, lessee, or other invitee; 
(4)  The building official has granted a written extension to the time frame for the presumption of vacancy set out in subsection (b) immediately above; or 
(5)  The building is owned by the City of Everman, the State of Texas, or the United States government. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 4-519. - Registration application for vacant buildings zoned for nonresidential uses or last utilized for nonresidential purposes. 
(a)  Application. To obtain a certificate of registration for a vacant building zoned for nonresidential uses or last utilized for nonresidential purposes, a property owner must submit an application on a form provided for that purpose to the building official. The application must contain all of the following information: 
(1)  The name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address (if applicable), and telephone number of the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(2)  The name, all street addresses, and the main telephone number, if any, of the vacant building, and a description of the last permitted use and the type of property (e.g., a commercial retail building, a warehouse, an office, a hotel), the date on which the vacant building was last occupied, and a description of any hazardous materials, uses or conditions that currently exist or previously existed in the vacant building. 
(3)  The names, street addresses, mailing addresses, e-mail addresses (if applicable), and telephone numbers of all owners of the vacant building and any lien holders and other persons with a financial interest in the vacant building. 
(4)  The name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address (if applicable), and telephone number of a person or persons to contact in an emergency as required by this article. 
(5)  The nature of the business of the applicant; the name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address (if applicable), and telephone number of the applicant if an individual or a managerial agent of the applicant if the applicant is a noncorporeal entity; and, if the business is a noncorporeal entity, documentation regarding the legal standing of the business. 
(6)  The number of buildings (including vacant and occupied buildings), units and other structures located in or on the premises of the vacant building. 
(7)  The total area in square feet of the vacant building, the number of stories contained in the vacant building, the area in square feet of each story, and whether each story is above or below ground level. 
(8)  Such additional information as the applicant desires to include or that the building official deems necessary to aid in the determination of whether the requested certificate of registration should be granted. 
(9)  Consent for the building official to enter at reasonable times, provided that such entry shall either be in the presence of the owner or the owner's representative, or, should the owner or owner's representative fail to appear when requested, based upon a search warrant issued by the municipal court based on a showing of reasonable suspicion that a violation of this ordinance has occurred. 
(b)  Multiple buildings. If the application for a certificate of registration is being made for multiple vacant buildings located at the same address, then the information required in subsection (a) must be provided for each vacant building located at that address. 
(c)  Supplemental information. A registrant shall notify the building official within ten (10) days after any material change in the information contained in the application for a certificate of registration for a vacant building, including any changes in ownership of the property. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 4-520. - Registration and inspection fee. 
The fees for a certificate of registration and required inspection for each vacant occupancy or unit or demised space zoned for nonresidential use or last utilized for nonresidential purposes are as shown in the city's fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
DIVISION 3. - BUILDINGS ZONED FOR RESIDENTIAL USE OR LAST USED FOR RESIDENTIAL PURPOSES 
 
Sec. 4-521. - Registration required for vacant buildings zoned for residential use or last utilized for residential purposes; defenses. 
(a)  Offense. A person commits an offense if the person owns a vacant building zoned for residential use or last utilized for residential purposes without a valid certificate of registration. An individual dwelling unit within a multifamily structure is not a building for purposes of this division; however, a multifamily structure with more than fifty (50) percent of the units vacant shall be deemed vacant for purposes of this article. If more than one (1) vacant building is located at the same street address, only one (1) certificate of registration is required for all of the vacant buildings. Also, only one (1) certificate of registration is required for a single vacant building that has more than one (1) street address. Apartment numbers or unit numbers will not be considered in determining the street address of a vacant building. 
(b)  Presumed vacancy. A building designated for residential use or last utilized for residential purposes is presumed vacant ninety (90) days after the earlier of the following: 
(1)  The date a valid certificate of occupancy expires; 
(2)  The date one (1) or more necessary utilities are disconnected; 
(3)  The date of a water bill for that address which shows no water usage; or 
(4)  The date the building appears unoccupied based on a physical inspection by the city. 
(c)  Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1)  The building was occupied within ninety (90) days preceding the date of the alleged offense; 
(2)  At the time of the alleged offense, the building was in the process of being renovated, rehabilitated, repaired, or demolished (pursuant to appropriate and valid permits issued by the building official, if required) and had been occupied at any time within ninety (90) days preceding the date of the alleged offense; 
(3)  Within sixty (60) days preceding the date of the alleged offense, the building suffered damage or destruction from a fire, flood, storm, or other casualty that rendered the building incapable of being occupied, except that this defense does not apply if the building was rendered incapable of being occupied by the intentional act of the owner, operator, lessee, or other invitee or an agent of the owner, operator, lessee, or other invitee; 
(4)  The building official has granted a written extension to the time frame for the presumption of vacancy set out in subsection (b) immediately above; or 
(5)  The building is owned by the City of Everman, the State of Texas, or the United States government. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 4-522. - Registration application for vacant buildings zoned for residential use or last utilized for residential purposes. 
(a)  Application. To obtain a certificate of registration for a vacant building zoned for residential use or last utilized for residential purposes, a property owner must submit an application on a form provided for that purpose to the building official. The application must contain all of the following information: 
(1)  The name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address (if applicable), and telephone number of the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(2)  The name, all street addresses, and the main telephone number, if any, of the vacant building, and a description of the type of property (e.g., an apartment complex, a group home, a condominium, or a single-family residence), the date on which the vacant building was last occupied, and a description of any hazardous materials, uses or conditions that currently exist or previously existed in the vacant building. 
(3)  The names, street addresses, mailing addresses, e-mail addresses (if applicable), and telephone numbers of all owners of the vacant building and any lien holders and other persons with a financial interest in the vacant building. 
(4)  The name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address (if applicable), and telephone number of a person or persons to contact in an emergency as required by section 4-518 of this article. 
(5)  Proof of insurance as required by this article. 
(6)  The number of buildings (including vacant and occupied buildings), dwelling units, swimming pools, and spas located in or on the premises of the vacant building. 
(7)  The total area in square feet of the vacant building, the number of stories contained in the vacant building, the area in square feet of each story, and whether each story is above or below ground level. 
(8)  Such additional information as the applicant desires to include or that the building official deems necessary to aid in the determination of whether the requested certificate of registration should be granted. 
(9)  Consent for the building official to enter at reasonable times, provided that such entry shall either be in the presence of the owner or the owner's representative, or, should the owner or owner's representative fail to appear when requested, based upon an administrative search warrant issued by the municipal court based on a showing of reasonable suspicion that a violation of this ordinance has occurred. 
(b)  Multiple dwelling units. If the application for a certificate of registration is being made for multiple vacant dwelling units located at the same address, then the information required in subsection (a) must be provided for each vacant dwelling unit located at that address. 
(c)  Supplemental information. A registrant shall notify the building official within ten (10) days after any material change in the information contained in the application for a certificate of registration for a vacant building, including any changes in ownership of the property. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 4-523. - Registration and inspection fee. 
The fees for a certificate of registration and required inspection for each vacant unit zoned for residential use or last utilized for residential purposes are as shown in the city's fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
DIVISION 4. - PROPERTY INSPECTION 
 
Sec. 4-524. - Inspection of residential structures and dwelling units when vacated. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy required. Whether a residential structure or dwelling unit is owner-occupied or rented, the owner, or tenant if tenant provides written permission or a lease signed by the owner, of an existing building or dwelling unit must obtain a certificate of occupancy: 
(1)  Before the residential structure or dwelling unit may again be occupied after becoming vacant; and 
(2)  When ownership of the residential structure or dwelling unit changes. 
(b)  Requirements for a certificate of occupancy. Before the city will issue a certificate of occupancy to an existing residential structure or dwelling unit which becomes vacant or a building that has changed ownership, the building must: 
(1)  Be inspected by the building official; and 
(2)  Be found in compliance with the minimum building standards as set forth in article IV of this chapter. 
(c)  Inspection. 
(1)  Presence of owner for inspection of vacant buildings. Whether the building is occupied or unoccupied, the occupant, the owner, or the owner's representative must be present during the inspection, except as provided in subsection (c)(2) below. 
(2)  Search warrant where necessary. The city is authorized to obtain an administrative search warrant to conduct an inspection permitted by this section when consent to enter the property has been refused or otherwise cannot be obtained. 
(3)  Multiple-family buildings. Any dwelling unit in multiple-family (multifamily) structure, which includes, but not limited to, individual dwelling units that are not supplied with individual utility meters or connections, are not exempt from a certificate of occupancy inspection. 
(4)  Mobile home or manufactured housing subdivision. All mobile home units and/or manufactured housing units that exist as conforming or nonconforming occupancy are not exempt from certificate of occupancy inspections regardless of the present zoning district that they are currently located in. All mobile home units and/or manufactured housing units that do not have individual utility meters or connections shall meet the provisions established in this section, and be subject to inspection. 
(d)  Enforcement. 
(1)  If the initial inspection by the city official reveals the residential structure or dwelling unit is substandard under Article IV of this Chapter the owner shall: 
a.  Bring the residential building or dwelling unit into compliance within thirty (30) days of the date of the inspection, if in the judgment of the building official repairs are capable of being made within thirty (30) days; or 
b.  Apply for a building permit and complete the repairs before the building permit expires, if in the judgment of the building official repairs are not capable of being made within thirty (30) days of the date of the inspection if warranted. 
(2)  If repairs are not made within the thirty (30) days or before the building permit expires, as applicable, the building official shall pursue enforcement under article IV of this chapter. 
(3)  The owner must obtain all permits required for the work needed to eradicate the conditions causing the building to be declared substandard under article IV of this chapter. 
(4)  A building that is under a substandard building order pursuant to article IV of this chapter shall be repaired or demolished pursuant to that order rather than under this section. 
(5)  The building official may proceed with enforcement to include, but not limited to, the issuance of citations as he or she deems appropriate. 
(e)  Fees. 
(1)  When a building is inspected under the provisions of this section, the owner of the property shall pay an inspection fee to the city. The owner must pay an additional inspection fee for each time the building official is not met by the owner or the owner's representative at the building at the agreed appointed time or is prevented from inspecting the building through no fault of the city official. 
(2)  The fees will be charged in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Sec. 4-525. - Annual inspection of certain buildings. 
(a)  Required. In addition to the inspections required before a building that has been vacant may again be occupied, the building official shall conduct an annual inspection of each commercial building, mobile home, manufactured home, travel trailer, and each dwelling unit in a residential building intended for occupancy by more than two (2) families, including multifamily dwelling units whether or not each unit is supplied with individual utility meters or connections, to assure substandard conditions described in section 4-79 of article IV of this chapter do not exist. If the initial annual inspection by the city official reveals the substandard conditions described in section 4-79 of article IV of this chapter, the owner shall bring the building into compliance within thirty (30) days of the date of the inspection. 
(b)  Search warrant where necessary. The city is authorized to obtain an administrative warrant to conduct an inspection permitted by this section when consent to enter the property has been refused or otherwise cannot be obtained. 
(c)  Utilities. If the annual inspection of a building reveals that any utility service to the building is turned on, the city official shall notify the owner to discontinue all utility service to the building. 
(d)  Duplicative inspections. If, within a calendar year, the city official has inspected a building pursuant to section 4-531 of article XIX that would otherwise be subject to inspection under this section, and the building was not found to be substandard as described in section 4-79 of article IV of this chapter, no additional inspection under this section is required in that calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Secs. 4-526—4-529. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XX. - RENTAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION 
 
Sec. 4-530. - Definitions. 
Building means a structure for the support or shelter of any use or occupancy. 
Building official means the person designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article and includes any representatives, agents, or department employees designated by the official to enforce the terms of this article. 
Certificate of rental registration means a certificate of rental registration issued by the building official under this article to the owner of a rental unit. 
Dwelling unit means one (1) or more rooms designed to be a single housekeeping unit to accommodate one (1) family and containing one (1) or more kitchens, one (1) or more bathrooms, and one (1) or more bedrooms. 
Owner means a person in whom is vested the ownership or title of real property: 
(1)  Including, but not limited to: 
a.  The holder of fee simple title; 
b.  The holder of a life estate; 
c.  The holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five (5) years or more; 
d.  The buyer in a contract for deed; 
e.  A mortgagee, receiver, executor, or trustee in control of real property; and 
f.  The named grantee in the last recorded deed; and 
(2)  Not including the holder of a leasehold estate or tenancy for an initial term of less than five (5) years. 
Person means any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
Premises or property means a lot, plot, or parcel of land, including any structures on the land. 
Property manager means a person whom for compensation has control of the day-to-day operations of the rental unit or units or the person in a partnership or corporation, or any other legal entity who has managing control of the rental unit(s). 
Registrant means a person issued a certificate of rental registration under this article. 
Rent means the offering, holding out, or actual leasing of a rental unit to an occupant other than the owner and generally involves the payment of a rental amount although other forms of consideration may be involved, or no consideration at all may be involved. 
Rental unit means a single-family dwelling unit, duplex, triplex, quadriplex, mobile home, town house dwelling unit, or a portion thereof that is rented or offered for rent as a residence. 
Residential structure means a structure that is located in an area zoned residential or last utilized for residential purposes. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
Tenant means any person who rents or leases a rental unit for living or dwelling with the consent of the owner or property manager. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 2, 12-27-17)  
Sec. 4-531. - Authority of building official. 
The building official shall implement and enforce this article and may by written order establish such rules, regulations, or procedures, not inconsistent with this article, as the building official determines are necessary to accomplish the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 2, 12-27-17)  
Sec. 4-532. - Delivery of notices. 
Any written notice that the building official is required to give an applicant or registrant under this article is deemed to be delivered: 
(1)  On the date the notice is hand delivered to the applicant or registrant; or 
(2)  Three (3) business days after the date the notice is placed in the United States mail with proper postage and properly addressed to the applicant or registrant at the address provided for the applicant or registrant in the most recent registration application. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 2, 12-27-17)  
Sec. 4-533. - Violations, penalty, affirmative defenses. 
(a)  Offense. A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to perform an act required of the person by this article, commits an offense. A person commits a separate offense each day or portion of a day during which a violation is committed, permitted, or continued. 
(b)  Fine. An offense under this article is a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(c)  Remedies cumulative. The penalties provided for in this article are in addition to any other enforcement remedies that the city may have under city ordinances and state law. 
(d)  Affirmative defenses. 
(1)  Temporary tenancies. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article that the rental unit was rented or leased for a period of less than sixty (60) days to a person who was the immediate past owner of the dwelling or who shall be the immediate next owner of the dwelling. 
(2)  Rental to family member. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article that the rental unit was rented or leased to a person who is related to the property owner within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 2, 12-27-17)  
Sec. 4-534. - Registration required for residential rental property. 
(a)  Rental registration. Each owner of a rental unit within the city shall register such rental unit with the building official on a form provided for that purpose prior to the first tenant occupying the rental unit, and annually thereafter. If a rental unit already exists at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, initial registration of the unit shall be in accordance with subsection (b) below. 
(b)  Initial registration of existing rental units. Each owner of a rental unit existing within the city at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall apply for registration of such rental unit with the building official on a form provided for that purpose no later than January 31, 2018. At the time of application the owner must also request a certificate of occupancy and make the rental unit available for inspection by the building official at a time designated by the city. Due to the large number of inspections and certificates of occupancy to be completed during the initial registration, initial inspections, issuance of certificates of occupancy and initial certificates of registration may be processed and scheduled at intervals over a period of time as deemed necessary by the building official. 
(c)  Renewal. Each owner of rental property shall renew such registration annually on the anniversary date of the issuance of the prior certificate of rental registration, or otherwise upon its expiration as described in section 4-541. 
(d)  Offense. It is an offense for an owner to fail to register or fail to renew the registration of a rental unit within the city, and each day that the owner continues to fail to register or renew the registration of the owner's rental unit(s) within the city shall constitute a separate offense. It is an offense for a person to rent a unit that does not have a valid certificate of rental registration. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 2, 12-27-17)  
Sec. 4-535. - Application for certificate of rental registration. 
(a)  Application. To obtain or renew a certificate of rental registration for a rental unit, an owner must submit an application to the building official on a form provided for that purpose. The owner must also submit a request for a certificate of occupancy and inspection (if required) at the time of submitting an application for certificate of rental registration and make the rental unit available for inspection at a time to be designated by the building official. 
The application must contain all of the following information: 
(1)  The name, physical and mailing address, cellular, work, and home telephone numbers, and a driver's license or identification card number, including the state of issuance, for each person with an ownership interest in the rental unit. 
(2)  If the owner does not live within fifty (50) miles of the city, then in addition to the information in subsection (a)(1) above, the same information shall be provided for a local contact person that has the authority to represent the owner in all matters relating to maintenance of the rental unit. 
(3)  If the owner is a business entity, then the person registering must state the type of entity, state of origin, the mailing address, business location, telephone number, and name of individual in charge of the property for the entity. 
(4)  Name, address, and telephone number of the property manager if applicable; 
(5)  Street address of the rental unit; 
(6)  Total square feet of living area and number of bedrooms; 
(7)  Name, driver's license or identification number, and state of issuance for each tenant or occupant that is eighteen (18) years of age or older; 
(8)  Number of persons occupying the rental unit; 
(9)  Whether there has been a change of occupancy or an additional tenant of the rental unit since the date of the last registration; 
(10)  Proof that all property taxes on the rental property are current, unless under a valid protest filed with the Tarrant County Tax Appraisal Office, and that there are no sanitation or mowing liens attached to the rental property; and 
(11)  Signature of the owner or owner's authorized agent. 
(b)  Multiple dwelling units. If the application for a certificate of rental registration is being made for multiple rental units located at the same address, then the above application information must be provided for each rental unit at that address. 
(c)  Duty to supplement information. An owner must notify the building official within ten (10) days of any material change in the information contained in the application for a certificate of rental registration, including any changes in ownership, tenancy, or occupancy of the rental unit. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 2, 12-27-17)  
Sec. 4-536. - Fees. 
(a)  Rental registration. The fee for a certificate of rental registration shall be twenty dollars ($20.00), or an amount that may be hereafter be set forth in the city fee schedule, or as such schedule may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Inspection. The fee for any inspection or re-inspection required in this article shall be the amount set forth in the city fee schedule as it exists upon adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or as such schedule may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 2, 12-27-17)  
Sec. 4-537. - Certificate of occupancy and inspection of rental units. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy Required. A current certificate of occupancy is required for registration or renewal of registration of a rental unit in accordance with this section. The owner of any property intended to be used as a rental unit within the city must request a certificate of occupancy at the time of submitting the first application for a certificate of rental registration and make the rental unit available for inspection by the building official. Thereafter a new certificate of occupancy (and required inspection) must be obtained on the earlier of: 
(1)  Three (3) years from the date of the last issuance of a certificate of occupancy; 
(2)  Within ten (10) business days of converting a property to a rental unit; 
(3)  Within ten (10) business days of acquiring ownership of a new rental unit; or 
(4)  Within ten (10) business days of a change in tenant of a rental unit. 
(b)  Requirements for a certificate of occupancy. Before the city will issue a certificate of occupancy to a rental unit as required above, the owner of the property must present evidence that all property taxes on the property are current and that there are no sanitation or mowing liens attached to the rental property. In addition, before issuance or re-issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the rental unit must: 
(1)  Be inspected by the building official within the thirty (30) days immediately prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy; and 
(2)  Such inspection must find that the property is in compliance with the minimum building standards set forth in article IV of this chapter. 
(c)  Inspection. Inspections of rental property shall be required before first issuance or any re-issuance of a certificate of occupancy as required in section 4-537(a), above. Whenever inspections of rental property are required in this article, they shall be performed by the building official or his designee and shall determine if the rental unit complies with the minimum building standards set forth in article IV of this chapter. 
(d)  Waiver. The building official may waive any inspection required in this article with the concurrence of the city manager if an inspection of the property was performed under this article or another provision of the City Code within the ninety (90) days preceding the required inspection date. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 2, 12-27-17)  
Sec. 4-538. - Issuance and denial of certificate of rental registration. 
(a)  Issuance. Upon payment of all required fees, the building official shall issue a certificate of rental registration for a rental unit to the applicant if the building official determines that: 
(1)  The applicant has complied with all requirements for issuance of the certificate of rental registration; 
(2)  The applicant has not made a false statement as to a material matter in an application for a certificate of rental registration; and 
(3)  The applicant has no outstanding fees assessed under this article. 
(b)  Denial. If the building official determines that the requirements of subsection (a) have not been met, the building official shall deny a certificate of rental registration to the applicant. 
(c)  Notice of denial. If the building official determines that an applicant should be denied a certificate of rental registration, the building official shall deliver written notice to the applicant that the application is denied and include in the notice the reason for denial and a statement informing the applicant of the right of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 2, 12-27-17)  
Sec. 4-539. - Revocation of registration. 
(a)  Grounds for revocation. The building official shall revoke a certificate of rental registration for a rental unit if the building official determines that: 
(1)  The registrant or the rental unit failed to comply, or no longer complies, with any provision of this article, any other city ordinance, or any state or federal law applicable to the rental unit; 
(2)  The registrant intentionally made a false statement as to a material matter in the application or in a hearing concerning the certificate of rental registration; or 
(3)  The registrant failed to pay a fee required by this article at the time it was due. 
(b)  Notice of consideration for revocation. Before revoking a certificate of rental registration under subsection (a), the building official shall deliver written notice to the registrant that the certificate of rental registration is being considered for revocation. The notice must include the reason for the proposed revocation, action the registrant must take to prevent the revocation, and a statement that the registrant has ten (10) days after the date of delivery to comply with the notice. 
(c)  Notice of revocation. If the registrant does not comply with the notice required in subsection (b) after ten (10) days from the date the notice was delivered, the building official shall revoke the certificate of rental registration and deliver written notice of the revocation to the registrant. The notice of revocation must include the reason for the revocation, the date the building official ordered the revocation, and a statement informing the registrant of the right of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 2, 12-27-17)  
Sec. 4-540. - Appeal. 
(a)  Procedure. If the building official denies the issuance or renewal of a certificate of rental registration or revokes a certificate of rental registration, the action is final unless the registrant files a written appeal to the rental property registration appeal board within seven (7) calendar days of delivery of the notice of revocation. 
(b)  Rental property registration appeal board. The city zoning board of adjustments and appeals shall serve as the rental property registration appeal board unless the city council creates and appoints a separate rental property registration appeal board. 
(c)  Appeal hearing. If a written request for an appeal hearing is filed with the building official within the seven-day period, the rental property registration appeal board shall hear the appeal within thirty (30) days from the city's receipt of the appeal unless otherwise agreed by the city and the appellant. 
(d)  Waiver. Failure to file an appeal in accordance with this section is a waiver of appeal and the building official's decision shall be final. 
(e)  Stay. The revocation of a certificate of rental registration is stayed pending appeal. 
(f)  Relief. At the appeal hearing, the rental property registration appeal board is limited to affirming or reversing the denial or revocation based upon proof by the appellant that there was an error as of the date of the revocation or denial. Subsequent repair, renovation, correction, or payment of a fee shall not form the basis of the board's decision. The decision of the board is final as to administrative remedies and no rehearing or appeal may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 2, 12-27-17)  
Sec. 4-541. - Expiration and renewal of registration. 
(a)  Expiration. A certificate of rental registration for a rental unit expires the earlier of: 
(1)  One (1) year after the date of issuance; 
(2)  The date of a change of controlling ownership of the rental unit as determined by the building official; or 
(3)  The date the unit ceases to be used as a rental unit. 
(b)  Renewal. A certificate of rental registration may be renewed by making application in accordance with this article, meeting all requirements, and paying the registration fee required by this article. The building official will endeavor to notify a registrant in writing at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of an existing certificate of rental registration of the impending expiration, and the process for renewal. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any failure of the building official to notify the registrant in advance shall not excuse noncompliance with the provisions of this article. A registrant shall apply for renewal at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of an existing certificate of rental registration. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 2, 12-27-17)  
Sec. 4-542. - Transfer of certificate of rental registration. 
A certificate of rental registration for a rental property is not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 2, 12-27-17)  
Sec. 4-543. - Inspection. 
(a)  Authorized. For the purpose of ascertaining whether violations of this article or any other city ordinance or state or federal law applicable to the rental unit exist, and for purposes of issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the building official is authorized at a reasonable time to inspect: 
(1)  The exterior of a rental property; and 
(2)  The interior of a rental property subject to the conditions provided by this article. 
(b)  Frequency. The building official shall inspect a rental property as provided in this article. 
(c)  Registrant cooperation. At reasonable times and upon prior notice, an applicant or registrant shall permit representatives of the city's police department, fire department, code enforcement department, and building official to inspect the interior and exterior of a rental property for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law. The applicant or registrant must attend the inspection in person or by representative. 
(d)  Warrant. If the owner refuses to allow inspection, the building official is authorized to obtain an administrative search warrant. 
(e)  Compliance inspection. Whenever a rental property is inspected by the building official and a violation of this article, any other city ordinance, or any state or federal law applicable to the building is found, the building official will re-inspect the building or premises for compliance after the expiration of any time limit for compliance given in a notice or order issued because of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 2, 12-27-17)  
Chapter 5 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal election, § 4.01 et seq. 
Cross reference— Administration generally, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Officers and elections, V.A.C.S. art. 977; elections generally, V.T.C.A. Election Code, § 1.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-1. - City to be one precinct. 
The city shall be and is hereby declared to be one (1) voting precinct for the purpose of holding municipal elections. 
(Code 1977, § 1-151)  
Chapter 6 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Nonamendatory Ord. No. 390, §§ 1—10, adopted July 12, 1988, has been treated as superseding former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-11, also relating to emergency management, which originated from the 1977 Code, §§ 6-1—6-6 and 6-9—6-13. Provisions of said ordinance have been designated by the editor as §§ 6-1—6-10 to conform with Code format; § 11, repealer, has not been codified herein. 
Charter reference— Mayor and mayor pro tem, § 3.03; vacancy in office of mayor filled by mayor pro tem, § 4.07A. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; ambulance service, Ch. 2.5; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 8; offenses, Ch. 13; planning and zoning, Ch. 15; police, Ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 17; utilities, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Emergency management, Government Code § 418.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Director—Organization. 
There exists the office of emergency management director of the city which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(1)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(2)  The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He/she may delegate the authority for the execution of the duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(3)  The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 1, 7-12-88)  
Sec. 6-2. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  Conducting an on-going survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)  Supervising the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(3)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary. 
(4)  Issuing necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary. 
(5)  Directing and controlling the operation of the city emergency management organization, as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(6)  Determining all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(7)  Maintaining a liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations. 
(8)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(9)  Supervising the drafting and execution of mutual-aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for a countywide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(10)  Supervising and giving final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including the acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(11)  Authorizing agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(12)  Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein. 
(13)  Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act 1975 (V.T.C.S. Article 6889-7). 
(Ord. No. 389, § 2, 7-12-88)  
Sec. 6-3. - Emergency management plan. 
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency management of the State of Texas. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 3, 7-12-88)  
Sec. 6-4. - Interjurisdictional program. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the County of Tarrant and the mayors of the other cities in said county in the formation of an emergency management council for the County of Tarrant and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the city. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 4, 7-12-88)  
Sec. 6-5. - Override. 
At all times, when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 5, 7-12-88)  
Sec. 6-6. - Liability. 
This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of said city; nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, trustee; nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith, carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions if this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result said activity. Any person, owning or controlling real estate or other premises, who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under license, privilege or other permission, or for the loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 6, 7-12-88)  
Sec. 6-7. - Commitment of funds. 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city council; nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life or property. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 7, 7-12-88)  
Sec. 6-8. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to stimulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter. 
(d)  Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 390, § 8, 7-12-88) 
Cross reference— Continued sounding of horn or signal device declared a nuisance, § 10-92(A).  
Sec. 6-9. - Severability. 
If any portion of this chapter shall, for any reason, be declared invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 9, 7-12-88)  
Sec. 6-10. - Limitations. 
This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 10, 7-12-88)  
Chapter 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ambulance service, Ch. 2.5; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; emergency management, Ch. 6; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 8; health, safety and nuisances, Ch. 10. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Arson reward. 
The city will pay a reward in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person on a charge of arson in connection with the burning or attempted burning of property situated within the city. The city's liability for such reward shall not exceed the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense, regardless of the number of persons convicted therefor, and regardless of the number of persons furnishing information leading to the arrest and conviction of such person. 
(Code 1977, § 7-51)  
Sec. 7-2. - Reward placards to be posted in public buildings. 
Placards at least eight (8) inches by twelve (12) inches in size, suitably framed under glass, shall be conspicuously posted at all times inside of public buildings, showing that the reward set forth in section 7-1 is offered, and the amount and conditions thereof. It shall be the duty of the fire marshal to enforce compliance with this section. 
(Code 1977, § 7-52)  
Sec. 7-3. - Smoke detectors. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
Approved locations means locations approved by the fire chief as a result of investigation or tests conducted by him or by reason of accepted principles or tests by national authorities or by technical or scientific organizations. 
Approved smoke detector means a smoke detector that has been approved by the fire chief as a result of investigation or tests conducted by him or by reason of accepted principles or tests by national authorities or by technical or scientific organizations. 
(b)  Installation required. Approved smoke detectors shall be installed in all approved locations in all buildings and structures in the following categories: 
(1)  All businesses, industries and commercial establishments; 
(2)  All existing one- and two-family dwellings, hereafter sold, and all one- and two-family dwellings which are altered, repaired, renovated or improved in any manner requiring a building permit shall be provided with approved smoke detectors; 
(3)  Rented or leased residential occupancies: 
a.  All one-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings that are rented, leased or subleased shall be provided with approved smoke detectors. The smoke detectors shall be installed by the landlord prior to renting, leasing or subleasing the dwelling. For purposes of this section, "landlord" shall mean the owner, lessor or sublessor of a dwelling unit, or the manager or agent of the landlord. 
b.  Duty to inspect and repair: 
1.  Upon commencement of a tenant's possession of a dwelling unit containing a smoke detector, the landlord shall have a duty to test the smoke detector to verify that it is in good working order. Upon installation of a smoke detector by a landlord after commencement of the tenant's possession of a dwelling unit, the landlord shall have a duty to test the smoke detector at that time to verify that it is in good working order. 
2.  During the term of the rental agreement, or any renewal or extension thereof, the landlord shall have a duty to inspect and repair a smoke detector only if the tenant has given notice to the landlord of malfunction or has made a request to the landlord for inspection or repair. The notice to the landlord need not be in writing, unless written notice is required in the written rental agreement. The landlord shall comply with the tenant's request for inspection and repair within a reasonable time, considering the availability of materials, labor and utilities. 
3.  A landlord shall not have a duty to inspect or repair a smoke detector if the damage or malfunction is caused by the tenant or the tenant's family, guests or invitees during the term of the rental agreement or any renewal or extension of the rental agreement. Provided, however, a landlord shall have a duty to repair or replace a smoke detector covered by this subsection if the tenant pays in advance for the reasonable cost of the repair or replacement, including labor, materials, taxes and overhead. 
4.  A landlord shall have satisfied his duty to inspect or repair a damaged or malfunctioning smoke detector if, after a test of the smoke detector, the test indicates that the smoke detector is in good working order. 
5.  After commencement of possession by the tenant of a dwelling unit, the landlord shall have no duty to provide replacement batteries for a battery-operated smoke detector which was in good working order according to a test of the smoke detector at the time of commencement of possession by the tenant. 
c.  A person commits an offense if, as landlord of a dwelling unit, he: 
1.  Fails to install a smoke detector in compliance with this chapter; or 
2.  Fails to test or repair a smoke detector in compliance with this section. 
(c)  Conditions. The requirements for smoke detectors in this section are in addition to and not in place of any requirements under the Uniform Fire Code or the revised civil statutes. 
(d)  Maintenance. All fire-alarm systems shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and shall be replaced or repaired when defective. Such systems shall be extended, altered or augmented as necessary to maintain and continue protection whenever any building so equipped is altered, remodeled or added to. 
(Ord. No. 328, §§ 2—4, 12-11-84)  
Sec. 7-4. - Key lock box. 
(a)  The following structures shall be equipped with a key lock box at or near the main entrance or such other location as required by the city fire marshal: 
(1)  Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic alarm system or automatic suppression system, or such structures that are secured in a manner that restricts access; 
(2)  Multifamily residential structures with common areas that have restricted access through locked doors, gates or entrances; 
(3)  Nursing homes, medical facilities, and similar care providers; and 
(4)  Governmental buildings and structures. 
(b)  All newly constructed structures subject to this section shall have a key lock box installed and operational prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. 
(c)  All structures in existence on the effective date of this section and subject to this section shall have one (1) year from the effective date of this section to have a key lock box installed and operational. 
(d)  All structures in existence on the effective date of this section, but not subject to this section, which are later altered or rebuilt in a manner that causes the structure to be subject to this section, shall have a key lock box installed and operational prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. 
(e)  The city fire marshal shall designate the type of key lock box system to be implemented within the city and shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations for the use of the lock box system. 
(f)  The owner or operator of a structure required to have a key lock box shall, at all times, keep a key or other necessary access equipment in the lock box that will allow for access to the structure. 
(Ord. No. 614, § 1, 8-12-08)  
Secs. 7-5—7-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 657, adopted May 8, 2012, repealed and reserved §§ 7-28—7-33, which had pertained to various amendments and provisions related to the Uniform Fire Code, and derived from §§ 7-4—7-9 of the 1977 Code; Ord. No. 315, adopted May 8, 1984; Ord. No. 475, adopted Oct. 13, 1998; Ord. No. 518, adopted Jan. 8, 2002; Ord. No. 579, adopted Feb. 14, 2006; and Ord. No. 607, adopted March 11, 2008. Similar provisions have been adopted by reference as set out in §§ 7-26 and 7-27. 
Cross reference— Administrative code, § 4-26 et seq.; building code, § 4-51 et seq.; dangerous buildings code, § 4-76 et seq.; electrical code, § 4-103; residential code, § 4-246 et seq.; mechanical code, § 4-271 et seq.; plumbing code, § 4-321 et seq.; sign code, § 4-371 et seq.; solar energy code, § 4-391 et seq.; swimming pool code, § 4-411 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-26. - Fire code adopted. 
(a)  The 2018 edition of the International Fire Code is hereby adopted as the official fire code of the City of Everman Texas. The 2018 International Fire Code is fully incorporated by reference as though copied into this article in its entirety. The material contained in the 2018 International Fire Code shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinance but shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. 
(b)  The 2018 edition of the International Fire Code, as adopted herein, is hereby amended in accordance with the recommendations of the North Central Texas Council of Governments and as detailed on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated by reference. When there is an option A or option B in the North Central Texas Council of Governments recommendations, option B will be applicable to the City of Everman. The city council is adopting option B as recommended by the Everman Fire Chief. The material contained in Exhibit "A" to this ordinance, although adopted and fully incorporated by reference, shall not be included in the formal codification of the ordinances. The material shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and made available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. It may be further amended from time to time by individual ordinances with such amendments to be maintained as public records in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1; Ord. No. 475, § 7, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 518, § 7, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 579, § 1, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 607, § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 657, § 1, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 701, § 2, 1-10-17; Ord. No. 751, § 1, 9-10-19) 
Cross reference— Administrative search warrants, § 2-1.  
Sec. 7-27. - Fire code amendments. 
The 2015 edition of the International Fire Code, as adopted herein, is hereby amended in accordance with the recommendations of the North Central Texas Council of Governments and as further amended and otherwise shown in Exhibit A attached to Ordinance No. 701. The material contained in Exhibit A to Ordinance No. 701, although fully adopted and incorporated by reference, shall not be included in the formal municipal codification of ordinances. The material shall instead be maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary and made available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. It may be further amended from time to time by individual ordinances with such amendments to be included therein and maintained as a public record in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3; Ord. No. 657, § 2, 5-8-12; Ord. No. 701, § 2, 1-10-17)  
Secs. 7-28—7-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration generally, Ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7-56. - Created. 
There is hereby created a fire department of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 1-101)  
Sec. 7-57. - Responsible to city manager. 
The fire department of the city shall be directly responsible to the city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 1-102)  
Sec. 7-58. - Right to use facilities. 
The fire department of the city shall have the right to use all facilities and all properties of all kinds formerly used and operated by the city volunteer fire department known as company 1; and all obligations of such former department shall be assumed and undertaken by the department created in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 1-103)  
Sec. 7-59. - Powers and duties. 
The city fire department shall have all power and authority to provide equipment and all necessary or proper apparatus, machinery or instruments for the prevention of fires and for the fighting of fires; and the fire department shall have all the duties and responsibilities enumerated in the ordinances of the city and in the statutes of the state. The fire department and those performing functions and services in its behalf shall be entitled to all rights and privileges provided by law in the discharging of their duties. 
(Code 1977, § 1-104)  
Secs. 7-60—7-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIRE MARSHAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Arson investigators under police department, § 16-46 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-81. - Fire marshal. 
The office of fire marshal is hereby created. Such office shall be independent of other city departments, the fire marshal reporting directly to the city manager. Such office shall be filled by appointment of the city manager, by and with the consent of the city council. The fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of the office and shall be removed only by the city manager, by and with the consent of the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 7-11)  
Sec. 7-82. - Refusal of person to be sworn, to testify, or to obey any lawful order of the fire marshal. 
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of such investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. 
(Code 1977, § 7-15)  
Sec. 7-83. - Investigations may be private. 
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Code 1977, § 7-16)  
Secs. 7-84—7-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 7-106, 7-107. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section XI of Ord. No. 389, adopted June 14, 1988, repealed Ord. No. 193, adopted May 21, 1974, whose provisions originally had been codified in the 1977 Code, §§ 1-121 and 1-122, and subsequently codified in this Code as Div. 3, §§ 7-106 and 7-107, pertaining to the creation of the ambulance rescue squad (operating as part of the city volunteer fire department) and its responsibility to the city manager, respectively,  
Secs. 7-108—7-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 480, adopted June 8, 1999, repealed Ord. Nos. 335 and 233 from which Art. IV derived. Section 1 of Ord. No. 480 adopted similar provisions to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 7-131. - Fireworks defined. 
The term "fireworks" shall mean and include any firecrackers, cannon crackers, sky rockets, torpedoes, roman candles, sparklers, squibs, fire balloons, star shells, gerbs or any other substance in whatever combination by any designated name intended for use in obtaining visible or audible pyrotechnic display, and such term shall include all articles or substances within the commonly accepted meaning of fireworks whether herein specifically designated and defined or not. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 6-8-99)  
Sec. 7-132. - Nuisance declared. 
The manufacture, use, possession, sale, discharge, explosion, ignition storage or warehousing of fireworks in any manner other than in strict accordance with this Code is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 6-8-99)  
Sec. 7-133. - Sale and use of fireworks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to manufacture, use, shoot, discharge, explode, ignite, sell, possess, handle, store or warehouse any fireworks within the corporate limits or within five thousand (5,000) feet of the corporate limits of the City of Everman, without prior approval written by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 6-8-99)  
Sec. 7-134. - Enforcement. 
In addition to any other penalty provided by this Code, any fireworks found in the possession of any person, firm, or corporation selling, using, shooting, discharging, possessing, storing, warehousing or igniting fireworks in violation of this Code shall be confiscated without compensation by the fire marshal or any peace officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 6-8-99)  
Sec. 7-135. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to articles used by railroads or transportation companies nor to high explosives used for blasting or similar purposes when used solely for the necessary conduct of construction, transportation, manufacturing or industry, nor to the conduct of the affairs of the army, navy, or militia. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 6-8-99)  
Chapter 8 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION AND CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 625, adopted May 12, 2009, not being specifically amendatory, has been treated by the editor as superseding Ch. 8 in its entirety. Former Ch. 8 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 456, adopted June 13, 1995. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; emergency management, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; health, safety and nuisances, Ch. 10; parks and recreation, Ch. 14; planning and zoning, Ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 17; utilities, Ch. 20. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of Texas has, in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City of Everman, Texas, does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 1, § A, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Everman are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 1, § B, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 1, § C, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 1, § D, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-5. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one (1) percent annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for Zone A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year; also called the "base flood". 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS). See Flood elevation study. 
Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of Flood or flooding ). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway. See Regulatory floodway. 
Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Special flood hazard area. See Area of special flood hazard. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 2, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Everman. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 3, § A, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-7. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Tarrant County, Texas and Incorporated Areas," dated March 21, 2019 with accompanying flood insurance rate maps dated March 21, 2019, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 3, § B, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 729, § 2, 3-12-19)  
Sec. 8-8. - Establishment of development permit. 
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 3, § C, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-9. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 3, § D, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 3, § E, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-11. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 3, § F, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-12. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 3, § G, 5-12-09)  
Secs. 8-13—8-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 8-21. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The city manager or designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 4, § A, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-22. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 8-7, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 4, § B, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-23. - Permit procedures. 
(1)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(a)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(b)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(c)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 8-32(2); 
(d)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(e)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection 8-22(1). 
(2)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(a)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(b)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(c)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(d)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(e)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(f)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(g)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(h)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(i)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 4, § C, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-24. - Variance procedures. 
(1)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(3)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(6)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection 8-23(2) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (½) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(7)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (section 8-3). 
(8)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(9)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(10)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(a)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(b)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
1.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(c)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(11)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that: 
(a)  The criteria outlined in subsection 8-24(1)—(9) are met; and 
(b)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 4, § D, 5-12-09)  
Secs. 8-25—8-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 8-31. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 5, § A, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-32. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 8-7, subsection 8-22(8), or subsection 8-33(3), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in subsection 8-23(1)(a), is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at two (2) feet above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of subsection 8-23(1), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 5, § B, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-33. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 8-2, 8-3, and 8-4 of this chapter. 
(2)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 8-8, section 8-23, and the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(3)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 8-7 or subsection 8-22(8) of this chapter. 
(4)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated by a detailed engineering study for all Zone A areas, within one hundred (100) feet of the contour lines of Zone A areas, and other streams not mapped by FEMA, as indicated on the community's FIRM. 
(5)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(6)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 5, § C, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-34. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-7, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 8-23 are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 5, § D, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-35. - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-7, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection 8-35(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article III. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulation, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 5, § E, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-36. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 5, § F, 5-12-09)  
Sec. 8-37. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this court order and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this court order by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this court order or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day a violation occurs is a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Everman from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 625, Art. 5, § G, 5-12-09)  
Chapter 9 - GARBAGE, TRASH AND REFUSE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administrative code, § 4-26 et seq.; dangerous buildings, § 4-76 et seq.; plumbing regulations, § 4-321 et seq.; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 8; health, safety and nuisances, Ch. 10; food establishments, § 11-131 et seq.; sewers and sewage disposal, § 20-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Garbage and refuse, V.A.C.S. art 4477-1, § 4; dumping junk near highway, art. 6674v-2. 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context indicates a different meaning: 
Brush shall mean large tree or shrub limbs, branches or trimmings and grass which cannot be placed in plastic bag containers and will have to be prepared in a manner for collection once monthly on the regularly scheduled brush collection day. 
Garbage shall mean animal and vegetable matter normally prepared in kitchens, drained of its liquid content, and the normal accumulation of structures and buildings such as tin cans, bottles, newspapers, magazines, paper wrappings, small grass clippings, small tree limbs or twigs, leaves, small shrubs, weeds that can be placed in plastic bag containers and excluding construction and remodeling material, dirt, rock or large appliances. 
Large load shall mean a maximum two-ton pickup. 
Large appliances shall mean all discarded furniture, toys, refrigerators, stoves, water heaters, etc., that are large, heavy and/or bulky. 
Private hauler shall mean a person who does business with commercial and industrial units who desire the use of a container system method of collection. 
Small load shall mean a maximum three-quarters of a ton pickup. 
Solid waste shall mean all wastes or refuse resulting from domestic, commercial or industrial operations incident of urban life, except liquid waste (sewage) and gas waste (smoke and industrial fumes), but including garbage, brush and trash. 
(Code 1977, §§ 8-2, 8-16)  
Sec. 9-2. - Department of sanitation established. 
There is hereby established a department of sanitation in the city. The department of sanitation shall be under the direct supervision of the city manager who shall be the sanitation director. The department is to provide facilities for the systematic collection and disposal of solid waste material, as defined in this chapter, from all households, commercial establishments and other premises. 
(Code 1977, § 8-1)  
Sec. 9-3. - Depositing refuse on streets or vacant lots prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw or deposit, or cause to be swept, thrown or deposited any refuse upon or along any drain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, street or vacant lot, or upon any publicly or privately owned premises within the corporate boundaries of the city. Every dwelling, unit, business place, manufacturing concern, wholesale distributor, retailer or apartment unit must have refuse service by the city or approved by the city sanitation director. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of anyone who hauls solid waste material on the streets of the city in open vehicles to cover the same with a tarp or net to prevent spilling and blowing of trash and waste material on publicly owned and privately owned property. 
(Code 1977, § 8-11)  
Sec. 9-4. - Placing refuse containers for collection. 
All single- and two-family residences, duplexes, and triplexes shall place garbage on the curbline no earlier than 6:00 p.m. the day prior to the proper day for collection, except that yard clippings may be placed so as to be available during the next regularly scheduled pickup date without "day prior" restrictions. All other days garbage will not be stored in front of the front building line of the particular property involved. The sanitation supervisor shall have the authority to designate the location of garbage at multifamily, commercial and industrial locations, taking into consideration, among other things, convenience to collection crews, convenience to the customer, hazardous conditions, such as electrical wiring, outside plumbing fixtures, telephone wires, gasoline pumps and other appurtenances. In the apartment units, the supervisor shall approve the location. 
(Code 1977, § 18-12; Ord. No. 425, § 1, 12-4-90)  
Sec. 9-5. - Use of commercial refuse containers restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit any bottles, broken glass, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or any other materials in a commercial refuse container owned by the city and located in the city, unless that person has the permission of the city to use the refuse container. 
(Code 1977, § 8-13)  
Sec. 9-6. - Authority of sanitation supervisor to make inspections and issue notices. 
The sanitation supervisor shall have authority to make inspections and to issue notices to comply with the provisions of this chapter to owners, occupants, tenants or lessees occupying any building, house or structure within the corporate limits of the city, or the premises from which such collections are to be made, when such owners, occupants, tenants or lessees have filed to maintain plastic bag containers in the manner prescribed by this chapter. If compliance with this chapter is not obtained by issuance of such notices, the sanitation supervisor is authorized to sign complaints against persons not in compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 8-14)  
Sec. 9-7. - Requirements and prohibitions concerning collection of various types of refuse. 
(a)  The following special requirements and prohibitions shall govern the collection of the types of refuse indicated: 
(1)  Garbage; single-family and including small businesses. Garbage from single-family and small businesses is to be placed in plastic bag containers as specified in this chapter and collected from the normal collection point as specified in this chapter. Maximum contents of any plastic bag container shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight. 
(2)  Garbage; commercial and industrial. Garbage from commercial and industrial establishments is to be placed in regulation, city-supplied containers as specified in this chapter and collected from the agreed collection point. 
(3)  Brush and cuttings. Brush and cuttings shall be reduced to no more than four-foot lengths and tied in bundles that can be readily handled by collectors and shall be placed at the point specified by the sanitation supervisor (generally at the curbline). 
(4)  Tree trimmings. Tree trimmings shall be no longer than eight (8) feet and shall be collected once monthly on the regularly scheduled brush collection day. 
(5)  Large appliances; discarded furniture; etc. Regardless of any provisions to the contrary in the Everman City Code, it shall be acceptable to place on the property, for collection, large appliances, discarded furniture, refrigerators, stoves, water heaters, to be collected by city sanitation crews. This shall not include batteries, mattresses, small or large containers of oil, gasoline or other petroleum products, automobile parts or accessories, wheels, bumpers, or other scrap metal. These city services shall be performed by the city sanitation crew on such days and at such regular hours as may be designated by the city manager. 
(6)  Earth and construction materials. Earth, rocks, concrete and similar materials will not be collected by the city sanitation crews. 
(7)  Cardboard boxes. Regardless of any provision to the contrary in the Everman City Code, it shall be acceptable to place brush, cuttings, tree trimmings and grass in cardboard box containers to be collected by city sanitation crews. Also, empty cardboard boxes may be collected if said boxes are dismantled as far as possible. 
(b)  Solid waste materials resulting from construction or remodeling by a building contractor and materials from an unimproved lot will not be collected. 
(Code 1977, § 8-15; Ord. No. 395, § 1, 3-14-89; Ord. No. 402, § 1, 9-12-89)  
Sec. 9-8. - Special charges for excessive service—Unclassified service. 
If the garbage or trash to be collected from any house, building or premises exceeds that which can be placed in plastic bag containers, the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee thereof shall be charged proportionately for the collection, removal and hauling of such excess at the rate of forty dollars ($40.00) per large load and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per small load. It shall be the responsibility of the sanitation supervisor to determine the size of the load. 
(Code 1977, § 8-16)  
Sec. 9-9. - Accumulation and storage of refuse. 
Accumulation and storage of garbage, filth, waste, refuse, clippings of brush, shrubs or trees or any other waste material beyond the scheduled garbage and waste pickup times, is hereby held to be a nuisance which threatens the public health, welfare and well-being of the citizens and a dangerous harboring place for germs, disease-carrying insects and rodents, viruses and other agencies normally associated with the communication of diseases. Any person who is keeping, maintaining, storing or retaining waste materials, garbage, solid waste or other refuse, beyond the normal scheduled waste and garbage pickup times, shall be deemed to be contributing to an unsanitary, unhealthy and dangerous condition within the city and shall be in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 8-17)  
Sec. 9-10. - Permit for private collection and disposal required. 
(a)  No person, except a duly authorized agent or employee of the city, shall empty refuse containers or transport garbage or trash on the streets, alleys and public thoroughfares of the city without a written permit granted and issued by the sanitation director. Only those contractors who employ the container-service method of storage and collection shall be eligible for a permit under the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person desiring a permit for the collection, removal, transportation or disposal of refuse shall make application for such permit to the sanitation director, who shall make or cause to be made such investigation as he may consider necessary in order to determine whether or not the public convenience and necessity warrant the granting of such permit. The sanitation director shall determine if the applicant is a fit and proper person to perform such service or conduct such business, and may require the applicant to provide in writing such information as the director shall request in order to determine such facts, as well as information as to his financial responsibility in the event of claims for damage against him by persons damaged by reason of the negligent operation of any vehicle used in such work. If the director is satisfied that the applicant meets the requirements of this chapter and is a competent and responsible person and has adequate equipment to perform such type of work, he shall issue a permit. 
(c)  Each person holding a permit shall pay an annual fee for same based on the following: For the collection and transportation of refuse from any point other than permittee's premises or place of business, the fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Permits shall be valid for one (1) year from date of issue, provided all provisions of this chapter applicable to private refuse haulers are followed. 
(d)  Permits granted for the collection, removal and disposal of refuse shall not be transferred or assigned. Such permits may be rescinded by the sanitation director at any time for any reason that such action is deemed to be in the best interest of the public. 
(e)  In all cases where permits have been issued for the collection, removal and disposal of refuse, evidence of such fact shall be established by the affixing of the permit in a prominent place on each vehicle for which a permit is granted, such permit to be issued annually by the sanitation director upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 8-19)  
Sec. 9-11. - Authority of the public health officer of the city to inspect. 
The public health officer of the city shall have authority to make inspection of publicly or privately owned premises to determine whether or not refuse is being properly collected, removed and disposed of as required by the provisions of this chapter or other applicable health ordinances. If it is found that this chapter or any other applicable health ordinances are being violated, appropriate and timely action shall be taken to ensure full compliance with same. 
(Code 1977, § 8-20)  
Sec. 9-12. - Garbage rates. 
(a)  There are hereby established garbage rates as follows: 
(1)  Residential rate ..... $10.60 
(2)  Senior citizen's rate residential ..... 9.23 
(Code 1977, § 8-23; Ord. No. 369, § 1, 9-9-86; Ord. No. 685, § 2(Att. A), 8-11-15)  
Sec. 9-13. - Minimum charge to be paid. 
All residential, commercial, school, nonprofit organizations, etc., will pay the minimum charge even if service is not used, except as provided in section 9-14. 
(Code 1977, § 8-24; Ord. No. 369, § 2, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 9-14. - Use of other service. 
Commercial, residential or other users may be required to contract with other disposal services if it is determined by the city manager that the city cannot handle the users' refuse. The users must furnish the name of the disposal service and schedule of pickups to the city. The disposal company shall pay a yearly permit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to the city. 
(Code 1977, § 8-25; Ord. No. 339, § 1, 8-13-85)  
Sec. 9-15. - Deposit required. 
A deposit of five dollars and seventy-five cents ($5.75) shall be made by each residential customer of the garbage service, except that the deposit of a senior citizen over sixty-five (65) years of age shall be four dollars and seventy-five cents ($4.75). A deposit of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be made for all commercial customers of the garbage service; this deposit is a part of the fifty-dollar deposit now in effect. 
(Code 1977, § 8-26; Ord. No. 369, § 4, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 9-16. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 8-27)  
Chapter 10 - HEALTH, SAFETY AND NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administrative search warrants, § 2-1; animals, Ch. 3; flood damage prevention control, Ch. 8. 
State Law reference— Sanitary code, V.A.C.S. art 4477; sanitation and health protection generally, art. 4477-1, et seq.; authority of home rule cities to enact more stringent requirements than state law, art. 4477-1, § 23; authority to abate nuisances and assess the expense on property, art. 4436. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 524, adopted Aug. 13, 2002, amended Arts. I—III in their entirety to read as herein set out. Former Arts. I—III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1977 Code §§ 10-1—10-5; Ord. No. 340, adopted Aug. 13, 1985; Ord. No. 408, adopted March 13, 1990; and Ord. No. 427, adopted June 24, 1991. 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Nuisance generally. 
(a)  Whatever is dangerous to human life or health, whatever renders the ground, the water, the air or food a hazard or injury to human life or health or that is offensive to the senses, or that is or threatens to become detrimental to the public health, is declared to be a nuisance, and the specific acts, conditions and things set forth in this chapter are, among others, each and all of them declared to be nuisances and prohibited and made unlawful. 
(b)  The enumeration of specific nuisances provided in this chapter shall not be deemed or interpreted to limit the scope of this definition to those items specifically enumerated, but shall be taken as specific examples only. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
Administrative fee shall refer to the city's minimum administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) that shall be assessed when the city abates or causes to be abated a nuisance. This fee shall not include the actual costs incurred in abating or causing to be abated a nuisance, but the administrative cost to the city of processing the abatement. Without amending this article, the city may impose an administrative fee of more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) if the city's cost of implementing this article is greater than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
Brush shall mean scrub vegetation or dense undergrowth. 
City manager means the city manager or the manager's designated representative. 
Costs shall mean the actual cost the city incurs in abating or causing to be abated a nuisance, including without limitation, the cost of mowing, weeding, removing objectionable rubbish, junk, unsightly, or unsanitary matter, etc. 
Cultivated shall mean vegetation that is deliberately grown and currently and continuously maintained by the owner, occupant, or agent of the property. 
Developed means a tract of land upon which a structure is situated. 
Expenses shall mean the total of the administrative fee and costs incurred by the city in abating or causing to be abated a nuisance. 
Garbage means and includes every accumulation of both animal and vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that is received from kitchens and also all decayable waste. 
Hearing officer means the city manager of the city or the city manager's designated representative. 
Junk means all worn out or discarded material, including but not limited to old iron or other metal, glass and cordage, plastic, machinery of any kind, tractors, refrigerators, stoves, any other household appliances, furniture, or old boats. 
Litter means discarded paper, wrapping material, glass or aluminum containers, or other decayable or nondecayable waste. 
Maintained shall mean watered, pruned, trimmed, treated, and controlled in such a manner as to enhance the use or enjoyment of one's property, without interfering with the enjoyment or use of neighboring property or public access. 
Nuisance shall mean anything which is injurious to the health or morals, or indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. 
Occupant means any person, firm or corporation, both public and private, claiming or having possessory control of any property. 
Owner means any person, firm or corporation, both public and private, claiming title of any property. 
Person shall include a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual. 
Refuse means an accumulation of worn out, used, broken, or rejected materials and includes garbage, litter, rubbish, yard waste and other decayable or nondecayable waste. It includes, but is not limited to, old barrels, old tires, tree and brush and grass trimmings and unused household items and appliances. 
Rubbish means all loose and decayed material and dirt-like substances that attends use or decay, or which accumulates from buildings, storing or cleaning, trash, debris, rubble, stone or fragments of building materials. 
Vegetation shall mean any grass, weeds, shrubs, brush, bushes, or vines. 
Weeds shall mean vegetation that because of its height is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary, but excluding cultivated crops, shrubs, bushes, trees, flowers, and vines. 
Yard waste means grass and brush trimmings, trees or tree limbs, hedge or shrub cuttings, leaves, weeds, vines or other decayable waste which is generated by maintaining a yard. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-3. - Nuisances defined—Prohibited generally. 
No owner or occupant of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the city shall permit or allow any stagnant or unwholesome water, filth, carrion, rubbish, refuse, yard waste, junk or garbage, litter or impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, or objectionable, unsightly matter of whatever nature to accumulate or remain on such real property or within any easement area on such real property or upon any adjacent right-of-way for streets and alleys between the property line of such real property and where the paved surface of the street or alley begins. Such conditions are hereby defined as nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-4. - Accumulation of waste and refuse. 
The accumulation upon the property of refuse, rubbish, or garbage that creates an unsanitary condition likely to attract or harbor mosquitoes, rodents, vermin or disease carrying pests constitutes a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-5. - Unclean pond or pool—Mosquito nuisance. 
Any lot or piece of ground within the corporate limits of the city on which there is a pond, pool or container of unwholesome, impure or offensive water, or is conductive to the breeding of mosquitoes constitutes a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-6. - Overgrown vegetation and weeds prohibited. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (d) it is an offense for any person owning, leasing, claiming, occupying, or having supervision or control of any real property within the city, to suffer, permit, or allow uncultivated grass, weeds, or brush, to grow to a height greater than ten (10) inches on average upon such premises, including along the sidewalk or street adjacent to the premises between the property line and the curb or, if there is no curb, between the property line and the driving surface. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any person owning, leasing, claiming, occupying, or having supervision or control of any real property within the city to cut or cause to be cut, grass, weeds and brush, as often as necessary to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (d), all grass, weeds, vegetation, or brush not regularly cultivated and which exceed ten (10) inches in height shall be presumed to be objectionable, unsightly, and unsanitary, and are hereby declared a public nuisance. 
(d)  For tracts of land in excess of five (5) acres, or that are used for the active production of livestock, it shall be required only that grass, weeds and vegetation, not regularly cultivated, be mowed to a height of no greater than ten (10) inches within a minimum of two hundred (200) feet of all adjacent property lines and public or private streets. This minimum may be revised on a case by case basis when deemed necessary by the fire department to insure adequate fire safety of adjacent property containing structures or equipment. 
(e)  Property maintained in violation of this section shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-7. - Order to abate nuisance, and enforcement options. 
Every person owning or possessing any place in or on which there exists a nuisance as described in this article shall, as soon as its existence comes to his knowledge, proceed at once to abate the nuisance. In the event that any person fails to comply with the provisions of this article, the public works director may at his discretion: 
(a)  Issue a warning notice; 
(b)  Issue one (1) or more court citations for violation of the article without prior notice; 
(c)  Commence abatement action and proceed with abatement of the nuisance; 
(d)  Request the city attorney to institute suit for civil remedies as provided by this Code and state law. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-8. - Notice of violation and order to abate prior to abatement by city. 
(a)  Notice required. If the owner of land fails to comply with the requirements of this article, a city official may cause the property owner to be notified and ordered to cut the grass, weeds, or brush, remove rubbish, garbage, refuse or brush or otherwise clean up the property as required within seven (7) days of the date of the notice. Prior notice shall not be required to issue a citation for violation of this article, or in accordance with section 10-11 of this article. 
(b)  Method of notice. The notice shall be given: 
(1)  Personally to the owner in writing; 
(2)  By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained: 
a.  By publication in the city's official newspaper once; 
b.  By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
c.  By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates. 
(c)  Unclaimed notice. If notice is mailed to a property owner in accordance with subsection (b) above, and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed", the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered delivered. 
(d)  Additional violations. Although it is not required, the city may: 
(1)  Inform the owner by regular or certified mail and a posting on the property that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind (failure to mow weeds or high grass or remove rubbish, refuse or garbage) on or before the first anniversary of date of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expenses against the property; and 
(2)  If a violation occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the city, without notice, may take corrective action and assess the expenses against the owner and the property. 
(e)  Contents of notice. The notice may contain a statement in accordance with subsection (d) above and shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the record owner; 
(2)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property upon which the violation is located; 
(3)  A statement describing the violation and the work necessary to correct the violation; 
(4)  A statement advising the owner that if the work is not completed within seven (7) days, the city will complete the work and charge the expenses to the owner; and 
(5)  A statement that if the city performs the work and the owner fails to pay the expenses, a priority lien may be placed on the property. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-9. - Noncompliance—Work to be performed by the city. 
If the owner does not cut the weeds, grass, or plants, or remove rubbish, garbage, refuse or brush or otherwise clean up the property within seven (7) days of the notice required by section 10-8, the city may go on such property or authorize another to go on such property, and do or cause the work to be done and charge the expenses incurred to the owner of the property and assess the expenses against the real estate on which the work is done. The remedy provided in this section is in addition to any criminal penalties or other remedies authorized by this article or other law. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-10. - Hearing—Right to extension. 
Whenever an order has been given to abate or remove any nuisance that may exist upon any lot or premises under the provisions of section 10-8 of this chapter, the owner thereof shall have the right, within the period of time given in the order for abatement to appear before the city manager to show cause why such order should not or cannot be complied with. The city manager may, at her discretion, give such reasonable extension of time for the abatement or removal of such nuisance as may be necessary; provided, there is no immediate danger to the public health. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-11. - Authority in case of public epidemic or immediate danger. 
In case of any public epidemic or immediate danger, the city manager shall have authority and is directed to employ any sanitary measure deemed necessary for the control of such epidemic and to prevent its spread or to take any other action authorized by law to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-12. - Assessment of expenses; lien; appeal. 
(a)  Lien assessed. The city does hereby assess the expenses incurred pursuant to section 10-9 against the real estate on which the work is done or improvements made, and charge the owner of the property. 
(b)  Notice. In assessing the expenses incurred against the property on which the work is done or improvements made, the city shall send the owner of the property upon which the work was done a notice which shall include: 
(1)  Identification of the property; 
(2)  Description of the violation; 
(3)  A statement that the city abated the condition; 
(4)  A statement of the city's expenses in abating the condition; 
(5)  An explanation of the property owner's right to request a hearing about the abatement of the nuisance within ten (10) days of the date of the letter; and 
(6)  A statement that if the owner fails or refuses to pay the expenses within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, the mayor or his designee shall place a lien against the property by filing with the county clerk of the county in which the property is located a notice of lien and statement of expenses incurred. 
(c)  Method. The notice shall be sent in the same manner as provided in section 10-8. 
(d)  Hearing. The city manager or his designated representative will conduct a hearing if the property owner submits a written request within ten (10) days of the date of the notice. At the hearing: 
(1)  The owner and the city may testify or present witnesses or written information related to the city's abatement of the nuisance. 
(2)  The city has the burden to show that a violation of this article existed, notice was given in substantial compliance with this article, and expenses were incurred to abate the violation. 
(3)  At the close of the hearing, the city manager or his representative may find, based upon a preponderance of the evidence, that the expenses are valid, or that they are erroneous or he may adjust them. 
(e)  Placement of lien. If no hearing is requested, or a hearing is held and the expenses are determined to be valid or are otherwise appropriately adjusted, and the owner fails or refuses to pay the expenses within thirty (30) days after the written notification to pay, the mayor or his designated representative shall place a lien against the property by filing with the county clerk of the county in which the property is located a notice of lien and statement of expenses incurred. The lien shall state the name of the property owner if known, and contain the legal description of the property. 
(f)  Security. The lien is security for the expenses and interest accruing at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the date the work was performed or the expenses were incurred by the city. 
(g)  Filing. When the statement is filed, the city shall have a privileged lien on that property, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. 
(h)  Suit. The city may institute suit to recover the expenses, with interest, and may foreclose on the property. The original or a certified copy of the statement of expenses is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city in doing the work or making the improvements. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-13. - Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds without prior notice. 
(a)  Abatement. The city may abate, without prior notice, weeds that have grown higher than forty-eight (48) inches, and are an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person. 
(b)  Notice. Not later than the tenth day after the date the city abates weeds under this section, the city shall give notice to the property owner in the same manner provided in section 10-12 of this chapter. 
(c)  Hearing. The city manager or his designated representative shall conduct an administrative hearing under this section if, not later than the thirtieth day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the property owner files with the city a written request for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the city manager or his designated representative not later than the twentieth day after the date a request for hearing is filed. At the hearing: 
(1)  The owner and the city may testify or present witnesses or written information related to the city's abatement of the nuisance. 
(2)  The city has the burden to show that a violation of this article existed, notice was given in substantial compliance with this section, and expenses incurred to abate the violation were reasonable. 
(3)  The city manager or his designated representative may approve the expenses, deny the expenses, or adjust the amount of the expenses and approve them as adjusted. 
(d)  Placement of lien. If no hearing is required, or a hearing is held and the expenses are determined to be valid or otherwise appropriately adjusted and the owner refuses to pay the expenses within thirty (30) days after written notification to pay, the mayor or his designated representative shall place a lien against the property by filing with the county clerk of the county in which the property is located a notice of lien and statement of expenses incurred. The lien shall state the name of the property owner if known, and contain the legal description of the property. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-14. - Right of entry. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter or whenever the public works director has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the public works director may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the public works director by this chapter. If such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry, and if such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the city manager shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-15. - Parkway maintenance. 
A person who owns, any lot, tract or parcel of land or portion thereof, within the city shall not permit grass, weeds, brush, or any plant that is not cultivated to grow to a height greater than twelve (12) inches on an average, in, along, upon, or across the sidewalk or street adjacent to the same in the area between the property line and the curb line or within the area ten (10) feet beyond the property line. In areas where the property is separated from the right-of-way by a screening device, the property owner shall maintain both sides of the right-of-way up to the screening device. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-16. - Violation; penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this article. Any such violation shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a maximum fine of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that a violation of this article occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Secs. 10-17—10-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LITTER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. I of this chapter. 
 
Sec. 10-35. - Definitions. 
In this article: 
Container means a city-approved receptacle used for the disposal of waste. 
Litter means any wastepaper, used beverage or food container, rubbish, trash, or garbage not placed in a container. 
Littering or to litter means the act of placing, throwing, depositing, disposing or dropping of litter. 
Pedestrian litter container means a container provided on public or private property for the disposal of litter by pedestrians. 
Person means a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
Private property means and includes, but not limited to, yards, grounds, driveways, entrances, passageways, parking areas, working areas, storage areas, vacant lots, and recreation facilities owned by private individuals, firms, corporations, institutions and organizations. 
Public property means and includes but is not limited to streets, medians, roads, road medians, catch basins, sidewalks, strips between streets and sidewalks, alleys, lanes, public right-of-way, public parking lots, school grounds, parks, publicly owned recreation facilities, and municipal bodies of water and waterways. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-36. - Littering unlawful. 
A person commits an offense if the person throws or deposits litter except in a container or a pedestrian litter container. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-37. - Duty to keep property free of litter. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the person who owns, occupies, or leases, or is engaged in construction on any private or public property to keep the exterior property free of litter. 
(b)  Persons who are owners, occupants or lessees of private property which abuts city sidewalks, streets, parkways, drainage ditches, or curb and gutter, shall keep those sidewalks, streets, parkways, curb and gutter, and drainage ditches free of litter by removing litter and placing it in a container. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-38. - Container closure, maintenance. 
(a)  All residential and commercial containers shall be closed with a well-fitting lid (cover) when any garbage, refuse, trash, debris, rubbish, solid waste or junk is in such container. If bags are utilized as a container they shall be tightly sealed with a fastener. Pedestrian litter containers may be open for ease of use, but shall be designed in such a way as to reasonably prevent their contents from becoming litter. 
(b)  All persons placing containers for collection and removing them after collection shall take the necessary precautions to prevent the contents thereof from becoming litter. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-39. - Pedestrian litter container use restrictions. 
A person commits an offense if the person deposits household or commercial garbage, refuse, trash, debris, rubbish, solid waste or junk in pedestrian litter containers. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-40. - Vehicles transporting loose materials. 
(a)  Every vehicle used to transport manure, garbage, swill, ashes, cinders or other loose material on any of the streets of the city shall be fitted with a tight and sufficient cover to prevent the cargo of the vehicle from becoming litter. 
(b)  Failure to utilize such a cover which results in the cargo of the vehicle becoming litter, shall constitute littering. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-41. - Littering from motor vehicle—Evidence. 
If littering occurs from a motor vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle was the origin of the litter, together with proof that the defendant was at the time of such violation the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, shall constitute prima facie proof that the registered owner or lessee is the person who committed such littering. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
Sec. 10-42. - Violation; penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this article. Any such violation shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a maximum fine of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that a violation of this article occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 9-14-04)  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. I of this chapter. 
 
Secs. 10-43—10-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKED VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 513, adopted Aug. 14, 2001, amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 409, adopted March 13, 1990; and Ord. No. 435, adopted Sept. 1, 1992. 
Cross reference— Traffic generally, Ch. 19. 
 
Sec. 10-71. - Definitions. 
The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings ascribed to them: 
Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least twenty-five (25) years old. 
Hearing officer means the municipal court judge of the city or the judge's designated representative. 
Inoperable means incapable of being propelled on its own power due to dismantling, disrepair, or some other cause. 
Junked vehicle means any motor vehicle, as defined in Subchapter E of Chapter 683 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, that: 
(a)  Does not have lawfully attached to it: 
1.  An unexpired license plate; or 
2.  A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and 
(b)  Is: 
1.  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
2.  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
a.  Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
b.  Thirty (30) consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
Motor vehicle collector means a person who: 
(a)  Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and 
(b)  Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 8-14-01)  
Sec. 10-72. - Junked vehicles declared public nuisance 
A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible from a public place or public right-of-way: 
(a)  Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public; 
(b)  Tends to reduce the value of private property; 
(c)  Invites vandalism; 
(d)  Creates fire hazards; 
(e)  Constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; 
(f)  Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of municipalities; and 
(g)  Is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 8-14-01)  
Sec. 10-73. - Notice. 
(a)  Prior to any official action being taken to abate and remove a junked vehicle constituting a public nuisance, from private property, public property or public right-of-way, not less than ten (10) days' notice shall be given, except as hereinafter provided, to the following parties: 
(1)  The last known registered owner of the junked vehicle as shown on the certificate of title; 
(2)  Any lienholder of record; and 
(3)  The owner or occupant of the property upon which the junked vehicle is located or the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the junked vehicle is located. 
(b)  The notice shall be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, and if the vehicle is reasonably accessible, also by posting a copy of such notice to the front windshield of the vehicle, and shall state the following: 
(1)  The nature of the public nuisance; 
(2)  That it must be removed and abated not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was mailed; 
(3)  That any request for a hearing must be made in writing before the ten-day period expires; 
(4)  That failure to abate the nuisance, request a hearing or attend the hearing, if requested, constitutes a waiver by the owner and lienholders of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and their consent to disposal for the junked vehicle under the terms of the Texas Transportation Code concerning the disposal of junked vehicles. 
(c)  If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the junked vehicle is unknown, notice may be placed on the junked vehicle, or, if the owner is located, hand-delivered. 
(d)  If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States post office, the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered, however, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than eleven (11) days after the date of the return of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 8-14-01)  
Sec. 10-74. - Hearing. 
(a)  The owner of the vehicle or occupant of the premises may, within the ten-day period after the service of notice required by section 10-73(b) to abate the nuisance, request the clerk of the municipal court of the city, either in person or in writing and without the requirement of bond, to set a date and time to appear before the judge of the municipal court for a public hearing to determine whether the person is in violation of this article. If a hearing is requested within ten (10) days after service of notice to abate the nuisance, the junked vehicle shall not be abated by the city until ordered to do so by the judge of the municipal court. 
(b)  At the public hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests and shall receive testimony from owners, witnesses, city employees and interested persons relative to such alleged public nuisance. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
(c)  At the hearing the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. 
(d)  Following the public hearing, the hearing officer shall consider all evidence and determine whether the vehicle, or any part thereof, constitutes a public nuisance as alleged. If the hearing officer finds that a public nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to abate the nuisance, and that notice requirements provided in this article have been met, the hearing officer shall make a written order setting forth his findings and ordering that the nuisance be abated. 
(e)  If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, the order requiring removal of the nuisance must include the vehicle's: 
(1)  Description; 
(2)  Vehicle identification number; 
(3)  License plate number; and 
(4)  A statement that the vehicle will be disposed of in accordance with the Texas Transportation Code. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 8-14-01)  
Sec. 10-75. - Abatement of nuisance. 
If no hearing is requested prior to the expiration of ten (10) days after the notice required by section 10-73(b) was served or in the event the hearing officer orders abatement of the nuisance, the city or any duly authorized person may abate such public nuisance by removal and disposal of the junked vehicle after the issuance of an order meeting the requirements of section 10-74(e). 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 8-14-01)  
Sec. 10-76. - Junked vehicles not to be made operable after removal. 
After any junked vehicle has been removed under the authority of this article, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable again. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 8-14-01)  
Sec. 10-77. - Notice to department of transportation. 
No later than the fifth day after the date of removal of a junked vehicle pursuant to this article, notice must be given to the state department of transportation. Such notice must identify the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 8-14-01)  
Sec. 10-78. - Relocation of junked vehicles. 
After the city has sent notice in accordance with section 10-73, the relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location in the city has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 8-14-01)  
Sec. 10-79. - Disposal of junked vehicles. 
Any junked vehicle taken into custody by the city or any duly authorized person pursuant to a provision of this article shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable provisions of Chapter 683, subchapter E of the Texas Transportation Code. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 8-14-01)  
Sec. 10-80. - Application of article. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is: 
(a)  Completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(b)  Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: 
(1)  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
(2)  Not a health hazard; and 
(3)  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 8-14-01)  
Sec. 10-81. - Offense. 
A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance described by section 10-72 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 8-14-01)  
Sec. 10-82. - Removal with permission of owner or occupant. 
If, within ten (10) days after receipt of notice from the code enforcement officer or his designated representative to abate the nuisance as herein provided, the owner or occupant of the premises shall give his written permission to the code enforcement officer or his designated representative for removal of the junked motor vehicle from the premises, the giving of such permission shall be considered compliance with provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 8-14-01)  
Sec. 10-83. - Right of removal from streets preserved. 
Nothing in this article shall affect ordinances or other laws that permit immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property which is abandoned or which constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 8-14-01)  
Secs. 10-84—10-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NOISE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 587, adopted Aug. 8, 2006, amended Art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. V was comprised of §§ 10-91—10-93, and derived from §§ 10-11—10-13 of the 1977 Code. 
 
Sec. 10-91. - Definitions. 
All terms not defined in this article shall be in conformance with the applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The sound pressure level so read is designated in dB(A) or dBA. 
Clearly audible means sound that can be heard without the assistance of any device. 
Commercial means property used for purposes other than residential or agricultural regardless of whether the property has a commercial zoning designation. 
Construction means any phase of the on-site erection or removal, including, but not limited to, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or structure conducted on that site. 
Daytime means the hours from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
Decibel (dB) means a unit of sound pressure level on a logarithmic scale measured relative to the threshold of audible sound by the human ear, in compliance with the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Standard S1.1-1960, or the successor thereto. 
Director means the director of the city department of public safety or the director's authorized representative. 
Governmental entity means any department, board, committee, or unit of the school districts within the city, the city municipal government, or the state or the federal government, including but not limited to the school board, joint-use committee, city council, planning and zoning commission, park board, SPIN committees, and city departments. 
Immediate vicinity means any distance within one hundred (100) feet of the noise source, or any area within the property line of the parcel or lot upon which the source of noise is emanating, whichever is the greater distance from the noise source. 
Nighttime means the hours from 9:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m. 
Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
Person means any individual, corporation, business or other entity. 
Repetitive incident of noise means a recurrence of any sound from the same source which repeats itself three (3) or more times per day, whether at routine cyclical periods or random periods. 
Residential means means any property used for temporary or permanent dwelling purposes. 
Sound means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network as specified in ANSI specifications for sound level meters. When the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply. 
Sound pressure means the instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by sound energy. 
Sound pressure level means twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of twenty (20) micropascals. This sound pressure level is expressed in decibels. 
(Ord. No. 587, 8-8-06)  
Sec. 10-92. - Offenses; nuisance declared. 
(a)  Tampering with sound instrument. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or render inaccurate or inoperative any sound level meter or any similar monitoring instrument or device positioned for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to provide false readings of any sound instrument. 
(b)  Noise and vibration nuisance. A person shall not create, assist in creating, permit or continue any excessive or unnecessary noise of a volume, intensity, or duration that is clearly audible, or a vibration, which disturbs, annoys, or endangers the calm, comfort, quiet, repose, health, peace or safety of persons of ordinary is hereby declared a nuisance and sensibilities beyond the immediate vicinity of the noise. Such noise or vibration shall be a violation of this article. 
(c)  Prima facie violation. The following acts of noise or vibration are prima facie evidence of a violation of this article: 
(1)  Permitting an unreasonably loud, harsh, or prolonged sounding of any horn, alarm, or other signal device on any vehicle, unless: 
a.  Necessary to ensure safe operation as authorized by state law; or 
b.  Caused by mechanical failure beyond the operator's control and the operator takes all reasonable measures to stop the noise made by the horn, alarm, or other device. 
(2)  Playing or use of any sound producing or amplifying device, speaker, or instrument, including a musical instrument, in such a manner or in such loud volume or intensity, at any time or place, so as to disturb, destroy, or endanger the peace, comfort, repose, or rest of persons of ordinary sensibilities beyond the immediate vicinity of the noise or disturbance or when such noise exceeds the dBA levels shown in Table 1, herein below. 
(3)  Creating a loud noise or disturbance in or with a motor vehicle or any appurtenance to such vehicle, including without limitation, a bed, trailer, or other equipment connected in any manner to the vehicle, so as to disturb, destroy, endanger the peace, comfort, repose or rest of persons of ordinary sensibilities beyond the immediate vicinity of the source of the noise when such noise exceeds the dBA levels shown in Table 1, herein below. 
(4)  Operating a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a muffler in good working order and in use at all times. 
(5)  Using any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless the noise is effectively muffled and reduced to the dBA levels shown in Table 1. 
(6)  Permitting any loud, harsh, or prolonged sounding of any burglar or fire alarm or other distress signal on any dwelling, commercial building, or other premises, unless: 
a.  Authorized by law; or 
b.  Caused by mechanical failure beyond the operator's control and the operator takes all reasonable measures to stop the noise made by the alarm or other device. 
(7)  Operating any heavy equipment, machinery or apparatus used in any exterior or outdoor construction, repair, remodeling, demolition, drilling, excavation, grading, earth moving, paving, cement laying or pouring, or other work of any nature during the nighttime or anytime on Sunday within one thousand (1,000) feet of any residential property, unless otherwise indicated in the exceptions set forth in section 10-94. 
(8)  Creating any loud or raucous noise or vibration within one thousand (1,000) lineal feet of any school building or court that is in session or adjacent to any hospital building or similar care facility, provided that conspicuous signs located on the premises identify the premises. 
(9)  Operating, as a part of any business, any equipment or machinery, including, but not limited to, combustion engines, fans, blowers, grinders, welders, loaders, washers, winches, lifts, and hoists, whether independent or attached to a motor vehicle, during the nighttime within one thousand (1,000) lineal feet of any residential dwelling, unless otherwise indicated in the exceptions set forth in the exceptions set forth in section 10-94. 
(10)  Discharging into the open air the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle engine or boat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises or vibrations. 
(11)  Conducting any commercial or industrial trash or waste pickup within one thousand (1,000) lineal feet of any residential dwelling during the nighttime. 
(12)  The continuous barking, howling, crowing or other loud noises by an animal for more than fifteen (15) minutes near a private residence that the animal's owner or person in control of the animal has no right to occupy, unless otherwise indicated in the exceptions set forth in section 10-94. 
(13)  Loud grating, grinding, banging, rattling, back-firing noises or vibrations caused by the use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle that is out of repair or poorly or improperly loaded. 
(14)  The shouting and crying or peddlers and vendors, or the use of any drum, musical instrument, load speakers or sound amplifying equipment, for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention by the creation of noise, without first obtaining a permit pursuant to section 10-95. 
(15)  The operation of sound equipment, including a car stereo, in a motor vehicle in such a manner that the noise is so audible or causes such a vibration as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet, or comfort of persons of ordinary sensibilities beyond the immediate vicinity of the noise or disturbance or when such noise exceeds the dBA levels shown in Table 1, herein below. 
(16)  Conducting or permitting any activity that produces a dBA level beyond the immediate vicinity that exceeds the dBA levels specified in Table 1: 
TABLE 1 
PRIMA FACIE MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE NOISE LEVELS 
Property Receiving 
Sound 	Daytime 	Nighttime 	Sundays 
Residential 	60 dBA 	55 dBA 	55 dBA 
Commercial 	70 dBA 	65 dBA 	65 dBA 
 
(17)  Any offense as set forth in Texas Penal Code, Section 42.01(a)(5) and (c)(2). 
(Ord. No. 587, 8-8-06)  
Sec. 10-93. - Noise from idling of commercial motor vehicles. 
(a)  In this section: 
(1)  Commercial motor vehicle means any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) over fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds. 
(2)  Idle means the operation of a motor vehicle engine in operating mode where the engine is not engaged in gear. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he idles a commercial motor vehicle for more than ten (10) consecutive minutes at a location on or within three hundred (300) feet of any residential use. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if, on any premises that he owns or controls, he permits the idling of a commercial motor vehicle for more than ten (10) consecutive minutes at a location on or within three hundred (300) feet of any residential use. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (b) and (c) of this section that the commercial motor vehicle was: 
(1)  Idling in obedience to an official traffic control device; 
(2)  Idling while stopped in traffic; 
(3)  Idling in obedience to a peace officer; 
(4)  Idling while being repaired in an enclosed structure; 
(5)  Idling in order to defrost a windshield; 
(6)  A school bus; 
(7)  Intended for commercial passenger transportation and idling on a public street; 
(8)  A concrete mixer truck idling while actually pouring concrete or staging to pour concrete; or 
(9)  A utility truck idling while providing power as needed to perform utility work. 
(Ord. No. 587, 8-8-06)  
Sec. 10-94. - Exceptions. 
The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Emergency work immediately necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a fire, accident or natural disaster, to restore public utilities, or to protect persons or property from imminent danger; 
(2)  Sounds made to alert persons to the existence of an emergency, an imminent danger, or an attempted crime; 
(3)  Parades, concerts, festivals, fairs or similar activities specifically approved by the city council or sponsored by or on behalf of a governmental body; 
(4)  Athletic, musical, or cultural activities or events, including practices and rehearsals, conducted by or under the auspices of public or private schools; 
(5)  Sound created by animals or livestock kept or maintained by persons on agriculturally zoned parcels where such animal or livestock is a part of a bona fide agricultural operation; 
(6)  Sounds created while conducting yard work or lawn maintenance during the daytime, including, but not limited to, lawn mowing, leaf blowing, brush clearing, and use of chain saws; 
(7)  Sounds created as a part of new construction, remodeling or maintenance activities on a building or structure during the daytime, excluding Sundays; or new construction, remodeling or maintenance activities indoors on Sunday during the daytime and which do not produce any clearly audible noise outside of the immediate vicinity; 
(8)  Sounds authorized under a temporary noise exemption permit as provided in this article; 
(9)  Sounds created during construction, maintenance, or repairs conducted by or on behalf of a governmental entity providing basic utility services or roadway projects approved by the city council; 
(10)  Sounds created by agricultural operations when such operations are related to activities directly associated with agricultural business, including raking, baling, plowing, planting, harvesting, milking, feeding, and mowing; 
(11)  Sounds created by typical roadway noises from traffic flow; 
(12)  Any aircraft in flight subject to federal law regarding noise control and any helicopter in the act of landing or taking off at a helipad licensed by the city or for use in emergency rescue or any railroad governed by federal law; and 
(13)  Any activity of a temporary duration for which a license or permit has been granted by the city, state or federal government, including, but not limited to ice cream and snow cone vehicle vendors. 
(Ord. No. 587, 8-8-06)  
Sec. 10-95. - Temporary noise exemption permits. 
(a)  Permit generally. A person may apply for a permit to engage in any activity that creates a noise that would otherwise constitute a nuisance or be a violation of this article. A person must apply in writing to the director at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the requested issuance date and time, unless the director determines that unforeseeable circumstances justify a shorter amount of time. 
(b)  Application for permit. The application for a permit shall be on a form prescribed by the director and must include the following: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant for both daytime and nighttime contact; 
(2)  A description of the type, duration, and location of the noise, specifically including the date and time the noise will occur; 
(3)  The reason the noise level is expected to exceed the provisions of this article; 
(4)  The name, if different from the applicant, of the owner of the property on which the noise will occur and a written letter of permission from the owner and any tenants or other persons occupying the property from which the noise will occur; 
(5)  A statement from the applicant that all property owners within two hundred (200) lineal feet to the property upon which the noise originates will be provided written notification within twenty-four (24) hours of making the application of their right to respond directly to the director to voice support or opposition to the application; and 
(6)  A copy of the notification(s) sent to any such property owners. 
(c)  Filling fee. A filing fee must be submitted with the application for a permit, in an amount prescribed in a fee schedule adopted by the city council, or twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in the absence of such fee schedule. No such fees shall be assessed to any governmental entity or any person conducting activities on behalf of the governmental entity. 
(d)  Duration of permit. The duration of such permit shall not exceed two (2) calendar days. 
(e)  Grounds for granting or denying permit. In determining whether to grant or deny the permit, the director may consider the following factors, among others: 
(1)  The safety of the persons that will be subjected to the noise, whether voluntarily or involuntarily; 
(2)  The number of persons that will be involuntarily subjected to the noise; 
(3)  The reasonableness of the time, place, and manner of the noise and the duration of the noise; and 
(4)  Any other factors necessary to determine the impact on the public health or safety and the disruption of the peace that the noise may cause. 
(f)  Notice of director's decision. The director shall, within five (5) calendar days following the date of the application, notify the applicant of the director's decision either to grant or deny the permit. If the director denies the permit, the director shall state the reasons for the denial in a written notice provided to the applicant. If the director grants the permit, the director may place reasonable time, place, and other restrictions on the activity authorized by the permit. 
(g)  Appeal. Upon receiving such notice from the director, the applicant may appeal the director's decision, including restrictions placed on the activity authorized by the permit, to the city manager. Within one (1) working day of receiving the appeal, the city manager shall consider the application, the basis of denial, or any restrictions placed on issuance of the permit. Based on standards stated in subsection (e) of this section, the city manager may: 
(1)  Uphold the decision of the director; 
(2)  Approve or deny the issuance of the permit as applied for; or 
(3)  Modify or delete restrictions placed on the permit. 
(h)  Permit. The permit shall be in a form prescribed by the director and shall be displayed in the immediate vicinity of the source of the noise at all times during the commission of the noise. The permit shall include the following: 
(1)  The date and time that the permit shall begin and end; 
(2)  The name of the permit holder and who will be generating the noise; 
(3)  A description of the basic nature of the noise; 
(4)  The specific location of the noise; and 
(5)  Any special limitations or restrictions placed on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 587, 8-8-06)  
Sec. 10-96. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 587, 8-8-06)  
Secs. 10-97—10-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MAINTENANCE OF DRAINAGEWAYS 
 
Sec. 10-121. - Duty to maintain drainageways. 
It shall be the duty of every person having ownership, possession or control of any real property within the City of Everman upon which a natural drainageway is located to maintain said drainageway as reasonably necessary to prevent the diversion or impoundment of water outside the confines of the drainageway. 
(Ord. No. 561, § 1, 6-14-05)  
Sec. 10-122. - Unlawful to permit weeds in drainageways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having ownership, possession or control of property within the city to permit grass, weeds or any plant that is noncultivated to grow to a height greater than ten (10) inches on average or to grow in rank provision within any drainageway upon such property. 
(Ord. No. 561, § 1, 6-14-05)  
Sec. 10-123. - Unlawful to permit rubbish in drainageways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having ownership, possession or control of any property within the city to permit any rubbish, brush or other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever nature to accumulate or be present within any drainageway on such property. 
(Ord. No. 561, § 1, 6-14-05)  
Sec. 10-124. - Duty to remove rubbish and weeds in drainageway. 
It shall be the duty of any person having ownership, possession or control of any property within the city to cut or cause to be cut and to remove or cause to be removed all such grass, weeds, plants, rubbish, brush and any other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever nature as often as necessary to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 561, § 1, 6-14-05)  
Sec. 10-125. - Extent of duty to maintain drainageways. 
The duty or responsibility of any person to maintain a drainageway as provided in this article shall apply whether or not the drainageway is located within a public easement for drainage purposes. The responsibility of any such person shall be limited to routine maintenance typical of maintenance normally performed on private premises within the city, such as maintenance performed by hand or by use of a mower or weedeater. As a further clarification, nothing herein shall be construed to require the property owner to utilize specialized or heavy equipment or to perform major maintenance other then cutting and clearing of grass, weeds, plants, trash, debris and other objectionable or unsightly matter. 
(Ord. No. 561, § 1, 6-14-05)  
Sec. 10-126. - Duty extends only to natural drainageways. 
The duty and responsibility of a person to clear, cut and maintain natural drainageways under this article shall apply to natural drainageways only and nothing herein shall be construed to require such maintenance responsibilities and duties within improved portions of any drainageway. 
(Ord. No. 561, § 1, 6-14-05)  
Sec. 10-127. - In the event of noncompliance: liens; citations. 
If the owner of any property within the city shall fail to comply with the requirements of this article, the designated representative may provide for the sending of notice and the filing of liens on the property following the procedures and requirements set forth in article I of this chapter. This action shall be in addition to any other enforcement action available to the city, including the issuance of citations. 
(Ord. No. 561, § 1, 6-14-05)  
Secs. 10-128—10-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SMOKING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 10-131. - Compliance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 592, § I.A, 3-13-07)  
Sec. 10-132. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words shall have the definitions ascribed to them by this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
City means the City of Everman, an incorporated municipality located in Tarrant County, Texas, its agents and employees. 
City council or council means the governing body of the City of Everman, Texas. 
Designated outside smoking area is allowed as determined by the Everman city council and city manager. 
Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association or any other legal entity. 
Public means owned by, leased by, operated by or otherwise under the management and control of the city. 
Smoking or to smoke means the possession of a burning tobacco product, weed or other plant product. The term includes, but is not limited to, the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or device, or the lighting of, emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind. 
Tobacco product means the product derived from the dried leaves of any one (1) of the various species of nicotine, including but not limited to the species nicotine tabacum, the broad-leafed native American plant, which is utilized for smoking. For purposes of the city's tobacco-free workplace policy, it shall also include chewing tobacco, snuff, and any other form of smokeless tobacco. 
(Ord. No. 592, § I.B, 3-13-07)  
Sec 10-133. - City policy. 
The city is a tobacco-free workplace. Employees and visitors are prohibited from smoking or using any form of tobacco product inside any building or facility, or any portion thereof, owned by, leased by, operated by or otherwise under the management or control of the city. 
(Ord. No. 592, § I.C, 3-13-07)  
Sec. 10-134. - Smoking prohibition. 
A person commits an offense if he smokes in any public building or facility. 
(Ord. No. 592, § I.D, 3-13-07)  
Sec. 10-135. - Signs and facilities to extinguish smoking products required. 
(1)  The city shall post conspicuous signs at all entrances of all public buildings, facilities and enclosed areas referenced in section 10-134 above. Such signs shall read: "No Smoking, City of Everman Ordinance No. 592". A person commits an offense if he destroys or defaces a sign posted as required by this article. 
(2)  The city shall provide for the extinguishment of smoking materials within twenty (20) feet of any public entrance to all such buildings, facilities and enclosed public areas referenced in section 10-134 above. 
(Ord. No. 592, § I.E, 3-13-07)  
Sec. 10-136. - Affirmative defense. 
It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution for an offense under this article that the location at which the offense occurs does not have conspicuously displayed a sign that smoking is prohibited as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 592, § I.F, 3-13-07)  
Sec. 10-137. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement. The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article as may be required by governing law. Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance. There shall be no requirement of a culpable mental state for a violation of this article. 
(b)  Criminal prosecution. Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00), except as may be otherwise expressly provided by state law. Each time that a provision of this article is violated shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under this article is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(c)  Civil remedies. Nothing in this article shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this article and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates this article or to require specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with this article; 
(2)  A civil penalty up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) a day when it is shown that the defendant was actually notified of the provisions of this article and after receiving notice committed acts in violation of this article or failed to take action necessary for compliance with this article; and 
(3)  Other available relief. 
(Ord. No. 592, § II, 3-13-07)  
Secs. 10-138—10-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 10-141. - Adoption of Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(a)  The City of Everman adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or rules as amended by The Executive Commissioner of the Health and Human Services Commission found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, Sections 161 through 171 and 173 through 175 regarding the regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Authorized agent or employee means the employees of the regulatory authority. 
Food establishment means a food service establishment, a retail food store, a temporary food establishment, a mobile food unit, and/or a roadside food vendor. 
Municipality of Everman in this article shall be understood to refer to the City of Everman. 
State rules means the state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, Sections 161 through 171 and Sections 173 through 175. These rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
Regulatory authority means the Tarrant County Public Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-142. - Permits and exemptions. 
A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferable from one (1) person or entity to another or from one (1) location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by this article. A valid permit must be visibly posted in or on every food establishment regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 2, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-143. - Application for permit and fees. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment and the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit. Renewals of permits are required on an annual basis and the same information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit. 
(b)  Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with state laws and rules. A food establishment that does not comply with state laws and rules will be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit. 
(c)  Fees for permits issued under this article shall be as listed in appendix A, fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 3, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-144. - Review of plans. 
(a)  Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that twenty (20) percent or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled or when equipment required by the rules is to be relocated or removed. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The plans and specifications will be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by this article. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion. 
(b)  Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(c)  Fees for the review of plans shall be as listed in appendix A, fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 4, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-145. - Inspections. 
(a)  Before a permit is issued, the city or its authorized representative shall inspect and approve the food establishment. An inspection of a food establishment shall be performed at least once annually and shall be prioritized based upon assessment of a food establishment's compliance and potential of causing foodborne illness according to 25 TAC 229.171(h). 
(b)  The regulatory authority shall classify food establishments as special priority, high priority, medium priority or low priority, according to the type of operations; particular foods that are prepared; number of people served; susceptibility of the population served; history of violations and any other risk factor deemed relevant to the operation. 
(c)  Refusal of an owner, manager or employee to allow the authorized representative of the regulatory authority, upon presentation of credentials, to inspect any permitted business or operation therein during normal business hours will result in an immediate suspension of the permit, requiring all permitted activities to abate until after such time as a hearing may be held per section 10-147. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 5, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-146. - Food manager/food handler education. 
(a)  Requirement. 
(1)  Each food service establishment shall have at least one (1) person employed in a managerial capacity possessing a current food manager certificate approved by the regulatory authority. 
(2)  Each food service establishment with six (6) or more employees that is required to have certified food managers must have at least one (1) certified manager on site during all operations. 
(3)  Every employee of a food service establishment other than a certified food manager must maintain a valid food handler certification registered with the regulatory authority. 
(4)  Food handler certification shall be valid for a period of up to three (3) years as determined by the regulatory authority. 
(5)  Food manager and food handler certification documentation must be maintained in the food service establishment and presented upon request by the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 6, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-147. - Suspension of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (b) of this section. When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within ten (10) days of receipt of a request for a hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten (10) days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 7, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-148. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten (10) days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period. 
(b)  If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 8, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-149. - Administrative process. 
(a)  A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit as shown on their permit application. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(b)  The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 9, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-150. - Remedies. 
(a)  Any person who violates a provision of these rules and any person who is the permit holder of or otherwise operates a food service establishment that does not comply with the requirements of these rules and any responsible officer of that permit holder or those persons shall be fined not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(b)  The regulatory authority may seek to enjoin violations of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 10, 7-12-11)  
ARTICLE IX. - SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS OR INTERACTIVE WATER FEATURES 
 
Sec. 10-151. - State regulations and guidelines adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by reference V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code § 341.064; Tex. Admin. Code §§ 265.181—265.208, Standards for Public Pools and Spas; and Tex. Admin. Code §§ 265.301—265.308, Public Interactive Water Features and Fountains. A copy of each shall be kept on file in the official records of the city. 
(Ord. No. 639, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-152. - Definitions. 
All definitions in V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 341, and Title 25, Chapter 265, Subchapter L of the Texas Department of State Health Services regulations "Standards for Public Pools and Spas," are hereby adopted. In addition, the following definitions shall apply in this article: 
Certified pool operator. A person who possesses a valid pool operator's certificate from a course approved by the city. 
City. Authorized representatives of the City of Everman which shall include the director and representatives of the Tarrant County Public Health Department. 
Director. Director of the Tarrant County Public Health Department, who shall be an authorized representative of the city with respect to public pool and spa inspections and permitting. 
Pool. Any manmade permanently installed or nonportable structure, basin, chamber, or tank containing an artificial body of water that is used for swimming, diving, aquatic sports, or other aquatic activity other than a residential pool and that is operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for use. The pool may be either publicly or privately owned. The term does not include a spa or a decorative fountain that is not used as a pool. 
Private residential pool. A pool that is located on private property that is intended for use by one (1) single-family and their invited guests, located on property used for the placement of a single-family residence. 
Private residential spa. A spa that is located on private property that is intended for use by one (1) single-family and their invited guests, located on property used for the placement of a single-family residence. 
Public interactive water feature and fountain (PIWF). Any indoor or outdoor installation maintained for public recreation that includes water sprays, dancing water jets, waterfalls, dumping buckets, or shooting water cannons in various arrays for the purpose of wetting the persons playing in the spray streams. 
Regulatory authority. The director and representatives of the Tarrant County Public Health Department. 
Spa. A constructed permanent or portable structure that is two (2) feet or more in depth and that has a surface area of two hundred fifty (250) square feet or less or a volume of three thousand two hundred fifty (3,250) gallons or less and that is intended to be used for bathing or other recreational uses and is not drained and refilled after each use. It may include, but is not limited to, hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold water, mineral baths, air induction bubbles, or any combination thereof. A spa does not refer to a business establishment, such as a day spa or a health spa. Industry terminology for a spa includes, but is not limited to, hydrotherapy pool, whirlpool, hot spa, hot tub, etc. A spa does not include a private residential spa. 
(Ord. No. 639, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-153. - Pool and spa permits. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a public pool, spa or interactive water feature in the city without a current and valid pool, spa or interactive water feature permit. 
(b)  Posting. A valid permit shall be posted in public view in a conspicuous place at the public swimming pool for which it is issued or on file in a secure area of the permitted facility's premises. 
(c)  Nontransference (change of ownership). Permits issued under the provisions of this article are not transferable. Upon change of ownership of a business, the new business owner will be required to meet current standards as defined in city ordinances and state law before a permit will be issued. The new owner shall notify the city within ten (10) days after assuming ownership of the pool, spa or interactive water feature. 
(d)  Multiple permits. A separate permit shall be required for every public pool, spa or interactive water feature except that public pools or spas or interactive water features on a single water filtration system require one (1) permit. 
(e)  Denial of permit. A permit may be denied if the city, upon inspection, determines that the requestor has failed to comply with approved plans and specifications adopted in accordance with these rules. 
(f)  Inspections for permits. An inspection shall be required annually to qualify for a permit. A permit is valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 639, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-154. - Review of plans and specifications. 
(a)  Submission of plans. Before a public pool's and/or spa's and/or interactive water feature's construction or extensive remodeling begins, the person proposing to construct or remodel shall submit an application to the regulatory authority for review and approval. The application shall include: 
(1)  The construction or remodeling plans, under an engineer's seal, and specifications stating that the proposed construction or remodeling complies with these rules and indicating that the proposed layout, mechanical plans, construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities; 
(2)  The date on or after which proposed construction is to begin; 
(3)  The phone number and address of the entity primarily responsible for constructing the pool, spa or interactive water feature and the phone number and address of the entity primarily responsible for operating the pool, spa or interactive water feature; 
(4)  A check or money order in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) payable to Tarrant County, Texas; and 
(5)  And any necessary additional information necessary to verify compliance. 
(b)  Approval. The city shall approve plans and specifications that meet the requirements of these rules. No public pool, spa or interactive water feature shall be constructed or extensively remodeled except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 639, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-155. - Inspections. 
(a)  Preoperational inspections. The city shall inspect a newly constructed or remodeled public pool, spa or interactive water feature prior to operation to determine compliance with approved plans and specifications, and with the requirements of these regulations. Requested inspections must be made a minimum of three (3) working days prior to the desired opening date. 
(b)  Inspections. The city shall inspect all public pools, spas and interactive water features at least once per year. The owner or operator shall request an inspection by permit application providing the pool, spa or interactive water feature owner's name and address and, if different, the pool, spa or interactive water feature operator's name and address. 
(c)  Inspection fees. A fee, as set forth in the city's fee ordinances, shall be required to be paid for preoperational inspections and, thereafter, on an annual basis. Fees shall be paid to Tarrant County Public Health Department at 1101 South Main, Fort Worth, Texas 76104. Only one (1) permit will be required for a public pool, spa or interactive water feature connected to a single filtration system. Inspection fees shall be based on the number of filtration systems located at a single address. Inspection fees for single filtration systems shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) each. 
(Ord. No. 639, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-156. - Pool, spa or interactive water feature closures. 
(a)  A public pool, spa or interactive water feature shall be closed if any of the following conditions occur: 
(1)  Disinfectant level below the minimums set by the Texas Department of State Health Services; 
(2)  pH below 7.0; 
(3)  Inability to see bottom drain (poor visibility); 
(4)  Chlorine levels above eight (8) ppm; or 
(5)  Any other imminent health hazards. 
(b)  A closed sign shall immediately be posted and the pool, spa or interactive water feature access gate shall be locked until all violations have been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 639, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-157. - Pool and spa records. 
Daily records for each permitted public pool, spa or interactive water feature shall be kept on premises and shall include information pertaining to: 
(1)  Disinfectant—Three (3) times per day; 
(2)  pH—Three (3) times per day; 
(3)  Alkalinity—One (1) time per week; 
(4)  Chemicals added—As noted by name, amount and date; and 
(5)  Other information needed to ensure the facility's proper operation. 
(Ord. No. 639, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-158. - Suspension and revocation of permit. 
(a)  Notice of suspension. The city may temporarily suspend the permit of a public pool, spa or interactive water feature for noncompliance with state pool, spa or interactive water feature standards, by issuing a written notice for suspension. When a permit is suspended, pool, spa or interactive water feature operations shall immediately cease. A closed sign shall be immediately posted and the pool, spa or interactive water feature access gate shall be locked until any and all violations have been corrected. 
(b)  Reinstatement of permit after suspension. Whenever a notice of suspension is issued by the city, the holder of the permit or the person in charge will be given an opportunity to correct the violation(s) prior to final revocation of the permit. The city may end the suspension any time if the reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(c)  Revocation of permit. The city may, after providing notice of pending revocation and an opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the city in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the city shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten (10) days following service of such notice. Unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the city by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(d)  Service of notices. A notice provided for in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge of pool and/or spa operations, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address listed on the permit application. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(e)  Hearings. The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearings, the regulatory authority shall make a final finding, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority. 
(f)  Right of appeal. Any permit holder who wishes to dispute the decision of a hearing may appeal the decision to the director of the Tarrant County Health Department. 
(g)  Application after revocation. Final revocation of a pool and/or spa permit shall not prevent the holder of the revoked permit from making written application for a new permit to the regulatory authority. 
(h)  Closed pool, spa or interactive water feature. Prior to reopening, the owner or operator shall provide the application and fee required by subsection 46-74(a) if a pool, spa or interactive water feature: 
(1)  Closes voluntarily at the request of the regulatory authority on more than two (2) occasions in one (1) calendar year; or 
(2)  Closes on court order on more than two (2) occasions in one (1) calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 639, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-159. - Public pool, spa or interactive water feature operator certification. 
(a)  Requirement. The person in charge of pool, spa or interactive water feature operations at a Class C pool as defined by the adopted regulations, shall have at least one (1) certified pool, spa or interactive water feature operator employed to maintain the pool, spa or interactive water feature for each apartment complex or municipal location. The certificate must be kept on premises to facilitate inspections. 
(b)  Termination of certified pool, spa or interactive water feature operator. In the event that a certified pool, spa or interactive water feature operator is terminated or transferred, the business shall have sixty (60) days from the operator's termination or transfer date to designate a new certificate holder. This requirement is applicable even if pool, spa or interactive water feature maintenance operations are contracted to an outside company. 
(Ord. No. 639, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-160. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 639, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 10-161. - Designation of health authority. 
The city designates the Medical Director of the Tarrant County Public Health Department as its health authority for the purpose of insuring minimum standards of environmental health and sanitation within the scope of that department's function. 
(Ord. No. 639, 7-12-11)  
Chapter 11 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Dog and cat licenses, § 3-3; animal control fees, § 3-6; kennel permits required, § 3-97 et seq.; prerequisites to occupancy of buildings, § 4-3 electrical licenses and temporary working permits, § 4-156 et seq.; electrical installation permits, § 4-191 et seq.; contractors' licenses, § 4-296 et seq.; plumbers' licenses, § 4-346 et seq.; permits for moving of buildings, § 4-431 et seq.; floodway development permits, § 8-56 et seq.; permit required for storage of mobile home on property, § 15-22; registration and work permit required of persons working in the street rights-of-way, § 17-2; permit required for street excavations, § 17-21; taxation, Ch. 18; permits required for connections to sanitary sewer systems, § 20-66 et seq.; permit required for construction of parking lots, § 19-127; permit required for liquid waste hauler, § 20-147. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 11-1—11-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AMUSEMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 14. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 11-31—11-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AMUSEMENT ARCADES 
 
Sec. 11-51. - Defined. 
The term "amusement arcade," as used in this division, shall mean and include any room, hall, building or place in which there is located any coin-operated amusement machine as defined in section 11-106, for the use of which a fee or charge is made, either directly or indirectly, and which place is operated for the sole purpose of an amusement or recreation facility. 
(Code 1977, § 4-81) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 11-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 511, adopted July 7, 2001, repealed § 11-52, which pertained to hours of operation of amusement arcades, and derived from the 1977 Code, § 4-82.  
Sec. 11-53. - Adult supervision required. 
No owner or operator of an amusement arcade in the city shall permit such amusement arcade to remain open unless there is an adult, who is an employee of the owner or operator, present at the arcade. 
(Code 1977, § 4-83)  
Sec. 11-54. - Gambling, drinking, smoking prohibited. 
The operator of an amusement arcade shall not permit gambling, betting or wagering of any kind or character to take place on the premises of the premises of the amusement arcade. The operator of an amusement arcade, or the person in charge thereof, shall not knowingly permit the drinking of intoxicating beverages, the smoking of marijuana, or the use of any narcotics on the premises of the amusement arcade. 
(Code 1977, § 4-84)  
Sec. 11-55. - Revocation of license. 
If any licensee who has been licensed under the provisions of division 4 of this article violates the provisions of this division or any other ordinance of the city or laws of the state, the chief of police may, at any time, give notice in writing for such licensee or operator of such amusement arcade for a hearing to be held for the purpose of determining if the license should be cancelled. Upon such hearing, the chief of police may cancel such license for any of the above causes, which action shall become final at the end of ten (10) days after such hearing. The licensee shall have the right of appeal to city council within such ten-day period. If such appeal is taken, the city council shall conduct a hearing on such cancellation and may cancel such license for any of the causes so shown, and such action shall be final. 
(Code 1977, § 4-85)  
Sec. 11-56. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 4-86)  
Secs. 11-57—11-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BINGO[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Bingo Enabling Act, V.A.C.S. art. 179d. 
 
Sec. 11-81. - Games authorized. 
Bingo games as authorized by the Texas Bingo Enabling Act are hereby permitted within the city limits. 
(Code 1977, § 4-91)  
Sec. 11-82. - Taxes. 
The city hereby elects to receive its share of any taxes to which it is entitled, as computed under the provisions of the Texas Bingo Enabling Act. 
(Code 1977, § 4-92)  
Secs. 11-83—11-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to levy tax, V.A.C.S. art. 8814; amount of state tax, art. 8802(1). 
 
Sec. 11-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Coin-operated machine means every machine or device of any kind or character which is operated by or with coins or metal slugs, tokens or checks, including "music coin-operated machines" and skill or pleasure coin-operated machines as defined in sections of Articles 8801 through 8817 of Chapter 8 of that title that is entitled "Coin-Operated Services" in Revised Civil Statutes of Texas. 
Operator means any person who exhibits, displays or permits to be exhibited or displayed, in a place of business other than his own, any "coin-operated" in this chapter. 
Owner means any person owning any coin-operated machine in this city. 
(Code 1977, § 4-11) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3. 
State Law reference— Simimilar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 8801.  
Sec. 11-107. - Amount of tax. 
(a)  Every owner, except an owner holding an import license and holding a coin-operated machine(s) solely for resale, who owns, controls, possesses, exhibits, displays, or permits to be exhibited or displayed in this city a coin-operated machine or machines, whether at the same or different locations, shall pay, and there is hereby levied on each coin-operated machine, an annual occupation tax of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per machine. 
(b)  The city may provide a duplicate permit if a valid permit has been lost, stolen or destroyed. The fee for a duplicate permit is one dollar ($1.00). 
(Code 1977, § 4-12; Ord. No. 497, § 1, 8-8-00)  
Sec. 11-108. - Sealing of machines by city. 
The city is authorized by article 8815 of the Revised Civil Statutes to seal any coin-operated machine on which the tax has not been paid. The fee for the release of any such machine sealed as provided in this section for nonpayment of tax is five dollars ($5.00). Whoever shall break the seal affixed in the name of the city or exhibit, display or remove from its location any machine on which the seal has been broken shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. 
(Code 1977, § 4-13)  
Sec. 11-109. - Penalties. 
Any person violating this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 4-14)  
Secs. 11-110—11-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 11-131. - Definitions. 
All definitions in the Rules on Food Service Sanitation and Rules on Retail Food Store Sanitation are hereby adopted. In addition the following definitions shall be understood: 
Childcare facility shall mean a facility keeping more than twelve (12) unrelated children that provides care, training, education, custody or supervision of children under fifteen (15) years of age, who are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for all or part of the day, whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the services it offers. Nonprofit facilities will be required to make application for a permit and meet current requirements but are exempt from payment of the permit fee. 
Food establishment shall mean all places where food or drink are manufactured, packaged, produced, processed, transported, stored, sold, commercially prepared, or otherwise handled, whether offered for sale, given in exchange or given away for use as food or furnished for human consumption. The term does not apply to private homes where food is prepared or served for guest and individual family consumption. The location of commercially packaged single portion nonpotentially hazardous snack items and wrapped candy sold over the counter is excluded. 
Health department shall mean representatives of the county health department. 
Ownership of business shall mean the owner or operator of the business. Each new business owner or operator shall comply with the current code of the city. 
Regulatory authority shall mean representatives of the county health department. 
Service of notice shall mean a notice provided for in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 3(a), (b), (d)—(f), 11-10-87; Ord. No. 432, § 4, 12-3-91)  
Sec. 11-132. - Designation of health authority. 
The city designates the county health department director as its health authority for the purpose of insuring minimum standards of environmental health and sanitation within the scope of that department's function. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 1, 11-10-87; Ord. No. 432, § 2, 12-3-91) 
Cross reference— Administration generally, Ch. 2.  
Sec. 11-133. - State regulations adopted. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by reference the Texas Department of Health, Division of Food and Drugs' Rules on Food Service Sanitation 301.73.11.001-.001 and the Rules on Retail Food Store Sanitation 229.231-.239, and the Texas Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (Article 4476-5 V.A.C.S.), and Texas Sanitation and Health Protection Law (V.A.C.S. Article 4477-1). 
(b)  A certified copy of each rule manual (above) shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 2, 11-10-87; Ord. No. 432, § 3, 12-3-91)  
Sec. 11-134. - Service of notices. 
A notice provided for in this article is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit, license, or certificate, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit, license, or certificate. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 384, §§ 3(c), 4(h), 11-10-87; Ord. No. 432, § 5(b), 12-3-91)  
Sec. 11-135. - Hearings. 
The hearings provided for in this article shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearings, the regulatory authority shall make a final finding, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit, license, or certificate by the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 4(i), 11-10-87; Ord. No. 432, § 5(i), 12-3-91)  
Sec. 11-136. - Appeal after hearings. 
Any permit holder who wishes to dispute the decision of a hearing under this article may appeal the decision to the director of the county health department. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 4(j), 11-10-87; Ord. No. 432, § 5(j), 12-3-91)  
Sec. 11-137. - Review of plans. 
(a)  Submission of plans. Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the health department for review and approval before construction, remodeling or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans, and construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The health department shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of this article. No food establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the health department. 
(b)  Preoperational inspection. The health department shall inspect any food establishment prior to its beginning operation to determine compliance with approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 5, 11-10-87; Ord. No. 432, § 6, 12-3-91)  
Sec. 11-138. - Food manager certification. 
(a)  Requirement. 
(1)  All food establishments handling open food and/or beverages shall have at least one (1) person employed on site in a managerial capacity possessing a current food manager certificate approved by the health department, unless specifically exempted in this article. 
(2)  All establishments with six (6) or more employees that are required to have certified food managers must have one (1) certified manager on duty per shift. 
(3)  Food manager certification certificates shall be posted along with the health permit. 
(b)  Expiration. 
(1)  Food manager certification is valid for a period of three (3) years from the date of issuance unless sooner revoked by the health department. 
(2)  Certification must be kept current at all times and all establishments must maintain compliance with food manager certification requirements. 
(c)  Revocation. 
(1)  Repeated violations of the state food rules, closure of a food establishment by the health department, or suspension of a health permit may constitute cause for immediate revocation of food manager certification. 
(d)  Change of managers. 
(1)  Termination or transfer of certified managers does not change the requirements as stated above. 
(2)  New managers shall have food manager certification prior to or immediately following employment or transfer to meet the requirement. 
(e)  Change of ownership. Since food manager certification requirements are frequently new to new owners, there will be a sixty-day grace period in which to obtain food manager certification following the date of actual change of ownership. 
(f)  New establishments. New food establishments must be in compliance with food manager certification requirements prior to issuance of the first health permit. 
(g)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Temporary food establishments. 
(2)  Establishments with uncut produce or packaged food only. 
(3)  Convenience stores with fountain drinks, coffee, and/or popcorn. 
(4)  Day care centers that do not prepare food other than heating/cooling of prepackaged items. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 6, 11-10-87; Ord. No. 432, § 7, 12-3-91)  
Secs. 11-139—11-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 11-161. - Requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment in the city, unless he possesses a current and valid health permit issued by the health department. 
(b)  Multiple permits. A separate permit shall be required for every food establishment or temporary food establishment with separate and distinct facilities and operations (as determined by the health department) whether situated in the same building or separate locations. 
(c)  Lounge operations. Separate and distinct lounge operations (in a food facility) will require a separate permit from food operations. However, multiple lounges on the same floor in the same building and under the same liquor license will not require a separate permit. 
(Ord. No. 432, §§ 5(a), (d), 12-13-91)  
Sec. 11-162. - Fees. 
(a)  Food establishments. A fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per health permit is required annually. Fees are due and payable on or before January third and are to be paid to the county health department at 1800 University Dr., Ft. Worth, Tx. 
(b)  Temporary establishments. A fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per health permit is required of any food establishments operating less than fourteen (14) days. Fees are due and payable as listed in paragraph (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 4(1), 11-10-87; Ord. No. 406, § 1, 12-5-89; Ord. No. 432, § 5(1), 12-3-91)  
Sec. 11-163. - Posting. 
A valid permit issued under this division shall be posted in public view in a conspicuous place at the food establishment for which it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 4(b), 11-10-87; Ord. No. 432, § 5(b), 12-3-91)  
Sec. 11-164. - Nontransferable. 
Permits issued under the provisions of this division are not transferable. Upon change of ownership of a business the new business owner will be required to meet current standards as defined in city ordinances and state law before a permit will be issued. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 4(c), 11-10-87; Ord. No. 432, § 5(c), 12-3-91)  
Sec. 11-165. - Suspension; hearing. 
(a)  The health department may suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the establishment does not comply with the requirements of this article, state laws and rules, or the operation of the food establishment otherwise constitutes an imminent health hazard. Before a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within ten (10) days of receipt of a written request for a hearing. Suspension is effective after a ten-day notice period is given by the health department in the event a public hearing is not requested. When a permit is suspended, food service operations shall immediately cease. 
(b)  Whenever a notice of suspension is given, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the permit is suspended. The health department may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exit. 
(c)  The regulatory authority shall immediately notify the city of any violations of this article or violations of state regulations or of any suspension or revocation of any permit authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 4(e), (f), 11-10-87; Ord. No. 432, §§ 5(e), (f), 8, 12-3-91)  
Sec. 11-166. - Revocation. 
The health department may, after providing notice and an opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article or for interference with the health department in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the health department shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten (10) days following service of such notice. Unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the health department by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 4(g), 11-10-87; Ord. No. 432, § 5(g), 12-3-91)  
Sec. 11-167. - Application after revocation. 
Whenever a revocation of a permit has become final, the holder of the revoked permit may make written application for a new permit to the health department. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 4(k), 11-10-87; Ord. No. 432, § 5(b), 12-3-91)  
Sec. 11-168. - Fine for violations. 
Any person who violates a provision of this article, upon conviction in the municipal court of Everman shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense, and each and every day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 432, § 9, 12-3-91)  
Secs. 11-169—11-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GARAGE SALES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 623, adopted March 10, 2009, amended Art. IV, §§ 11-191—11-194, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV pertained to the same subject matter and derived from the 1977 Code; Ord. No. 298, adopted Aug. 16, 1983; Ord. No. 334, adopted May 14, 1985; Ord. No. 338, adopted June 11, 1985; and Ord. No. 423, adopted Dec. 4, 1990. 
 
Sec. 11-191. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Estate sale. A display or offer of sale of personal property belonging to a deceased person by the heirs, administrators or executors of the deceased person, which takes place within nine (9) months from the date of death. 
Garage sale. The sale of tangible personal property or used or unwanted household items that is held in the garage, driveway or yard of the seller's residence; or the parking lot or sidewalk of a nonresidential property. The term garage sale includes the terms yard sale, estate sale, occasional sale, and similar terms. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 1, 3-10-09) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 11-192. - Regulations. 
(1)  Permit required. A permit shall be required to hold or have a garage sale. The permit may be issued to the owner or tenant of the residence, or to the owner of the nonresidential property. The sign issued by the city shall serve as the permit for the sale. The permit number shall be listed on the sign. The permit for sales on a nonresidential property shall be in addition to any special event sales or temporary outdoor sales allowed by the zoning regulations. 
(2)  Number and duration of sales. The number of garage sales on a property shall not exceed four (4) during any calendar year period from January 1 to December 31. The duration of each sale shall not exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days, except that, if the sale is an estate sale, then the property may be displayed, offered for sale or sold for a continuous period not to exceed seven (7) consecutive calendar days, but under the following terms and conditions: 
(a)  No personal property shall be displayed, offered for sale or sold within an open garage or in a front yard. 
(b)  All displays shall be within the confines of the house. 
(3)  Conditions of sale. Tangible personal property shall be sold only on the premises of the owner or tenant of the residential property where the sale is conducted, or on the premises of the owner of the nonresidential property where the sale is conducted. The owner or tenant must be the legal owner of such tangible personal property at the time of such sale. The items for sale shall be confined to the garage, porch, patio or yard on the premises of the residence, and to the parking lot or sidewalk on the premises of a nonresidential property. No merchandise acquired solely for the purpose of resale, shall be sold at a garage sale. 
(4)  Sales affected by rain or inclement weather. If a property owner or tenant has purchased a garage sale permit, and the majority of the scheduled dates for the sale are affected by rain or other inclement weather, as determined by city staff, a rain-out permit may be issued at no cost provided the property owner or tenant returns the sign originally issued as the permit. The new permit must be issued within thirty (30) days of the date of the original permit. If the permit was issued for two (2) or three (3) days and the rain or inclement weather affects only one (1) day during the permit period, a rain-out permit shall not be issued. 
(5)  Multiple garage sales. In the event of multiple garage sales in one (1 subdivision, each property participating in the event will be required to obtain a permit. 
(6)  Permit fee. The permit fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00), fifteen dollars ($15.00) of which shall be refunded when all of the signs are returned as required by subsection 11-193(5). 
(Ord. No. 623, § 1, 3-10-09)  
Sec. 11-193. - Signs. 
(1)  On-premises signs. Three (3) signs shall be issued by the city with the permit. The sign shall be posted on the property conducting the sale in a location visible from the street, as it serves as the permit for the sale. No other garage sale signs shall be permitted. 
(2)  Off-premises signs. Up to two (2) off-premises signs may be placed on private property, subject to permission of the property owner where the sign is to be located. 
(3)  Sign locations. 
(a)  Signs shall not be placed on utility poles, street sign poles, or other fixed objects in the city or state rights-of-way. 
(b)  Signs shall not be placed within a street median or a visibility triangle. 
(4)  Removal of signs. Signs shall not be posted more than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the beginning of the sale. The sign advertising a garage sale shall be removed by the permittee not later than twenty-four (24) hours following the expiration of the permit. 
(5)  Return of sign. The sign must be returned to City Hall within ten (10) days after the expiration of the permit, at which time the refund in subsection 11-192(6) shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 1, 3-10-09)  
Sec. 11-194. - Right to deny permit. 
If any person is cited for violation of this article two (2) or more times during any twelve-month period, the City of Everman may refuse to issue that individual a permit to hold a garage sale anytime during the subsequent twelve-month period. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 1, 3-10-09)  
Secs. 11-195—11-215. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PEDDLERS OR SOLICITORS 
 
Sec. 11-216. - Policy of city declared. 
In order to promote and protect the general health, safety and welfare of persons residing in the city, and to secure such persons in their right to privacy and prevention from annoyances, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that no person may go in or upon private residences in the city to peddle or sell products or services, or to solicit the sale of products or services, for the private profit of the person doing same, when not requested or invited to do so by the occupants of such residences. 
(Code 1977, § 4-1)  
Sec. 11-217. - Not to go upon private residences without invitation. 
No person may go in or upon a private residence in the city for the purpose of peddling or selling products or services, or to solicit the sale of products or services, for the private profit of the person doing same, when not requested or invited to do so by the occupants of such private residence. 
(Code 1977, § 4-2)  
Sec. 11-218. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 4-3)  
Secs. 11-219—11-249. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - USE OF CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY FOR SOLICITATION OR SALES 
 
Sec. 11-250. - Offense. 
It shall be an offense to go upon, stand, or otherwise use the city right-of-way, including streets and highways, to solicit, raise, or ask for donations or contributions, or to sell any goods, product, or service. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 8-11-98)  
Sec. 11-251. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Written permission from city council. It shall not constitute an offense under section 11-250 if a group has written permission from the city council. 
(b)  Application. Any group desiring to obtain written permission from the city council to use the city right-of-way shall file a written application with the city secretary at least three (3) days before a regularly scheduled city council meeting and must have a representative present at the city council meeting. The application must state the date, place, time and purpose for which the group desires to use the city right-of-way, and must list every person that will be participating with the group and the age of each person. 
(c)  Factors in determining whether to grant permission. In determining whether to grant permission to a group, the city council must consider at least the following factors: 
(1)  The age of the participants; 
(2)  The obstruction or interference that the use of the city right-of-way will cause to the flow of traffic; 
(3)  The location at which the group desires to use the city right-of-way; 
(4)  The day and time at which the group desires to use the city right-of-way; 
(5)  The number of people or groups that will be using the city right-of-way at a particular location; and 
(6)  The purpose for which the group desires to use the city right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 8-11-98)  
Secs. 11-252—11-274. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 11-275. - Definitions. 
Alarm business means the business of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing, or monitoring an alarm system at an alarm site. 
Alarm site means the specific property or area of the premises on or within which an alarm system is installed or placed. 
(a)  If an alarm system is installed by an individual tenant in an apartment complex, duplex, townhome, mini-storage warehouse, or other similar premises, the tenant shall obtain a permit before operating or causing the operation of the alarm system. The tenant must provide the name of a representative of the complex who can grant access to the apartment or other type of unit. 
(b)  If the owner or property manager of an apartment complex, duplex, townhome, mini-storage warehouse, or other similar premises provides alarm systems in each apartment or other type of unit as an amenity, the owner or property manager shall obtain a permit before operating or causing the operation of the alarm system. 
Alarm system means any mechanical or electrical device that is used to protect buildings or premises from criminal acts, unauthorized entries, or fire damage by transmitting a signal intended to summon police or fire services of a municipality or by warning persons of a crime, unauthorized entry or fire through the emission of a sound or the transmission of a signal or message. Alarm system does not include: 
(a)  An alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is used for a habitation at a permanent site; or 
(b)  An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises. 
False alarm means an alarm signal received by the police chief or his representative for which a response is made within thirty (30) minutes and which, from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises, is determined not to involve a criminal offense, attempted criminal offense, fire or other emergency. 
Permit holder means the person designated in an alarm permit application who is responsible for responding to alarms, giving access to the site, and proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of the fees. 
Person means an individual firm, corporation, partnership, association, organization, or similar entity. 
Public safety communications center means the office responsible for receiving requests for emergency services and for dispatching appropriate police or fire personnel in the city. 
(Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-11-2000)  
Sec. 11-276. - Permit required; fee; application; false statements. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person operates, or causes to be operated, an alarm system without a valid alarm permit issued by the police chief. A separate permit is required for each alarm site. 
(b)  An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person. A new permit and permit fee is required within thirty (30) days after: 
(1)  The installation of the alarm system; 
(2)  The expiration or revocation of a permit; or 
(3)  The transfer of a person occupying or in control of the alarm system at an alarm site. 
(c)  The annual fee for a permit (whether new or transferred) or permit renewal for an alarm site is twenty dollars ($20.00). No refund of a permit or permit renewal fee will be made. 
(d)  Each permit application must be made on a form provided by the police chief and must include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone numbers of the person who will be the permit holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this article; 
(2)  The classification of the alarm site as residential, commercial, or multifamily dwelling or mini-warehouse or other similar premises; 
(3)  For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the purpose of the alarm system, i.e., burglary, fire, or other; 
(4)  The date of installation, or the date of the transfer of a person occupying or in control of the alarm system at an alarm site, whichever is applicable; and 
(5)  The name, address, and phone number of the alarm business monitoring and installing the alarm system installation and responsible for providing repair service to the alarm system. 
(e)  Any false statement of a material matter made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a permit. 
(f)  All fees owed by an applicant must be paid before a permit may be issued or renewed. 
(g)  To the extent permitted by law, information contained in permit applications shall be held in confidence by all employees or representatives of the city with access to such information. 
(Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-11-2000)  
Sec. 11-277. - Revocation of a permit. 
(a)  The police chief may suspend or revoke a permit if the police chief determines that the permit holder: 
(1)  Made a false statement of a material matter in the application for a permit; 
(2)  Failed to make timely payment of a false alarm fee assessed under section 11-283; or 
(3)  Has committed and has not remedied a violation of section 11-279. 
(b)  A permit holder commits an offense if the person operates the alarm system during a period in which the alarm permit is suspended or revoked. 
(c)  The police chief may refuse police response to an alarm system at an alarm site for which the alarm permit is revoked, suspended, or there is no permit, unless the permit holder has paid all false alarm fees. 
(Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-11-2000)  
Sec. 11-278. - Permit duration; renewal. 
A permit shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance, and must be renewed annually by submitting an updated application and permit fee to the police chief. The city shall attempt to notify each permit holder of the need to renew at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the permit holder's permit. However, it is the responsibility of the permit holder to submit an application prior to the permit expiration date. Failure to renew will be classified as use of a nonpermitted alarm system and citations may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-11-2000)  
Sec. 11-279. - Proper alarm system operation and maintenance. 
A permit holder shall: 
(1)  Maintain the premises in a manner that assures proper operation of the alarm system; 
(2)  Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm notification; 
(3)  Respond or cause a representative to respond, within a reasonable period of time, to a request by the city to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, and to provide access to the premises or to provide security for the premises; 
(4)  In the event that an alarm is activated on the premises, immediately report or have an alarm company charged with responsibility of notification immediately report such alarm to the public safety communications center. No owner, occupant, or alarm company shall delay or interfere with the immediate notification of the fire alarm to the public safety communications center; 
(5)  Refrain from manually activating an alarm for any reason other than the occurrence of any event that the alarm system was intended to report; 
(6)  Notify the public safety communications center prior to activating an alarm for maintenance purposes; and 
(7)  Maintain at each alarm site a complete set of written operating instructions for each alarm system along with special codes, combinations, or passwords included in these instructions. 
(Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-11-2000)  
Sec. 11-280. - Alarm activation, limitation and reset requirements. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install or utilize any alarm system that causes an audible signal to be emitted for more than thirty (30) minutes after being activated or that emits a subsequent alarm without being reset. 
(Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-11-2000)  
Sec. 11-281. - Indirect alarm reporting. 
A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notification to the city shall: 
(1)  Communicate the alarm notification to the city in a manner and form determined by the police chief; and 
(2)  Comply with the requirements of this chapter and any rules and regulations promulgated by the police chief. 
(Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-11-2000)  
Sec. 11-282. - Automatic alarm notification prohibited. 
An alarm system which transmits automatic alarm notification to the public safety communications center is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-11-2000)  
Sec. 11-283. - False alarm fees. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b), (c), (d) and (e) below, the permit holder shall pay a false alarm fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each notification from any alarm system within any twelve-month period that is in excess of five (5) alarms. 
(b)  Upon adequate proof presented to the police chief of the date of installation of a new alarm system, no false alarm fee will be assessed during the first thirty (30) days after the system is put into service, and alarm notifications during that period will not be counted in determining when a false alarm fee will be assessed. 
(c)  An alarm notification will not be counted in determining when a service fee will be assessed if the permit holder can prove that the alarm notification was the result of a severe weather condition, such as a tornado, hurricane, earthquake, or other weather condition that causes physical damage to the alarm site, or the result of malfunction of the telephone lines for the transmission of the alarm signals, proof of the latter being documented upon the telephone company work orders or time stamped records from the alarm company showing the period of interrupted service. 
(Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-11-2000)  
Sec. 11-284. - Appeals from denial or revocation of permit; appeals from false alarm fees. 
(a)  If the police chief refuses to issue an initial permit or to renew a permit, or revokes a permit, the police chief shall send to the permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and a statement of the permit holder's right to appeal. The permit holder may appeal the decision of the police chief to the city council by filing with the city secretary a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice from the police chief. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city secretary stays an action of the police chief in revoking a permit until the city council makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action of the police chief is final. 
(b)  A permit holder may appeal assessment of a fee to the city council by filing with the city secretary a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten (10) days after the imposition of the fee. 
(c)  The city council shall conduct a hearing and consider the evidence presented by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The council shall make a decision on the basis of the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing, including, but not limited to, evidence that a false alarm notification was caused by a defective part that has been repaired or replaced, or was caused by a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense; certification that the permit holder has received training on using the alarm system; or other evidence that the cause of a false alarm has been otherwise determined and corrected. 
(Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-11-2000)  
Sec. 11-285. - Offenses; penalties. 
A person commits an offense if he violates by commission or omission any provision of this article that imposes upon him a duty or responsibility, and is subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-11-2000)  
Secs. 11-286—11-299. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES 
 
Sec. 11-300. - Permit fees. 
The following fees are hereby levied and assessed and shall be collected by the city for each permit issued by the state pursuant to the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, for premises located within the city, which fee shall be paid by the permittee: 
(a)  Brewer's permit. The annual fee for each holder of a brewer's permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 12.01, shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
(b)  Nonresident brewer's permit. The annual fee for each holder of a nonresident brewer's permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 13.01, shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
(c)  Distiller's and rectifier's permit. The annual fee for each holder of a distiller's and rectifier's permits, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 14.01, shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
(d)  Winery permit. The annual fee for each holder of a winery permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 16.01, shall be thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50). 
(e)  Wine bottlers permit. The annual fee for each holder of a wine bottlers permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 18.01, shall be one hundred twelve dollars and fifty cents ($112.50). 
(f)  Wholesaler's permit. The annual fee for each holder of a wholesaler's permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 19.01, shall be nine hundred thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($937.50). 
(g)  General class B wholesaler's permit. The annual fee for each holder of a general class B wholesaler's permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 20.01, shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(h)  Local class B wholesaler's permit. The annual fee for each holder of a local class B wholesaler's permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 21.01, shall be thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50). 
(i)  Package store permit. The annual fee for each holder of a package store permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 22.01, shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(j)  Local distributor's permit. The annual fee for each holder of a local distributor's permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 23.01, shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(k)  Wine only package store permit. The annual fee for each holder of a wine only package store permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 24.01, shall be thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50). 
(l)  Wine and beer retailer's permit. The annual fee for each holder of a wine and beer retailer's permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 25.01, shall be eighty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($87.50). 
(m)  Wine and beer retailer's off-premises permit. The annual fee for each holder of a wine and beer retailer's off-premises permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 26.01, shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(n)  Mixed beverage permit. The annual fee for each holder of a mixed beverage permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 28.01, shall be three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00). A mixed beverage permit is exempt from the fee authorized by this section during the three-year period following the issuance of the permit. 
(o)  Mixed beverage late hours permit. The annual fee for each holder of a mixed beverage late hours permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 29.01, shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(p)  Daily temporary mixed beverage permit. The annual fee for each holder of a daily temporary mixed beverage permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 30.01, shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(q)  Caterer's permit. The annual fee for each holder of a caterer's permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 31.01, shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(r)  Private club late hours permit. The annual fee for each holder of a private club late hours permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 33.01, shall be three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00). 
(s)  Nonresident seller's permit. The annual fee for each holder of a nonresident seller's permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 37.01, shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(t)  Medicinal permit. The annual fee for each holder of a medicinal permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 39.01, shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(u)  Physician's permit. The annual fee for each holder of a physician's permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 40.01, shall be fifty cents ($0.50). 
(v)  Beverage cartage permit. The annual fee for each holder of a beverage cartage permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 44.01, shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(w)  Bonded, warehouse permit. The annual fee for each holder of a bonded warehouse permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 46.01, shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(x)  Local industrial alcohol manufacturer's permit. The annual fee for each holder of a local industrial alcohol manufacturer's permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 47.01, shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(y)  Market research packager's permit. The annual fee for each holder of a market research packager's permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 46.01, shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(z)  Minibar permit. The annual fee for each holder of a minibar permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 51.02, shall be: 
1.  One thousand dollars ($1000.00) for an original permit; 
2.  Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the first renewal of a permit; 
3.  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second renewal of a permit; and 
4.  Three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00) for the third and each subsequent renewal. 
(aa)  Package store tasting permit. The annual fee for each holder of a package store tasting permit, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 52.01, shall be twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50). 
(Ord. No. 502, § 1, 11-14-00)  
Sec. 11-301. - License fees. 
The following fees are hereby levied and assessed and shall be collected by the city for each license issued by the state pursuant to the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, for premises located within the city, which fee shall be paid by the licensee: 
(a)  Manufacturer's license. The annual fee for each holder of a manufacturers license, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 62.01, shall be as follows: 
1.  Three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00) for the first establishment. 
2.  Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the second establishment. 
3.  Two thousand one hundred thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($2,137.50) for each of the third, fourth and fifth establishments. 
4.  Four thousand two hundred dollars ($4,200.00) for each establishment in excess of five (5). 
(b)  General distributor's license. The annual fee for each holder of a general distributor's license, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 64.01, shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(c)  Local distributor's license. The annual fee for each holder of a local distributor's license, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 65.01, shall be thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50). 
(d)  Branch distributor's license. The annual fee for each holder of a branch distributor's license, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 66.01, shall be thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50). 
(e)  Importer's license. The annual fee for each holder of an importer's license, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 67.01, shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(f)  Importer's carrier's license. The annual fee for each holder of an importer's carrier's license, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 68.01, shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(g)  Retail dealer's on-premises license. The annual fee for each holder of a retail dealer's on-premises license, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 69.01, shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(h)  Retail dealer's on-premises late hours license. The annual fee for each holder of a retail dealer's on-premises late hours license, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 70.01, shall be one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). 
(i)  Retail dealer's off-premises license. The annual fee for each holder of a retail dealer's off-premises license, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 71.01, shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(j)  Brewpub licensee. The annual fee for each holder of a brewpub license, as defined by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 74.01, shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 502, § 1, 11-14-00)  
Sec. 11-302. - Issuance of permit. 
Upon the payment of the applicable tax or fee prescribed in this chapter to the city secretary and exhibition to the city secretary of a permit duly issued by the state to the applicant or person paying such tax or fee, the city secretary shall, in the name of the city, issue and deliver to such applicant or person a permit to engage in the business in the city of the character described in and authorized by the permit from the state held by such applicant or person. The permit so issued in the name of the city shall authorize the conduct of such business upon the premises described in the permit from the state, and shall remain in force only so long as such permit from the state remains in force. 
(Ord. No. 502, § 1, 11-14-00)  
Sec. 11-303. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall fail to pay any tax or fee prescribed by this chapter and secure a permit before engaging in any business for which the payment of any such fee and securing of any such permit is required by the terms of this chapter, or who shall engage in any such business without holding an unrevoked or unexpired permit from the city authorizing the same shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 502, § 1, 11-14-00)  
Secs. 11-304—11-324. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES 
 
Sec. 11-325. - Sale of liquor and beer prohibited in residential areas. 
The sale of liquor or beer shall be prohibited in all residential areas of the city. No permit shall be issued for the sale of liquor or beer in any residential area of the City of Everman, Texas. For the purpose of this section, the term "residential area" shall include all areas of the city presently zoned residential and all land hereinafter zoned residential, provided that this section shall not apply to any permit issued for premises zoned commercial at the time of such issuance and subsequently rezoned residential. 
(Ord. No. 678, § 1, 10-10-14)  
Sec. 11-326. - Regulations prohibiting sale of alcoholic beverages near a church, public or private school, or public hospital. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity who is engaged in the business of selling alcoholic beverages to sell the same at a place of business that is within: 
(1)  Three hundred (300) feet of a church, public or private school, or public hospital; or 
(2)  One thousand (1,000) feet of a private school if the city council receives a request from the governing body of the private school, and deems it appropriate given all circumstances. 
(b)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. 
(c)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public or private school shall be: 
(1)  In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or 
(2)  If the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located. 
(d)  Every applicant for an original alcoholic beverage license or permit for a location with a door by which the public may enter the place of business of the applicant that is within one thousand (1,000) feet of the nearest property line of a public or private school, measured along street lines and directly across intersections, must give written notice of the application to officials of the public or private school before filing the application with the city and the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. A copy of the notice must be submitted to the city and the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission with the application. This subsection does not apply to a permit or license covering a location where minors are prohibited from entering the premises under V.T.C.A. Alcohol Beverage Code § 109.53. 
(e)  Subsection (a)(1) does not apply to the holder of a license or permit covering a premises that is located within three hundred (300) feet of a private school if the permit holder also holds a food and beverage certificate for the covered premises or if the permit covers a premises where minors are prohibited from entering under V.T.C.A. Alcohol Beverage Code § 109.53. 
(1)  In this section, "private school" means a private school, including a parochial school, that offers a course of instruction for students in one (1) or more grades from kindergarten through grade 12 and has more than one hundred (100) students enrolled and attending courses at a single location. 
(f)  The city council may allow a variance to this section if it determines that the enforcement of the regulations in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land and resources, creates an undue hardship on the applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other reason the city council determines, after consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, that the variance is in the best interest of the community. 
(g)  Subsection (a)(2) does not apply to the holder of a permit issued under V.T.C.A. Alcohol Beverage Code Ch. 27, 31 or 72 who is operating on the premises of a private school or a permit covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering under V.T.C.A. Alcohol Beverage Code § 109.53 and that is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a private school. 
(h)  To the extent applicable under V.T.C.A. Alcohol Beverage Code § 109.331, the provisions of subsection (a)(1) relating to a public school also apply to a day-care center and child-care facility as those terms are defined in V.T.C.A. Human Resources Code § 42.002. 
(i)  As authorized by V.T.C.A. Alcohol Beverage Code § 109.36, the city council may allow a variance to this section if it determines that the enforcement of the regulations in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land and resources, creates an undue hardship on the applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other reason the city council determines, after consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, that the variance is in the best interest of the community. 
(Ord. No. 678, § 1, 10-10-14)  
Sec. 11-327. - Permit or license required. 
(a)  No person shall sell alcoholic beverages in the City of Everman unless a permit or license authorizing such sale is first issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission and remains in effect. 
(b)  No permit or license shall be issued except in conformance with all state and city regulations. 
(c)  A fee for each issued permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the amount of which shall equal one-half (½) the state fee excluding surcharges collected under V.T.C.A. Alcohol Beverage Code § 5.56, is established and set forth in article VIII of this chapter. The permit or license fee shall be collected by the city when the permit or license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 678, § 1, 10-10-14)  
Sec. 11-328. - Hours for sale of alcoholic beverages, wine and beer, if permitted. 
If the sale of alcoholic beverages, wine or beer for off-premises consumption is permitted by the Code, the hours permitted for the sale of alcoholic beverages, wine or beer shall be governed by V.T.C.A. Alcohol Beverage Code §§ 105.04 and 105.05, as now written or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 678, § 1, 10-10-14)  
Sec. 11-329. - Regulation of food and beverage certificate holders. 
(a)  A person or entity engaged in the sale of mixed beverages in a restaurant under a food and beverage certificate shall, on an annual basis, on a day coinciding with the date that such information is furnished to the State of Texas, file with the city secretary an affidavit showing the gross receipts and sales of the business. The affidavit shall contain a statement reflecting the gross receipts attributable to the premises and the gross receipts attributable to the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  The food and beverage certificate holder shall also file with the city secretary, on an annual basis, on a date coinciding with the date such information is furnished to the State of Texas, the gross receipts and figures furnished to the State of Texas for sales tax and alcoholic beverage tax purposes. This provision applies to restaurants, cafes, cafeterias or eating establishments and to a permittee of a federal or state agency. 
The food and beverage certificate holder shall also furnish receipts from suppliers upon request of the city secretary. Such receipts shall reflect current operations and operations for the previous twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 678, § 1, 10-10-14)  
Chapter 12 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, § 9.01 et seq. 
Cross reference— General penalty for Code violations, § 1-7; emergency management, Ch. 6; offenses, Ch. 13; police, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, V.T.C.A. Government Code, § 29.001 et seq. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), adopted July 23, 2019, repealed the former Ch. 12, and enacted a new Ch. 12 as set out herein. The former Ch. 12 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1977 §§ 1-136, 1-137, 1-140; Ord. No. 417, § 1, adopted June 19, 1990; Ord. No. 460, §§ 1, 2, adopted November 14, 1996; Ord. No. 489, §§ I—III, adopted December 14, 1999. 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Municipal court of record created. 
(a)  There is hereby created the "Municipal Court of Record in the City of Everman, Texas." The municipal court of record shall be comprised of as many divisions as the city council deems necessary. The municipal court that is operating on the date that this ordinance is adopted shall transfer its pending cases to the municipal court of record in the City of Everman, Texas and be abolished, and all cases arising from alleged actions or inactions occurring after the date of the adoption of this ordinance shall be filed within the new municipal court of record for disposition. 
(b)  The court shall have no term and may sit at any time for the transaction of business of the court. Where the term "municipal court" is used in the City's Code of Ordinances, it shall mean the municipal court of record created herein. Any provision of the city's charter, ordinances or state law that is applicable to a municipal court shall be applicable to the municipal court of record created herein unless the provision is in conflict with or inconsistent with Chapters 29 or 30 of the Texas Government Code, as amended, which governs municipal courts of record. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-2. - Jurisdictional limits of court. 
(a)  The court has all such jurisdiction as is provided to municipal courts by Sections 29.003 and 30.005, Texas Government Code. 
(b)  The court has concurrent jurisdiction with a justice court in any precinct in which the municipality is located in criminal cases that arise within the territorial limits of the City of Everman and are punishable by fine only. 
(c)  The court has civil jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing municipal ordinances enacted under Subchapter A, Chapter 214, Texas Local Government Code, or Subchapter E, Chapter 683, Texas Transportation Code. 
(d)  The court has concurrent jurisdiction with a district court or a county court at law under Subchapter B, Chapter 54, Texas Local Government Code, within the city's territorial limits and property owned by the city located in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing health and safety and nuisance abatement ordinances. 
(e)  The court has authority to issue: 
(1)  Search warrants for the purpose of investigating a health and safety or nuisance abatement ordinance violation; and 
(2)  Seizure warrants for the purpose of securing, removing, or demolishing the offending property and removing the debris from the premises. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-3. - Municipal judge appointment. 
(a)  The municipal court of record shall be presided over by a judge, who shall be known as the "municipal judge." The judge shall be appointed by the city council for a term of two (2) years and shall be entitled to a salary set by the city council. The amount of the judge's salary may not be diminished during the judge's term of office. The salary may not be based directly or indirectly on fines, fees, or costs collected by the court. 
(b)  Upon the adoption of this ordinance, the current presiding judge of the Municipal Court of Everman shall become the judge of the Municipal Court of Record in the City of Everman. The initial term shall expire two (2) years from the date of his/her last appointment by the city council as judge of the municipal court. At the conclusion of the initial term described herein, all succeeding terms of the municipal judge shall be two (2) years from the date of the last appointment by the city council. 
(c)  The municipal judge must: 
(1)  Be a citizen of the United States; 
(2)  Be a resident of this state; 
(3)  Be a licensed attorney in good standing; 
(4)  Have two (2) or more years of experience in the practice of law in this state; and as may be amended by Texas Government Code Sec. 30.00006. 
(d)  A person may not serve as a municipal judge if the person is otherwise employed by the municipality. A municipal judge who accepts other employment with the municipality vacates the judicial office. 
(e)  If a vacancy occurs in the office of municipal judge, the city council shall adopt an ordinance appointing a qualified person to fill the office for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(f)  There may also be alternate judges appointed by the city council, subject to the same qualifications, who shall have all the powers and shall discharge all the duties of a municipal judge while serving as municipal judge. In the event of the appointment of any such alternate judge, the regular municipal judge shall be titled and known as "presiding judge." Each alternate judge shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. If the presiding judge is temporarily absent due to illness, family death, continuing legal or judicial education programs, or any other reason, he/she shall select one (1) of the alternate judge(s) to serve during his/her absence. 
(g)  Upon the adoption of this ordinance, the current alternate judge(s) of the Municipal Court of Everman shall become the alternate judge(s) of the Municipal Court of Record in the City of Everman. The initial term shall expire two (2) years from the date of his/her last appointment by the city council as alternate judge of the municipal court. At the conclusion of the initial term described herein, all succeeding terms of the alternate municipal judge shall be two (2) years from the date of the last appointment by the city council. 
(h)  The municipal judges may exchange benches and act for each other in any proceeding pending in the court. An act performed by any of the judges is binding on all parties to the proceeding. 
(i)  The municipal judge(s) shall take judicial notice of state law and the ordinances and corporate limits of the municipality. 
(j)  The judge(s) of the municipal court may grant writs of mandamus, injunction, attachment, and other writs necessary to the enforcement of the court's jurisdiction and may issue writs of habeas corpus in cases in which the offense charged is within the jurisdiction of the court. 
(k)  A municipal judge is a magistrate and may issue administrative search warrants. 
(l)  A municipal judge may be removed from office by the city council as provided by the Everman Charter section 9.03 and: 
(1)  As provided by Section 1-a, Article V, Texas Constitution; or 
(2)  For the reasons and by the procedure provided in Subchapter B, Chapter 21, Texas Local Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-4. - Court rules. 
The Code of Criminal Procedure and the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure, as modified by Chapter 30, Texas Government Code, govern the trial of cases before the municipal court of record. The court may make and enforce all rules of practice and procedure necessary to expedite the trial of cases before the court that are not inconsistent with law. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-5. - Municipal court clerk appointment, powers and duties. 
The city manager of the city shall appoint a clerk of the municipal court of record who may hire, direct, and remove the personnel authorized in the city's annual budget for the clerk's office. The clerk or the clerk's deputies shall keep the records of the municipal court of record, issue process, and generally perform the duties for the court that a clerk of the county court at law exercising criminal jurisdiction is required by law to perform for that court. In addition, the clerk or the clerk's deputies shall maintain an index of all court judgments in the same manner as county clerks are required by law to prepare for criminal cases arising in county courts. The clerk shall perform the duties in accordance with statutes, and the charter and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-6. - Preserving court record. 
For the purpose of recording the proceedings and preserving a record in all cases tried before the municipal court of record, a good quality electronic recording device shall be used. When the recording device is used, a court reporter need not be present at the trial to certify the reporter's record. The recording shall be kept and stored for a 20-day period beginning the day after a final order has been entered in the proceeding, upon completion of the trial, or after the denial of motion for a new trial, whichever occurs last. If a case is appealed, the proceedings shall be transcribed from the recording by an official court reporter. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-7. - Court facilities and seal. 
(a)  The city council shall provide courtrooms, jury rooms, offices, office furniture, libraries, law books, and other facilities and supplies that the city council determines necessary for the proper operation of the municipal court of record. 
(b)  The city council shall provide the municipal court of record with a seal that contains the phrase "Municipal Court of The City of EVERMAN, Texas." The seal's use must conform to Article 45.012 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-8. - Complaints and pleadings. 
Proceedings in the municipal court of record shall commence by complaint, as provided by state law. Complaints and pleadings must substantially conform to the relevant provisions of Chapters 212 and 45, Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-9. - Prosecution. 
Prosecution in the municipal court of record shall be conducted as provided by Article 45.201, Code of Criminal Procedure. Prosecution may be performed by the city attorney or another lawyer designated as municipal prosecutor/deputy city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-10. - Jury. 
(a)  A person who is brought before the municipal court of record and who is charged with an offense is entitled to be tried by a jury of six (6) persons. Trial by jury, including the summoning of jurors, must substantially conform to Chapter 45, Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)  The court clerk shall supervise the selection of persons for jury service. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-11. - Appeal from judgment or conviction. 
(a)  A defendant has the right of appeal from a judgment or conviction in the municipal court of record. The State of Texas has the right to appeal as provided by Article 44.01, Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)  The appellate court shall determine each appeal from a municipal court of record conviction and each appeal from the state on the basis of the errors that are set forth in the appellant's motion and that are presented in the clerk's record and reporter's record prepared from the proceedings leading to the conviction or appeal. An appeal from the municipal court of record shall not be by trial de novo. 
(c)  To perfect an appeal, the appellant must file a motion for new trial not later than the tenth day after the date on which the judgment and sentence are rendered. The motion must be in writing and must be filed with the clerk of the municipal court of record. The motion must set forth the points of error of which the appellant complains. The motion or an amended motion may be amended by leave of court at any time before action on the motion is taken, but not later than the twentieth day after the date on which the original or amended motion is filed. The court may for good cause extend the time for filing or amending, but the extension may not exceed ninety (90) days from the original filing deadline. If the court does not act on the motion before the expiration of the thirty (30) days allowed for determination of the motion, the original or amended motion is overruled by operation of law. 
(d)  To perfect an appeal, the appellant must also give notice of the appeal. If the appellant requests a hearing on the motion for new trial, the appellant may give the notice of appeal orally in open court on the overruling of the motion. If there is no hearing, the appellant must give a written notice of appeal and must file the notice with the court no later than the tenth day after the date on which the motion is overruled. The court may for good cause extend that time period, but the extension may not exceed ninety (90) days from the original filing deadline. 
(e)  The fee for the preparation of the clerk's record, which does not include the fee the defendant must pay for an actual transcript of the proceedings, is twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The clerk shall note the payment of the fee on the docket of the court. If the case is reversed on appeal, the fee shall be refunded to the defendant.  
Sec. 12-12. - Appeal bond and record on appeal. 
(a)  If the defendant is not in custody, the defendant may not take an appeal until the defendant files an appeal bond with the municipal court of record. The bond must be approved by the court and must be filed not later than the tenth day after the date on which the motion for new trial is overruled. If the defendant is in custody, the defendant shall be committed to jail unless the defendant posts the appeal bond. 
(b)  The appeal bond must be in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or double the amount of fines and costs adjudged against the defendant, whichever is greater. 
(c)  The bond must: 
(1)  State that the defendant was convicted in the case and has appealed; 
(2)  Be conditioned on the defendant's immediate and daily personal appearance in the court to which the appeal is taken; and 
(3)  Be in the form of either a cash bond, or surety bond naming two (2) or more good and sufficient sureties as approved by the clerk of the court. 
(d)  After an order overruling a motion for new trial, the defendant shall give written notice of appeal and pay a fee for the preparation of the clerk's record of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) not later than ten (10) days after the date on which the motion is overruled. The court shall note the payment of the fee on the docket of the court. If the case is reversed on appeal, the fee shall be refunded to the defendant. The defendant shall pay the fee for the preparation of the clerk's record and the fee for an actual transcription of the proceedings. 
(e)  The record on appeal must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of a transcript in the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-13. - Statement of facts. 
(a)  A reporter's record included in the record on appeal must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of a reporter's record in the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)  The appellant shall pay for the reporter's record. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-14. - Bills of exception. 
Bills of exception must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of bills of exception in the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-15. - Transfer of record. 
(a)  Not later than the sixtieth day after the date on which the notice of appeal is given or filed, the parties must file the following with the clerk of the municipal court: 
(1)  The reporter's record; 
(2)  A written description of material to be included in the clerk's record in addition to the required material; and 
(3)  Any material to be included in the clerk's record that is not in the custody of the clerk. 
(b)  On completion of the record, the municipal judge shall approve the record in the manner provided for record completion, approval, and notification in the court of appeals. 
(c)  After the court approves the record, the clerk shall promptly forward the record to the appellate court clerk. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-16. - New trial. 
(a)  Each party, on filing the party's brief on appeal with the appellate court clerk, shall deliver a copy of the brief to the municipal judge. 
(b)  The trial court shall decide from the briefs of the parties whether the appellant should be permitted to withdraw the notice of appeal and be granted a new trial by the court. The court may grant a new trial at any time before the record is filed with the appellate court. 
(c)  If the appellate court awards a new trial to the appellant, the case stands as if a new trial had been granted by the municipal court of record. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-17. - Certificate of appellate proceedings. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the certificate of appellate proceedings from the appellate court clerk, the clerk of the municipal court of record shall file the certificate with the papers in the case and note the certificate on the case docket. 
(b)  If the municipal court of record judgment is affirmed, to enforce the judgment the court may: 
(1)  Forfeit the bond of the defendant; 
(2)  Issue a Writ of Capias for the defendant; 
(3)  Issue an execution against the defendant's property; 
(4)  Order a refund for the defendant's costs; or 
(5)  Conduct an indigency hearing at the court's discretion. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-18. - Texas code of criminal procedure, article 102.017, adopted. 
The city hereby adopts Article 102.017(b), (c), (d) and (e) of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure; Municipal Court Building Security Fund, as applicable to a municipality. This section only applies to conviction of offenses (misdemeanors) committed on or after August 28, 1995. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-19. - Municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  Establishment. There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, hereinafter referred to as the "fund," pursuant to Article 102.0172, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. The fund may be maintained in an interest-bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account. 
(b)  Amount of fee; assessment; collection. 
(1)  The fee shall be in the amount of four dollars ($4.00). 
(2)  The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the City of Everman Municipal Court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
a.  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
b.  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication, disposition, or community supervision; or 
c.  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(3)  The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after September 1, 1999. 
(4)  The court clerk shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the finance director of the City of Everman, who shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund. 
(c)  Designated use of the fund; administration. 
(1)  The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the Municipal Court of the City of Everman, Texas, including: 
a.  Computer systems; 
b.  Computer networks; 
c.  Computer hardware; 
d.  Computer software; 
e.  Imaging systems; 
f.  Electronic kiosks; 
g.  Electronic ticket writers; or 
h.  Docket management systems. 
(2)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council of the City of Everman. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2(Att. A), 7-23-19)  
Chapter 13 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty for Code violations, § 1-7; emergency management, Ch. 6; municipal court, Ch. 12; police, Ch. 16; traffic, Ch. 19. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Discharging of firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol or firearm of any kind, or to discharge an air rifle or air pistol of any description, by whatever name known, that by means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs or any other means is capable of discharging and propelling shots, pellets or any solid object for a distance of greater than fifty (50) feet, within the city limits. 
(Code 1977, § 11-31)  
Sec. 13-2. - Firearms in city buildings; prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a peace officer, to carry a firearm in any city building, regardless of whether or not the person is duly licensed by the state to carry a concealed handgun. 
(b)  The term "city building" as used in this section is defined as any building or portion of a building owned, occupied, leased, or controlled by the City of Everman, Texas, for city operations and activities. The term does not include any public or private driveway, street, sidewalk or walkway, parking garage, or other parking area. 
(c)  The term "handgun" as used in this section is defined as any firearm that is designed, made or adapted to be fired with one hand, and the term "concealed handgun" as used in this section is defined as a handgun, the presence of which is not openly discernible to the ordinary observation of a reasonable person. 
(d)  The terms "gun," "pistol," "rifle," and "firearm" as used in this section shall not only be defined to include all percussion weapons, but shall include all air guns, air pistols, air rifles, and all other firearms using air pressure to propel a projectile. 
(Ord. No. 461, § 1, 1-9-96) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 461, § 1, adopted Jan. 9, 1996, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification as § 13-2 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 13-3. - Criminal trespass. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain on or in the property of another without effective consent of the owner, the person in control, or the owner's agent if the person: 
(1)  Has notice that the entry was forbidden; 
(2)  Has notice that permission is withdrawn; or 
(3)  Receives notice to depart from the owner, the person in control, or the owner's agent but fails to do so, 
and remains on the property after a Texas Peace Officer orders the person to leave. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 1, 12-14-10)  
Sec. 13-4. - Loitering with a criminal purpose. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any street or place open to the public or to which the general public has access to for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, including, but not limited to, the front or immediate area surrounding any convenience store, retail store, or other business establishment, in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of committing or inducing, enticing, or provoking another to commit assault, reckless damage, criminal mischief, or disorderly conduct. 
(b)  In this section, the term "loiter" means "to remain, to delay, or to linger in one (1) place with an apparent harmful purpose, such as to: 
(1)  Establish control over an identifiable area; 
(2)  Obstruct or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(3)  Intimidate others from exiting or entering an establishment; or 
(4)  Conceal illegal activities; 
and at a time not usual for law abiding individuals or under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm for the safety of persons or property within the vicinity. 
(c)  The terms "assault", "reckless damage", "criminal mischief", and "disorderly conduct" shall have the same meanings as set out in the Texas Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 1, 12-14-10)  
Secs. 13-5—13-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MINORS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 13-51—13-71. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No.728, § 1, adopted March 12, 2019, amended Div. 2, §§ 13-72—13-77, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 449, adopted July 12, 1994; Ord. No. 499, adopted Sept. 15, 2000; Ord. No. 621, § 1, adopted March 10, 2009; Ord. No. 658, § 1, adopted June 12, 2012. 
 
Sec. 13-72. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following words are defined as follows: 
(a)  Curfew hours: 
(1)  11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday; 
(2)  12:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday; and 
(3)  8:30 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday. 
(b)  Emergency: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. The term includes, but is not limited to; fire, natural disaster, vehicular accident, or a serious medical condition of sudden onset. 
(c)  Establishment: A privately owned place of business open to the public, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
(d)  Guardian: Any person, or public or private agency that has been given custody of minor by a court order. 
(e)  Minor: Any person under seventeen (17) years of age. 
(f)  Operator: Any individual, firm association, partnership, corporation or any other entity operating, managing or conducting an establishment. 
(g)  Parent: A mother or father whether biological or adoptive, step mother/father or foster mother/father or a court appointed guardian or other person eighteen (18) years of age or older, authorized by a court order or a parent or guardian to have care and custody of a minor. 
(h)  Public place: Any location which the public, or a substantial number of members of the public have access to and includes, but is not limited to; streets, highways, parks, sidewalks, alleys, common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transit facilities, shopping centers, shops, restaurants, theaters, and game rooms. 
(i)  Remain: To linger, stay or fail to leave a location when requested to do so by a police officer, owner, operator or other person in control of premises. 
(j)  Serious bodily injury: A bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death, or causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. No. 728, § 1, 3-12-19)  
Sec. 13-73. - Violations and offenses. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this ordinance for a minor to remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about in or upon any public place in the city during the curfew hours defined in paragraphs 13-72(a)(1)(2)(3) above. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this ordinance for a parent or guardian to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control allow a minor to remain in any public place or remain on the premises of any establishment with the city limits during the curfew hours defined in paragraphs 13-72(a)(1)(2)(3) above. 
3.  The owner, operator or employee of an establishment commits an offense of this ordinance if he/she allows a minor to remain upon the premises of an establishment during the curfew hours defined in paragraphs 13-72(a)(1)(2)(3) above. 
(Ord. No. 728, § 1, 3-12-19)  
Sec. 13-74. - Defenses. 
It is a defense to prosecution under this division that: 
(1)  The minor was accompanied by his or her parent or guardian; 
(2)  The minor was accompanied by someone aged eighteen (18) or older designated by his or her parent or guardian; 
(3)  The minor was on an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(4)  The minor was on an errand made necessary by an emergency; 
(5)  The minor was in a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate travel, for which passage through the curfew area was the most direct route; 
(6)  The minor was engaged in a lawful employment activity or was going directly to or coming directly from his or her place of lawful employment without any detour or stop; 
(7)  The minor was on the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor where the minor had permission from his or her guardian and if the next-door neighbor did not complain about the minor's presence; 
(8)  The minor was attending s school, government or civic organization sponsored event, a religious activity or other recreational activity sponsored and supervised by adults, or coming or going from such an event without detour or stop; 
(9)  The minor is married or had been married or had the disabilities of minority removed in accordance with Chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code; 
(10)  The minor was exercising his or her First Amendment Rights protected by the United States Constitution, including, but not limited to, the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and freedom of assembly; or any rights and protections afforded by the Texas Constitution; 
(11)  With respect to the hours of 8:30 a.m.—3:00 p.m. specified as curfew hours in section 13-72(a)(3) above, it shall be a defense to prosecution if the offense occurred during the school summer vacation break of the school in which the minor is enrolled or on a holiday observed by the closure of the school in which the minor is enrolled or that the minor has graduated from high school or received a high school equivalency certificate; 
(12)  It shall be a defense to prosecution under section 13-73(c) if the owner, operator or employee of an establishment notified the Everman Police Department a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(Ord. No. 728, § 1, 3-12-19)  
Sec. 13-75. - Enforcement. 
Before taking any enforcement action under this ordinance, a police officer shall ask the alleged offender's age and reason for being in a public place during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest unless the officer believes that an offense has occurred and none of the defenses to prosecution set forth in section 13-74 above are applicable to the situation. 
(Ord. No. 728, § 1, 3-12-19)  
Sec. 13-76. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this ordinance is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  When required by Section 51.08 of the Texas Family Code, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over the minor and refer the matter to juvenile court. 
(Ord. No. 728, § 1, 3-12-19)  
Sec. 13-77. - Re-adoption. 
In accordance with section 370.002 of the Texas Local Government Code, before the third anniversary of the adoption of this ordinance and every third year thereafter, if it is continued to be required by state law, the city council shall review the regulations contained herein and conduct a public hearing on the need to continue, abolish or modify this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 728, § 1, 3-12-19)  
Secs. 13-78—13-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AEROSOL PAINT AND GRAFFITI 
 
Sec. 13-100. - Definitions. 
In this article the following words, terms and phrases shall have their respective meanings as described below: 
Aerosol means an aerosolized paint product, including, but not limited to, a clear or pigmented lacquer or finish. 
Graffiti means an unauthorized inscription, work, signature, symbol, design, or other marking which is etched, written, painted, drawn, or applied in any other way to a structure, building, or property. 
Minor means a person younger than seventeen (17) years of age. 
Owner means a person who owns or is in control of property. 
Unauthorized means without the permission of the owner of property. 
(Ord. No. 473, § 1, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 13-101. - Possession of aerosol paint. 
(a)  A minor commits an offense if the minor possesses aerosol paint. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) that the minor possessed the aerosol paint while the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied or supervised by a parent or guardian; 
(2)  Accompanied or supervised by a teacher in connection with a school project; 
(3)  Supervised during the minor's regular employment; 
(4)  On the property on which the minor lives; or 
(5)  Engaged in an organized event sponsored or supervised by the city, a school, a church, or some other officially recognized entity or organization. 
(Ord. No. 473, § 1, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 13-102. - Graffiti declared a nuisance. 
Graffiti visible from public or private property other than the property on which the graffiti exists is hereby declared a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 473, § 1, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 13-103. - Placement of graffiti. 
A person commits an offense if the person places graffiti on property. 
(Ord. No. 473, § 1, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 13-104. - Failure to remove graffiti. 
An owner of property commits an offense if the owner fails to remove graffiti from the owner's property if the graffiti is visible from public or private property other than the property on which the graffiti exists. 
(Ord. No. 473, § 1, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 13-105. - Notice and abatement by owner. 
(a)  The city must notify the property owner of a violation of this article, and must give the owner the opportunity to remove the graffiti before: 
(1)  Issuing a citation for a violation of this section 13-104; or 
(2)  Entering the property and doing the work necessary to abate the nuisance. 
(b)  Notice must be given: 
(1)  In writing and personally delivered to the owner; 
(2)  By letter addressed to the owner's address as listed on the most recent ad valorem tax rolls; or 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's address is unknown: 
a.  By publication in the official newspaper at least twice within ten (10) consecutive days; or 
b.  By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
c.  If the property does not contain any buildings, by posting the notice on a placard or sign attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates. 
(c)  Notice shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the record owner; 
(2)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property upon which the violation is located; 
(3)  A statement describing the violation and the work necessary to correct the violation; 
(4)  A statement advising the owner that if the work is not completed within fourteen days, the city will complete the work and assess the cost of the work to the owner; 
(5)  A statement that if the city performs the work and the owner fails to pay the cost, a lien may be placed on the property; 
(6)  A statement that the owner may submit a written request to the city secretary for an informal hearing before the city manager or her designee within five (5) days after receiving notice of a violation to contest whether the violation exists; and 
(7)  A statement that the city may, at any time, file a criminal misdemeanor complaint in municipal court with a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day the violation exists, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedy provided by law. 
(d)  For purposes of this article notice is deemed to have been received: 
(1)  For personal service, on the day notice was personally delivered to the owner; 
(2)  For mailed notice, three days after written notice was mailed to the owner; 
(3)  For notice by publication, on the date that the last notice is published in the official newspaper; or 
(4)  For notice by posting, the day of posting. 
(e)  A citation for violation of section 13-104 may be issued fourteen (14) calendar days after notice of the violation is received. 
(f)  If the owner does not comply with this article by the fourteenth calendar day after notice is deemed received, the city may enter the property or authorize another to enter the property and do or cause to be done all work necessary to abate the graffiti. 
(g)  If the city performs the abatement work pursuant to subsection (f), it shall initially pay for the work done, and shall charge the expenses to the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 473, § 1, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 13-106. - Informal hearing. 
If within five (5) days after receiving notice, the property owner files a written request with the city secretary according to section 13-105(c)(6), the city manager or her designee shall hold an informal hearing. Unless the owner requests and is granted an immediate hearing and waives the right to notice, notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be sent to the owner by certified mail. At the hearing, the owner may provide evidence or testimony that a violation does not exist and abatement is not warranted. After the hearing, the city manager or her designee may determine whether a violation requiring abatement exists. Failure of the property owner to timely request a hearing or to appear at a hearing shall constitute a waiver of any right to challenge the abatement of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 473, § 1, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 13-107. - Assessment of expenses; lien. 
(a)  The city may assess expenses incurred by the city for the abatement of graffiti pursuant to section 13-105 against the real property on which the work was done. 
(b)  To obtain a lien against the property, the city shall file with the county clerk of the county in which the property is located a statement of expenses and a copy of the notice that the city provided to the owner. 
(c)  The lien is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of ten percent per annum on the amount due from the date of payment by the city. 
(d)  The lien is inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. A lien may not be filed against real estate protected by the homestead provisions of the Texas Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 473, § 1, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 13-108. - Public service by offenders. 
In any case in which a defendant is found guilty of an offense involving placing graffiti or possessing aerosol spray, the municipal court judge shall consider imposing a public service assignment to clean up graffiti, in place of or in addition to a fine. 
(Ord. No. 473, § 1, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 13-109. - Assistance in removal of graffiti. 
If an owner needs assistance in removing graffiti from the owner's property, the owner shall submit a written request for assistance to the city manager or the city manager's designee within three (3) days after receiving notice under section 13-105. The city manager or designee shall respond in writing, telling the property owner whether or not assistance is available. The city shall not issue a citation for a violation of section 13-104 until fourteen (14) days after the city responds in writing. 
(Ord. No. 473, § 1, 7-14-98)  
Chapter 14 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 680, § 1, adopted Nov. 11, 2014, amended Ch. 14 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 14, §§ 14-21, 14-23—14-25, and 14-46—14-50, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 12-1(3), (5)—(12), 12-2, 12-21, 12-22 and 12-51 of the 1977 Code; Ord. No. 317, §§ 1—3, adopted June 12, 1984; Ord. No. 447, § 1, adopted March 1, 1994; Ord. No. 447A, § 1, adopted June 13, 1995; Ord. No. 481, § 1, adopted June 16, 1999; and Ord. No. 519, §§ 1, 3, adopted April 9, 2002. 
Cross reference— Flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 8; amusement regulations generally, § 11-31 et seq.; planning and zoning, Ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 17; utilities, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Authority to acquire and develop park land, V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, § 331.001 et seq. 
Note— By Resolution No. 1987-11-3, the city council established the following fees for use of the softball, baseball and football fields: (1) Thirty dollars ($30.00) per night for use of the softball and baseball fields; (2) ninety dollars ($90.00) per game and one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for two (2) games for use of the football field. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage shall be defined to include any alcohol and any beverage containing more than one-half (½) of one (1) percent of alcohol by volume which is capable of use for beverage, either alone or when diluted. 
City park shall be defined to be any park, playground or recreational area owned, leased, operated or under the control of the city. This definition shall include but is not limited to any athletic field, swimming pool, gymnasium, tennis court, and other similar facility owned by the city. 
City sports field shall mean the Johnson Park Baseball fields or the Clyde Pittman Park Football field. 
Everman youth association shall mean any nonprofit entity registered with the Texas Secretary of State that is formed for the purpose of providing youth recreational activities and that serves only youth from the Everman School District. 
Other youth association shall mean any nonprofit entity registered with the Texas Secretary of State that is formed for the purpose of providing youth recreational activities and that serves youth from areas outside of the Everman School District. 
Renter shall mean, when used in this chapter, any person, association or other entity that applies for rental of a city sports field, submits all necessary materials, is approved by the city and enters into a duly executed rental agreement. 
(Ord. No. 680, § 1, 11-11-14; Ord. No. 713, § 1, 7-11-17)  
Secs. 14-2—14-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARK USE RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 14-21. - Rules and regulations. 
The following regulations and restrictions are prescribed for the use of city parks: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in any city park. 
(2)  Riding, driving, or walking horses in city park. Except on designated horse trails, it shall be unlawful for any person to walk, drive or ride a horse or horses within any city park. 
(3)  Riding or driving off-road motorized vehicles in a city park. Except on designated off-road trails, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or ride an off-road vehicle within any city park. For the purposes of this section, an off-road vehicle is a motorized vehicle designed and equipped for use on surfaces other than paved roadway with such definition to specifically include off-road motor bikes, go-carts, and dune buggies. 
(4)  Vehicular traffic prohibited in certain areas. Except in designated overflow parking areas, it shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to stand, stop, park or cross onto or into any portion of a city park other than upon a roadway or parking area so designated for such purposes. 
(5)  Time limitations on public use of park. Except for a city sponsored event, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, enter into or be within a city park during the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. 
(6)  Littering, vandalism, and graffiti. Littering, criminal mischief, and graffiti are hereby prohibited in any city park. Littering shall include leaving trash or other items by persons picnicking within a city park and not placing trash and other items in appropriate trash receptacles provided in such park. Criminal mischief or vandalism and graffiti shall have the meaning ascribed to those words and offenses in the Texas Penal Code, as amended. 
(7)  Firearms prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on or about himself or to discharge a gun, pistol, rifle, or other firearm within any city park except that a person duly licensed by the state to carry a concealed handgun may carry a concealed handgun in accordance with state law. 
(8)  Bicycles, skates, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle, scooter, skate board, in-line skates, or roller skates on any tennis court or basketball court owned or leased by the city, or in any other public areas posted by the city. 
(9)  Smoking prohibited in splash pad area. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in the designated splash pad area. 
(10)  Glass containers prohibited in city parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a glass container in a city park. 
(11)  Defacing public property. 
a.  No person shall remove, destroy, mutilate, or deface any structure, monument, statue, vase, fountain, wall, fence, railing, vehicle, bench, building or other property located in any city park. 
b.  No person shall cut, break, deface, injure, or remove the trees, shrubs, plants, grasses, or turf within any city park. 
(12)  Wild animals. It shall be unlawful to catch, injure, kill, strike, or attempt to strike with any object or weapon any animals within a city park. 
(13)  Climbing, etc., prohibited. It shall be unlawful to climb any trees or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, walls, fences, railings, vehicles, basketball posts or nets, soccer posts or nets, volleyball posts or nets, or any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes in any city park. 
(14)  Pollution of waters. It shall be unlawful to throw, discharge to, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters any substance, matter, or anything liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
(15)  Children under a certain age. No person under twelve (12) years of age shall be permitted in any city park without being accompanied by an adult over the age of eighteen (18). 
(16)  Splash pad. Splash pad operation shall be from Memorial Day weekend through Labor Day weekend during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Food or drink of any kind shall not be permitted in the splash pad. 
(17)  Erecting structures prohibited. 
a.  No person shall place or erect any structure, sign, bulletin board, post, pole, or advertising of any kind in a city park. 
b.  No person shall attach to any tree, shrub, fence, railing, post, or structure within any city park, any sign, bulletin board, or other advertising device of any kind. 
c.  The prohibitions contained in subsections a. and b. of this section shall not be applicable to persons acting pursuant to and with the written authorization of the director of public works or his designee. 
(18)  Projectile devices. No person shall possess, fire, or discharge a device capable of propelling a projectile, including without limitation, any air gun, pistol, bow and arrow, cross bow, or sling shot in a city park; provided, however, the director of public works may permit the temporary occurrence of such activities in a city park for special programs and events. 
(19)  Sale of merchandise. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any food, drinks, confections, merchandise, or services in any park or playground unless such person has a written agreement or permit issued by the city permitting the sale of such items in such park or playground. This section shall have no application to social organizations selling items to their own members, or at functions sanctioned by the city. 
(20)  Sound amplification. It shall be unlawful to use any type of sound amplification system in a city park without the written consent of the director of public works. 
(21)  Pets prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any animal considered a pet in any city park. Pets shall include all dogs, cats, snakes, monkeys, and all other animals except for animals that are used for service of the disabled. 
(Ord. No. 680, § 1, 11-11-14)  
Sec. 14-22. - Variances. 
The city manager or his/her designee is authorized to issue special permits or grant variances to the provisions of this article. The zoning board of adjustment will make recommendations regarding variances to the city manager. A special permit variance shall not be granted by the city manager unless a written request is submitted which demonstrates: 
(1)  Special circumstances exist which are peculiar to the applicant's ability to utilize city parks; and 
(2)  That use of the city park by other groups or individuals will not be adversely affected by granting the special permit variance. 
(Ord. No. 680, § 1, 11-11-14)  
Secs. 14-23—14-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SPORTS FIELD RECREATIONAL AREAS 
 
Sec. 14-30. - Everman youth association rental of city sports fields. 
The city sports fields consist of Johnson Park Baseball field and Clyde Pittman Park Football field. Rental of these city sports fields and the execution of a rental contract will be allowed on the following basis: 
(1)  Any Everman youth association will be allowed to rent either of the city sports fields and associated grounds, structures and parking areas for a season covering such dates and including such games and practices as are specified in the application, subject to approval by the city manager or his designee. Everman youth associations may apply for such rental by submitting a completed application in accordance with the provisions of this article along with all required information, including proof of state approved nonprofit corporation or association status and payment of all necessary deposits and fees, to the city manager's office no earlier than sixty (60) days prior to the start of the first practice of the requested sports season. Other youth associations may also apply for rental of the fields, but scheduling preference will be given to Everman youth associations. 
(2)  If multiple applications are received for a specific period or season, the city will grant rental of the field to the first Everman youth association submitting all of the required information. In the event that more than one (1) Everman youth association submits all required information at the same date and time, the acceptance and approval of the application and rental will be determined by drawing of numbers. If no Everman youth association submits an application for a particular period or season, applications will be opened up to other youth associations. 
(3)  To be deemed complete an application must include all of the following: 
a.  Completed application form; 
b.  Payment of applicable fees/deposits as set forth below; 
c.  Proof of state approved nonprofit corporation or association status; 
d.  Liability insurance in amounts set by the city manager; 
e.  Play and practice schedule listing date and time of each practice session and each game for the season; and 
f.  Roster indicating number of teams, number of players, and name and address of all players for the season. 
(4)  After approval of the application, a rental contract will be prepared by the city and executed by both parties prior to any use of the sports fields. 
(Ord. No. 713, § 2, 7-11-17)  
Sec. 14-31. - Rental of sports fields by other youth associations or persons. 
Other youth associations or other persons or entities may rent the city sports fields for such dates and times as approved by the city manager or his designee after submission of an application meeting the requirements set forth in section 14-30 above and payment of the applicable deposits and fees set forth in this chapter. Scheduling preference shall be given to Everman youth associations. 
(Ord. No. 713, § 2, 7-11-17)  
Sec. 14-32. - Concession areas. 
(a)  During such times that any renter is approved for rental of a particular city sports field and is operating under a valid rental contract, the renter shall have exclusive use of any concession area located at the applicable city sports field and may place a lock on the concession area (a key must be provided to the city manager's office). The renter shall not remove any existing property from the concession area without the written approval of the city. At the end of the rental period, the renter must remove all of its property from the concession area and will no longer have use of the area. Any property not removed by the renter within ten (10) days of the end of the rental period will be removed by the city and stored for up to thirty (30) days. The renter will be responsible for the city's costs incurred in removal and storage of property and must pay such costs before the property will be returned. In addition, the renter will not be allowed to rent any city sports field until such costs are paid in full. The city may use any and all recourse available to collect such costs from the renter. At the end of thirty (30) days, the city will treat any items that have not been returned as abandoned property and will dispose of such property as allowed by law. 
(b)  Any renter of a city sports field must submit with the application the concession area use fee described below. 
(c)  Concession sales shall only be allowed with the appropriate Tarrant County food handler's permit. 
(Ord. No. 713, § 2, 7-11-17)  
Sec. 14-33. - Maintenance. 
During such times that any renter is approved for rental of a particular city sports field, the renter shall be responsible for all routine maintenance and cleaning of the field(s). This shall include, but is not limited to, cleaning up any and all trash, spills or items left in the area; depositing all trash in dumpsters; raking the playing fields after any game or practice; and making sure that concession areas are kept free of spills or spoiled food items that could attract insects or rodents. Renter will be notified in writing of any failure to properly clean and maintain the field and other areas and costs incurred by the city to perform such cleaning or maintenance shall be assessed against the renter. Any subsequent failure to properly clean and maintain the area shall result in termination of the rental agreement and forfeiture of future rental privileges. 
(Ord. No. 713, § 2, 7-11-17)  
Sec. 14-34. - Fees/deposits required. 
(a)  Everman youth associations. 
(1)  Johnson Park Baseball Field. 
a.  Damage deposit. Any Everman youth association renting the four (4) fields at Johnson Park for baseball or softball shall pay a damage deposit in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), which shall be applied to the cost of any damage occurring to the concession area and equipment, fields, stands, parking areas or any other property, structures or facilities during the rental period. Any deposit remaining after offset of such damages shall be refunded to the association within forty-five (45) days after the end of the rental period. If any damage exceeds the damage deposit, the association shall be responsible for payment of any additional costs within ten (10) days of receipt of written notice of such costs. 
b.  Electricity deposit/charges. Any Everman youth association renting the four (4) fields at Johnson Park for baseball or softball shall pay the costs of electricity incurred by the city at the sports field during the rental period. At the time of submission of the application, the association must pay a deposit in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), which will be applied to the cost of electricity used during the rental period. Any deposit amount remaining after offset of the electricity charges shall be refunded to the association within forty-five (45) days after the end of the rental period. 
c.  Per player season fee. Any Everman youth association renting the four (4) fields at Johnson Park for baseball or softball shall be required to pay a one-time per season fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each Everman resident player and ten dollars ($10.00) for each non-Everman resident player on the player roster submitted with the application. This payment must be made to the city prior to the beginning of any practices or games. If the number of players on the roster increases after submission of the application and payment, the association must notify the city and pay the additional fees within five (5) business days of adding the player to the roster. 
d.  Concession area fee. Any Everman youth association renting the four (4) fields at Johnson Park for baseball or softball shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per season for use of the concession area. 
e.  Tournament fee. If any renter schedules a tournament in which participants from outside the renter's association will be playing, a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) per team outside of the renter's association will be charged. This fee must be paid prior to the tournament. 
(2)  Clyde Pittman Park Football Field. 
a.  Damage deposit. Any Everman youth association renting the Clyde Pittman Park Football Field shall pay a damage deposit in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), which shall be applied to the cost of any damage occurring to the concession area and equipment, fields, stands, parking areas or any other property, structures or facilities during the rental period. Any deposit remaining after offset of such damages shall be refunded to the association within forty-five (45) days after the end of the rental period. If any damage exceeds the damage deposit, the association shall be responsible for payment of any additional costs within ten (10) days of receipt of written notice of such costs. 
b.  Per player season fee. Any Everman youth association renting the Clyde Pittman Park Football Field shall be required to pay a one-time per season fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each Everman resident player and ten dollars ($10.00) for each non-Everman resident player based on the player roster provided with the application. This payment must be made to the city prior to the beginning of any practices or games. If the number of players on the roster increases after submission of the application and payment, the renter must notify the city and pay the additional fees within five (5) business days of adding the player to the roster. 
c.  Concession area fee. Any Everman youth association renting the Clyde Pittman Park Football Field shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per season for use of the concession area. 
(b)  Other youth associations, entities or persons. 
(1)  Rental fees. Fees for rental of the city sports fields for other youth associations, entities or individuals shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each day game or practice and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each night game or practice plus a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day for use of the concession areas. 
(2)  Deposits. In addition, such renters must submit the damage deposits referenced above at the time of application and shall be subject to the same terms as set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 713, § 2, 7-11-17)  
Sec. 14-35. - No subleasing. 
Renters shall not allow any other person or entity to use the rented city sports field (except for tournaments pursuant to payment of the tournament fee), or in any other way assign or sublease the city sports field to any third party. Violations of this provision will result in termination of the rental agreement and forfeiture of future rental privileges. 
(Ord. No. 713, § 2, 7-11-17)  
Sec. 14-36. - Rules and regulations. 
The individual signing the application for rental of a city sports field, its administration and any other entity or person associated with the management of such association or entity shall be responsible for ensuring that all coaches, players and spectators comply with the City of Everman Park Use Rules and Regulations set forth in this chapter as well as any other rules and regulations that may be provided to the renter or published to the public from time to time by the city manager. Violation of any of the above-referenced rules and regulations or any local, state or federal laws by any persons under the control of the renter shall result in termination of the rental agreement and forfeiture of future rental privileges. 
(Ord. No. 713, § 2, 7-11-17)  
Chapter 15 - PLANNING AND ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administrative search warrants, § 2-1; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; emergency management, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 8; parks and recreation, Ch. 14; streets and other public places, Ch. 17; traffic, Ch. 19; utilities, Ch. 20. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Filing fees for filing of plats. 
The city secretary shall collect the following fees, in addition to any other required fees, for the filing of plats. The fees listed below shall not be refunded regardless of the action taken by the planning and zoning commission or the city council, whether or not the plats are approved or rejected. 
(1)  Preliminary plats: three hundred dollars (#300.00) plus two dollars ($2.00) per acre; 
(2)  Final plats: four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) plus two dollars ($2.00) per lot. 
(Ord. No. 359, § 1, 8-12-86)  
Sec. 15-2. - Subdivision regulations adopted. 
The regulations attached to Ordinance No. 530 as Exhibit "A" are hereby adopted as the subdivision regulations and design criteria for subdivisions for the City of Everman and are on file in the office of the city secretary and available for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 530, 1-28-03)  
Secs. 15-3—15-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STORAGE OF MOBILE HOMES WITHIN THE CITY 
 
Sec. 15-21. - Defined. 
As used in this article, a "mobile home" means a movable or portable dwelling constructed to be towed by a motor vehicle on its own chasses, and designed without a permanent foundation. It may consist of one (1) or more units that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for additional capacity, or two (2) or more units, separately towable but designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit. 
(Code 1977, § 13-125) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 15-22. - Permit—Required. 
No person shall store, or permit to be stored, a mobile home on their property without first obtaining a permit to do so for each such mobile home from the building official for the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13-121) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 11.  
Sec. 15-23. - Same—Fee. 
A fee for each permit issued under this article shall be paid to the city in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Code 1977, § 13-122)  
Sec. 15-24. - Same—Term. 
Permits issued under this article shall be valid for a period of six (6) months and may be revoked at any time if the permit holder violates any section of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 13-123)  
Sec. 15-25. - Right of building official to inspect mobile home and lot it is to be stored on. 
The building official shall have the right to inspect the mobile home and the lot where the mobile home is to be located before issuing a permit. The building official shall not issue a permit if, after inspection, he determines that the storage of the mobile home will be a nuisance, as that term is defined in this Code, or that storage will create a fire hazard or health hazard. 
(Code 1977, § 13-123)  
Chapter 16 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty for Code violations, § 1-7; administration generally, Ch. 2; emergency management, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; municipal court, Ch. 12; offenses, Ch. 13; traffic, Ch. 19. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Chief of police to replace city marshal. 
The office of city marshal is hereby dispensed with, and the office of chief of police is hereby created. 
(Code 1977, § 1-63)  
Sec. 16-2. - Duties of chief of police. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police of this city to enforce all laws of the state and all ordinances of the city; and he shall discharge all of the duties prescribed by law for the city marshal and such other duties as may be imposed upon him by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 1-64)  
Secs. 16-3—16-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 7-56 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-21. - Police department created. 
There is hereby created the police department of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 1-81)  
Sec. 16-22. - Powers and duties of chief. 
The director of the police department shall be the chief of police. The police department shall be composed of the police chief and of such other officers, patrolmen and employees as the city council may determine. The chief of police shall have immediate direction and control of the police department subject to the supervision, rules and regulations and the orders of the city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 1-82)  
Sec. 16-23. - Special police. 
No person, except as otherwise provided by state law or any ordinances passed in pursuance thereof, shall act as special police or special detective. 
(Code 1977, § 1-84)  
Sec. 16-24. - Powers and duties of policemen. 
(a)  The officers constituting the police department of the city shall be and they are hereby invested with all the power and authority given to them as peace officers under the laws of the state in taking cognizance of, and in enforcing, the criminal laws of the state and the ordinances and regulations of the city within the limits of the city. It shall be the duty of each such officer and private to use his best endeavors to prevent the commission within the city of offenses against the laws of the state and against the ordinances and regulations of the city; to observe and enforce all such laws, ordinances and regulations; to detect and arrest offenders against the same; to preserve the good order of the city; and to secure the inhabitants thereof from violence, and property therein from injury. 
(b)  Such policemen shall have no power or authority in civil matters, but they shall execute any criminal warrant or warrant of arrest that may be placed in their hands by the duly constituted authorities of the city. Such policeman shall not receive any fee or other compensation of any services rendered in the performance of his duty, other than the salary paid him by the city, nor shall he receive a fee as a witness in any case arising under the criminal laws of the state, or under the ordinances of regulations of the city and prosecuted in the municipal court of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 1-85)  
Secs. 16-25—16-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ARSON INVESTIGATOR[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Fire marshal, § 7-81 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16-46. - Office created. 
There is hereby created the office of arson investigator of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 1-161)  
Sec. 16-47. - Duties. 
There is hereby granted to such arson investigator, and such investigator is hereby empowered with, all of the rights, powers and duties of a peace officer, as provided in article 2.12 of the state Code of Criminal Procedure, as well as all of the powers of investigation provided in article 5.45 of the Insurance Code of the state, and all other statutes of the state and by law. 
(Code 1977, § 1-162)  
Sec. 16-48. - Appointed by mayor. 
Such arson investigator of the city shall be appointed by the mayor of the city with the consent and approval of the city council for such terms and under such conditions as desired. 
(Code 1977, § 1-163)  
Sec. 16-49. - Other duties. 
It is further ordered and declared that the person so appointed as arson investigator of the city may have other titles, positions and duties with the fire department of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 1-164)  
Sec. 16-50. - Departmental supervision. 
The arson investigator shall work in the criminal investigation division of the police department under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Code 1977, § 1-165)  
Chapter 17 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 8; growth of grass, weeds and uncultivated plants along streets and sidewalks, § 10-42; parks and recreation, Ch. 14. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Materials falling from vehicles, etc. 
Each person who owns or is the operator of a vehicle on any public street or highway in the city shall cause all materials of all kinds to be contained on such vehicle in such a manner as to avoid or prevent such materials from spilling, spewing or leaving the body of such vehicle, while traveling on any public street or highway in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 16-11)  
Sec. 17-2. - Liability insurance, registration and work permit required of persons working in street rights-of-way; exemptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of any construction in street rights-of-way and easements in the city; to construct, repair or modify streets, curb, gutter, waterlines, sewer lines, storm drains or drive approaches without first filing proof of liability insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) property damage and two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) personal injury; obtaining registration with a required fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) renewable January first each year for fifty dollars ($50.00), and obtaining a no cost permit for each occasion from the city prior to commencing work. All work is to be performed to city specifications. 
(b)  Paragraph (a) of this section does not apply to any person who is a regular employee of a regulated utility and who is performing work in conjunction with such person's job, or any person or company employed by the city and performing work in conjunction with such person's job. 
(Ord. No. 366, §§ 1, 2, 9-9-86) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 462, §§ 1—3, adopted May 24, 1996, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification as § 17-3 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 11.  
Sec. 17-3. - Sprinkler systems in city's right-of-way. 
(a)  The construction or installment of sprinkler systems within the city's right-of-way is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  The city shall not be responsible for repair of or damages to existing sprinkler systems caused by the maintenance of its water lines within the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 462, §§ 1—3, 5-24-96)  
Sec. 17-4. - Operation of motor assisted scooters or pocket bikes. 
(1)  Findings. The city council finds and determines as follows: 
(a)  Prohibiting the use and operation of motor assisted scooters on paths, trails, sidewalks, alleys, streets and highways in the city, except on paths and trails set aside for the exclusive operation of bicycles, is necessary in the interest of safety; 
(b)  Prohibiting the use and operation of pocket bikes on all paths, trails, sidewalks, alleys, streets and highways in the city is necessary in the interest of safety; 
(c)  Requiring children to wear helmets while operating or riding a motor assisted scooter or a pocket bike is necessary in the interest of safety; and 
(d)  It will be advantageous, beneficial and in the best interest of the citizens of Everman to prevent potential traffic hazards and safety hazards resulting from unauthorized use of the paths, trails, sidewalks, alleys, streets and highways in the city by children who fail to wear helmets. 
(2)  Definitions. In this section: 
Child means any individual under eighteen (18) years of age. 
Helmet means properly fitted protective headgear that is not structurally damaged and that conforms to the standards of the American National Standards Institute, the American Society for Testing and Materials, the Snell Memorial Foundation or any federal agency having regulatory jurisdiction over bicycle helmets, as applicable, at the time of the manufacture of the helmet. 
Motor assisted scooter shall have the same meaning assigned by Texas Transportation Code, Section 551.301, as it exists or may be amended, and means: 
(a)  A self-propelled device with: 
1.  At least two (2) wheels in contact with the ground during operation; 
2.  A braking system capable of stopping the device under typical operating conditions; 
3.  A gas or electric motor not exceeding forty (40) cubic centimeters; 
4.  A deck designed to allow a person to stand or sit while operating the device; and 
5.  The ability to be propelled by human power alone; but 
(b)  Does not include a pocket bike or a minimotorbike as defined by Texas Transportation Code, Section 551.301. 
Parent means the natural or adoptive parent or court-appointed guardian, or conservator of a child. 
Pocket bike shall mean a "pocket bike" or "minimotorbike" as defined by Texas Transportation Code, Section 551.301, as it exists or may be amended, and means a self-propelled vehicle that is equipped with an electric motor or internal combustion engine having a piston displacement of less than fifty (50) cubic centimeters, is designed to propel itself with not more than two (2) wheels in contact with the ground, has a seat or saddle for the use of the operator, is not designed for use on a highway, and is ineligible for a certificate of title under Chapter 501 of the Texas Transportation Code. The term does not include any of the following: 
(a)  A moped or motorcycle; 
(b)  An electric bicycle or motor-driven cycle, as defined by Section 541.201 of the Texas Transportation Code; 
(c)  A motorized mobility device, as defined by Section 542.009 of the Texas Transportation Code; 
(d)  An electric personal assistive mobility device, as defined by Section 551.201 of the Texas Transportation Code; 
(e)  A neighborhood electric vehicle, as defined by Section 551.301 of the Texas Transportation Code; or 
(f)  A motor assisted scooter, as defined by Section 551.301 of the Texas Transportation Code. 
Public way or public property means real property owned, leased or controlled by a political subdivision of the State of Texas, a governmental entity or agency, or similar entity, or any property that is publicly owned or maintained or dedicated to public use, including but not limited to, a path, trail, sidewalk, alley, street or highway, and a public park facility. 
Wearing a helmet means that the person has a helmet fastened securely to his/her head with the straps of the helmet securely tightened in the manner intended by the manufacturer to provide maximum protection. 
(3)  Restrictions and prohibitions for motor assisted scooters and pocket bikes, and penalty for violation. 
(a)  Restrictions and prohibitions on locations of use. 
1.  It is unlawful to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter on any path, trail, sidewalk, alley, street or highway within the city, except on a path or trail set aside for the exclusive operation of bicycles. 
2.  It is unlawful to operate or ride a pocket bike on any sidewalk, path, trail, alley, street or highway within the city. 
3.  It is unlawful for a parent to allow or permit a child to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter on any path, trail, sidewalk, alley, street or highway within the city, except on a path or trail set aside for the exclusive operation of bicycles. 
4.  It is unlawful for a parent to allow or permit a child to operate or ride a pocket bike on any path, trail, sidewalk, alley, street or highway within the city. 
5.  It is presumed that a parent allowed a child to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter or a pocket bike in a restricted or prohibited area. 
(b)  Penalty. 
1.  A person who violates any provision of subsection (3)(a), above, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
2.  The purpose of this subsection (3) is to promote safety and discourage the use of motor assisted scooters or pocket bikes in unsafe areas. The courts may consider deferred dispositions under the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as it exists or may be amended, whenever the circumstances warrant deferred dispositions. 
3.  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the motor assisted scooter or pocket bike was not being operated or ridden upon public property or a public way at the time of the alleged offense. 
(4)  Helmets required; penalty for failure to wear helmet. 
(a)  Helmet required. 
1.  It is unlawful for any child to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter or a pocket bike unless the child is wearing a helmet. 
2.  It is unlawful for a parent to allow or permit a child to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter or a pocket bike unless the child is wearing a helmet. 
3.  It is presumed that a parent allowed a child to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter or a pocket bike without a helmet. 
4.  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the motor assisted scooter or pocket bike was not being operated or ridden upon public property or a public way at the time of the alleged offense. 
(b)  Penalty. 
1.  A person who violates any provision of subsection (4)(a), above, requiring helmets, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) upon the first conviction and an amount not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) upon the second and each subsequent conviction. 
2.  The municipal court shall dismiss a charge against a child and/or parent for a first offense under subsection (4)(a) upon receiving proof that: 
a.  The defendant acquired a helmet for the child who was operating or riding the motor assisted scooter or pocket bike in violation of subsection (4)(a); and 
b.  The defendant acquired the helmet on or before the tenth day after receiving the citation for the violation. 
3.  If the charge against a person is dismissed under subsection (b)2. of this subsection, a later conviction for a violation of subsection (4)(a) shall be considered a second or subsequent conviction for purposes of subsection (b)1. of this subsection. 
4.  The purpose of this subsection (4) is to promote safety and encourage the use of helmets. The courts may consider deferred dispositions under the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as it exists or may be amended, whenever the circumstances warrant deferred disposition. 
(5)  Savings; repealing clause. This section shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances and the Code of the City of Everman, Texas, except where the provisions of this section are in direct conflict with the provisions of such ordinances and Code, in which event the conflicting provisions of such ordinances and Code are hereby repealed. 
(6)  Penalty clause. Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined as set forth herein. Each unlawful act or continuing day's violation under this section shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this section shall not preclude the City of Everman from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The City of Everman retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 557, §§ 1—5, 7, 7-12-05)  
Sec. 17-5—17-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 
 
Sec. 17-21. - Permit to open required. 
Any person desiring to open any street, alley or sidewalk for the purpose of making connections to any water or sanitary sewer system or for any other purpose in the city or to alter or repair any waterlines or house or main or lateral sewer lines, or for any other reason, shall first make application to the city secretary or his authorized representative, and receive in writing a permit to open such street, alley or sidewalk for such purpose or purposes as the term of the permit shall specify. 
(Code 1977, § 16-1) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous regulations, Ch. 11.  
Sec. 17-22. - Restoration of street, alley or sidewalk. 
(a)  Upon the expiration time named in the permit or sooner, if the use of the streets, alleys, avenues or public grounds as provided therein is no longer necessary, the permittee shall clear the street, alley or sidewalk of all obstructions. 
(b)  Specifications for restoring streets, alleys or sidewalks are as follows: 
(1)  Dirt street or alley. Any ditch shall be well-stamped in six-inch layers, and in case of settlement, the party holding the permit agrees to maintain the ditch for a reasonable length of time. 
(2)  Gravel street or alley. Any ditch shall be well-tamped in six-inch layers to a point nine (9) inches below the surface of the street, after which one (1) foot of good road gravel will be tamped in until level with the surface of the existing street. The party holding the permit agrees to maintain the cut for a reasonable length of time. 
(3)  Asphalt-treated gravel streets. Any ditch shall be taken care of as set out in this subsection and in addition the cut shall be finished by hand-pouring approximately .6 of a gallon of 90-100 penetration asphalt followed by a covering of what is ordinarily termed chat or torpedo gravel. 
(4)  Paved streets. Any ditch shall be flooded and filled with a good quality backfill gravel and tamped down to a point six (6) inches below the top of the existing concrete base and then filled with six (6) inches of a 1:6 mixture of concrete. After four (4) days time, a surface shall be applied corresponding to the existing surface on the street. 
(5)  Other streets. No street, road, or thoroughfare in the city that has been modified to conform to semipermanent design shall be cut or opened by the permittee, but the permittee shall be required to drill, core or jack through the subgrade at a depth to be determined by the city engineer. However, if such procedure is deemed impractical by reason of rock, utilities, underground construction or terrain and a cut or opening is made, all backfill materials shall be of selected mineral aggregate and cement in proportions of 27 to 1, properly compacted and covered with a three-inch concrete slab sub-grade. 
(6)  Sidewalks, gutters and driveways. Any ditch shall be flooded and filled with a good quality of backfill gravel after which a concrete surface shall be applied that meets with specifications for concrete sidewalks, gutters and drivewalks, as required by the city. 
(7)  Inspection. Any and all of the work mentioned in this subsection shall be done under the direction of, and shall be satisfactory to, the city engineer. The holder of a permit shall notify the city engineer twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time the backfill will be made, and a city inspector shall be present at the time the work is done. However, this will in no way relieve the permit holder from his responsibility for maintenance due to failure of the repaired cut. 
(8)  Notification to restore; payment for costs. If such opening or excavation is not refilled and restored as herein provided and approved by the city engineer or his authorized representative, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to notify the permittee in writing to refill and restore same. If the permittee shall fail to refill and restore the same within three (3) days after issuance of such notice, the city engineer shall immediately proceed to have the opening or excavation refilled and restore the street, alley or sidewalk to its previous condition at the cost of the permittee and to pay for the same either out of the aforementioned cash deposit, or demand payment of the cost of such restoration from the permittee and his surety in cases where the permittee has filed a surety bond as provided in this chapter. In cases where a cash deposit was made, whatever amount of the deposit may remain after the payment of the cost of restoration is made, shall be refunded to the permittee. 
(9)  Refund of deposit; permit status. If the permittee shall refill and restore the street or alley to its previous condition and same is approved by the city engineer, the aforementioned cash deposit shall be returned to permittee upon authorization by the city engineer. If any permittee shall fail to refill and restore any street, alley or sidewalk, no further permit shall be issued the permittee by the city secretary until the excavation shall have been refilled and restored and the cost of same has been fully paid. 
(Code 1977 § 16-3)  
Sec. 17-23. - Convenience and safety of the public. 
(a)  The permit holder shall not cut or open more than one-half of the roadway at a time in order to maintain the flow of traffic at all times. However, in an emergency, or with the permission of the city engineer, the total width of roadway may be cut or opened, provided that barricades are placed at the first intersection each way from the cut and suitable detour signs are erected. 
(b)  If a cut or opening is left after sundown, a barricade must be placed on both sides of the cut and a suitable flare or flares shall be placed in front of each barricade. The barricades and flares shall be furnished by the permit holder. 
(c)  It is understood that the permit holder shall be responsible for the safety of the public and shall be held fully liable for accidents and for damages that might be caused by the cut until same has been approved and accepted by the city engineer or his authorized representative. 
(Code 1977, § 16-4)  
Sec. 17-24. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who shall dig up or cut any street, alley or sidewalk in the city without first having secured a permit as provided in this chapter or who fails and refuses to comply with the specifications in backfilling and restoration of such streets, alleys and sidewalks, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7. 
(b)  In case of any willful violation of any of the terms and provisions of this article, the city, in addition to imposing the penalties provided in paragraph (a), may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in any court having proper jurisdiction to restrain, correct or abate such violation. Further the definition of any violation of the terms of this article as a misdemeanor shall not preclude the city from invoking the civil remedies given it by the laws of the state, but shall be cumulative and subject to prosecutions as prescribed in paragraph (a), for such violations. 
(Code 1977, § 16-5)  
Secs. 17-25—17-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TREES ON PUBLIC LANDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 426, §§ 1—14, adopted June 4, 1991, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as Art. III, §§ 17-31—17-44 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, Ch. 14. 
 
Sec. 17-31. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Street trees is herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between the curb, pavement line, and the property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city. 
Park trees is herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 1, 6-4-91)  
Sec. 17-32. - Creation and establishment of a tree board. 
There is hereby created and established a city tree board for the city, which shall consist of the same persons who are members of the park board so that the park board shall also serve as the city tree board, (herein referred to as the "board"). 
(Ord. No. 426, § 2, 6-4-91)  
Sec. 17-33. - Compensation. 
Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 3, 6-4-91)  
Sec. 17-34. - Duties and responsibilities. 
It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate, counsel, and develop and/or update annually a written plan for the care, preservation, trimming, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in public ways, streets, and alleys. Such a plan will be presented to the city council for approval. 
The board, under the supervision and with the approval of the city manager, shall be responsible for the planting, pruning, and removal of all trees located within the street rights-of-way, easements, alleys, and parks of the city. The owner of land abutting on any street may, when acting within the provisions of this article, prune, spray, plant, or remove, trees in that part of the street abutting his land. Permission of the board shall only be required when the owner of the abutting property intends to deviate from the rules and regulations contained in this article. 
The board, when requested by the city council or the city manager, shall consider, investigate, make finding, report, and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 4, 6-4-91)  
Sec. 17-35. - Species size classes. 
[The types of species size classes of trees dealt with in this article are as follows:] 
  Small Trees 	  Large Trees 
Redbud 	Live Oak 
Hawthorn 	Bur Oak 
Flowering Dogwood 	Red Oak (Shumard) 
Crepe Myrtle 	Water Oak 
Japanese Black Pine 	Chinese Pistachio 
Gum Elastic 	Cedar Elm 
Arizona Cypress 	Southern Magnolia 
Eastern Red 	Pecan 
Mesquite 	Sweetgum 
Mexican Plum 	Greenash 
Callary Pear 	Pinus Elderica 
Bradford Pear 	
 
(Ord. No. 426, § 5, 6-4-91)  
Sec. 17-36. - Spacing. 
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the species size classes listed in section 17-35 of this article, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following (without approval of the tree board); small trees, twenty (20) feet; and large trees, forty (40) feet. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 6, 6-4-91)  
Sec. 17-37. - Distance from curb and sidewalk. 
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the species size classes listed in section 17-35 of this article, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: Small trees, two (2) feet and large trees, four (4) feet in accordance with existing city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 7, 6-4-91)  
Sec. 17-38. - Distance from street corners and fireplugs. 
No street tree shall be planted closer than twenty (20) feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten (10) feet of any fireplug. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 8, 6-4-91)  
Sec. 17-39. - Utilities. 
No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in section 17-35 of this article may be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
Utility companies franchised by the city may remove or trim trees which potentially endanger public safety and welfare by interfering with the continuance of electric service, except that where such trees are on owner occupied properties developed for one-family use, complete removal of such trees shall be at the option of the property owner. 
The right, license, privilege and permission is hereby granted to the electric company, its successors and assigns, to trim trees upon and overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the city, so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires or cables of the electric company. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 9, 6-4-91)  
Sec. 17-40. - Public tree care. 
The city shall have the right to plant, trim, spray, preserve, and remove trees, plants, shrubs, within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure safety when servicing city utilities or to preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The board under the supervision and with the approval of the city manager may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is located on public property or municipal utility easement, which by reasons of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect, or other pest. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 10, 6-4-91)  
Sec. 17-41. - Trimming corner clearance. 
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall trim the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight (8) feet above the surface of the street or right-of-way. The city shall have the right to trim any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. Such trimming is to be confined to the area immediately above the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 11, 6-4-91)  
Sec. 17-42. - Interference with board. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the board or its authorized agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees and park trees as authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 12, 6-4-91)  
Sec. 17-43. - Review by city council. 
The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and decisions of the board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the board to the city council who may hear the matter and make a final decision. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 13, 6-4-91)  
Sec. 17-44. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction or a plea of guilty, shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed the maximum allowed by law. Each day may constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 14, 6-4-91)  
Chapter 18 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration generally, Ch. 2; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 11; water and wastewater system facility access fees, § 20-261 et seq.; electric rates, § 20-291 et seq.; gas rates, § 20-316 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES 
 
Sec. 18-21. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the words "residence homestead" and "disabled" shall mean the same as those words are defined in section 11.13 of the V.T.C.A. Property Tax Code. 
(Code 1977, § 5-21)  
Sec. 18-22. - Tax assessor and collector. 
The office of tax assessor and collector of the city is hereby created. The tax assessor and collector shall possess such qualifications as are required by the city manager and applicable state law. The tax assessor and collector shall be appointed by the city manager with the consent of the city council. The city manager may serve as tax assessor and collector with the consent of the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 5-11) 
Charter reference— Authority to establish office, § 7.01. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 18-23. - Disabled homeowners' exemption. 
An exemption of thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000.00) from the appraised market value of a residence homestead, as provided for in the Property Tax Code, section 11.13, is hereby provided for homeowners who are disabled. 
(Code 1977, § 5-18; Ord. No. 430, § 2, 10-1-91)  
Sec. 18-24. - Elderly homeowners' exemption. 
An exemption of thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000.00) from the appraised market value of a residence homestead is hereby provided for homeowners of a residence homestead who are sixty-five (65) years or older. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 2, 6-12-84; Ord. No. 430, § 2, 10-1-91)  
Sec. 18-25. - Not to receive both. 
An eligible disabled person who is sixty-five (65) years or older may not receive both a disabled and an elderly residence homestead exemption, but he may choose either. 
(Code 1977, § 5-20)  
Secs. 18-26—18-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SALES AND USE TAX 
 
Sec. 18-46. - Retained. 
The one (1) percent city sales tax on residential use of gas, telephone and electricity, in effect at all times within the city shall be continued in full force. 
(Code 1977, § 5-61) 
State Law reference— Authority to continue tax, V.T.C.A. Tax Code § 321.105(c).  
Sec. 18-47. - Adoption of taxes authorized by state bill. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts all taxes authorized by state house bill no. 1949. 
(b)  The city hereby repeals the application of the exemption provided for in Tax Code section 321.210(a) and (b), effective on the date permitted by such statute. 
(Ord. No. 360, §§ 1, 2, 8-12-86)  
Sec. 18-48. - Telecommunications services. 
The tax exemption that otherwise is applicable to telecommunications services is herewith repealed and a tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the City of Everman (hereinafter referred to as "city"). For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications devices from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communications is billed. The repeal of the telecommunications tax exemption shall become effective as soon as permitted by law. 
The rate of the tax imposed by this order shall be the same as the rate imposed by the City of Everman for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 521, §§ 1, 2, 5-14-02)  
Sec. 18-49. - Tax to finance crime control and prevention district. 
In accordance with Chapter 323 of the Texas Tax Code, the city council does hereby adopt and levy a sales and use tax at a rate of one-fourth (¼) of one (1) percent on the sale of items at retail within the city and an excise tax at the same rate on the use, storage, or other consumption within the city of tangible personal property purchased, leased, or rented from a retailer during such time as the tax is effective within the city (hereinafter collectively referred to as the "tax"). The tax shall be used for financing the operation of the Everman Crime Control and Prevention District. 
The tax shall be administered, collected, and remitted in accordance with the Act, and to the extent not inconsistent with the Act, in accordance with Chapter 323, Texas Tax Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 522, §§ 1, 2, 5-14-02; Ord. No. 691, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-16, appr. 11-8-16)  
Sec. 18-50. - Tax for purpose of maintaining and repairing existing streets. 
(a)  All action concerning the submission of the proposition to the voters of the city having been taken and the tax authorized by the act having been approved by the voters of the city as stated in the foregoing recitals, the city council does hereby adopt and levy a sales and use tax at a rate of one-fourth (¼) of one (1) percent on the sale of items at retail within the city and an excise tax at the same rate on the use, storage, or other consumption within the city of tangible personal property purchased, leased, or rented from a retailer during such time as the tax is effective within the city (hereinafter collectively referred to as the "tax"). The tax shall be used for maintaining and repairing existing streets. 
(b)  The tax shall be administered, collected, and remitted in accordance with the Act and, to the extent not inconsistent with the Act, in accordance with Chapter 327, Texas Tax Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 626, §§ 1, 2, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 707, §§ 1, 2, 2-7-17, appr. 5-6-17)  
Sec. 18-51. - Goods in transit. 
Goods in transit, as defined by section 11.253, Texas Tax Code, which are not exempt from taxation under other law shall be subject to ad valorem taxation for tax year 2012 and for every year thereafter, and shall not be exempt from taxation as provided by, and in accordance with section 11.253, Texas Tax Code. 
(Ord. No. 645, § 2, 11-8-11)  
Sec. 18-52. - Tax to benefit Everman Community Development Corporation. 
(a)  The governing body has found and determined, and hereby finds and determines, that an additional sales and use tax in the amount of one-half (½) of one (1) percent is hereby levied, imposed, ratified, and reconfirmed on the receipts from the sale at retail of taxable items within the city (since January 1, 2000) in accordance with the provisions of the Act, the Texas Tax Code, including, but not limited to, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.102(a), as amended, and all other applicable law. 
(b)  The governing body has found and determined, and hereby finds and determines, that the election held in the city on August 14, 1999 concerning the imposition of an additional sales and use tax was called, conducted and canvassed in accordance with the provisions of all applicable law and that the city is authorized to collect, for the benefit of the corporation, the additional sales and use tax as authorized by the provisions of the Act. 
(c)  The governing body has found and determined pursuant to a resolution adopted on October 19, 1999, and hereby finds and determines, that it is advisable that a nonprofit economic development corporation be authorized and created, with such economic development corporation to be known as the "Everman Community Development Corporation" (the "corporation"). 
(d)  The public purposes of the City of Everman, Texas (the "city"), which the corporation may further on behalf of the city are as set forth in the Act, the corporation's articles of incorporation and the aforementioned election. 
(e)  The corporation is hereby designated as the duly constituted authority and instrumentality of the city (within the meaning of those terms in the regulations of the Department of the Treasury and the rulings of the Internal Revenue Service prescribed and promulgated pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended) and shall be authorized to act on behalf of the city for the specific public purposes as set forth in the Act; but the corporation is not intended to be and shall not be a political subdivision or a political corporation within the meaning of the Constitution and the laws of the State of Texas (the "state"), except as provided in the Act, and shall have all of the powers set forth in the Act. 
(f)  The corporation may, under the conditions set forth in this section, issue obligations on behalf of the city, acquire, lease, sell, or convey certain properties to promote and encourage employment and the public welfare and to finance projects as defined in the Act and in accordance with the election. The city shall not lend its credit or grant any public money or thing of value in aid of the corporation. Furthermore, obligations issued by the corporation with the approval of the city shall be deemed not to constitute a debt of the state, the city, or of any other political corporation, subdivision or agency of the state or a pledge of the faith and credit of any of them, but such obligations shall be payable solely as provided in the Act. 
(g)  Upon dissolution of the corporation, the city shall accept title to or other interest in any real or personal property owned by the corporation at such time. 
(Ord. No. 675, §§ 1—7, 5-13-14)  
Secs. 18-53—18-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TAX INCREMENT FINANCING REINVESTMENT ZONES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 18-76—18-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ZONE NUMBER ONE 
 
Sec. 18-86. - Created. 
The city hereby creates a reinvestment zone over the area described in Exhibit A attached to Ordinance No. 670 and depicted in the map attached thereto as Exhibit B and such reinvestment zone shall hereafter be identified as Tax Increment Financing Reinvestment Zone Number One, City of Everman, Texas (the "zone" or "reinvestment zone"). 
(Ord. No. 670, § 3, 11-12-13) 
Editor's note— Exhibits A and B to Ordinance 670, adopted Nov. 12, 2013, are not included herein, but can be found on file in the city offices.  
Sec. 18-87. - Board of directors. 
There is hereby established a board of directors for the zone that shall consist of five (5) members. The board of directors of Tax Increment Financing Reinvestment Zone Number One, City of Everman, Texas shall be appointed as follows: 
(1)  Three (3) members shall be appointed by the city council, one (1) member shall be appointed by the Tarrant County Commissioners Court and one (1) member shall be appointed by the Tarrant County Hospital District. The initial board of directors shall be appointed by resolution within sixty (60) days of the passage of the ordinance from which this division is derived or within a reasonable time thereafter. All members appointed to the board shall meet the eligibility requirements set forth in the Act. The governing bodies of other taxing units that levy taxes on real property in Tax Increment Financing Reinvestment Zone Number One have chosen not to pay any of their taxes into the tax increment fund and have waived their right to appoint board members. 
(2)  The terms of the board members shall be two-year terms. The city council shall designate a member of the board to serve as chairman of the board of directors, and the board shall elect from its members a vice chairman and other officers as it sees fit. 
(3)  The board of directors shall make recommendations to the city council concerning the administration of the zone. It shall prepare and adopt a project plan and reinvestment zone financing plan for the zone and must submit such plans to the city council for its approval. The board of directors shall possess all powers necessary to prepare, implement and monitor such project plan and financing plan for the reinvestment zone as the city council considers advisable, including the submission of an annual report on the status of the zone. 
(Ord. No. 670, § 4, 11-12-13)  
Sec. 18-88. - Effective date. 
The zone shall take effect on January 1, 2013, and the termination of the zone shall occur on December 31, 2042, or at an earlier time designated by subsequent ordinance of the city council in the event the city determines that the zone should be terminated due to insufficient private investment, accelerated private investment or other good cause, or at such time as all project costs and tax increment bonds, if any, and the interest thereon, have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 670, § 5, 11-12-13)  
Sec. 18-89. - Determination of tax increment base. 
The tax increment base for the zone, which is the total appraised value of all taxable real property located in the zone, is to be determined as of January 1, 2013, the year in which the zone was designated a reinvestment zone. 
(Ord. No. 670, § 6, 11-12-13)  
Sec. 18-90. - Tax increment fund. 
There is hereby created and established a tax increment fund for the zone which may be divided into such subaccounts as may be authorized by subsequent resolution or ordinance, into which all tax increments, less any of the amounts not required to be paid into the tax increment fund pursuant to the Act, are to be deposited. The tax increment fund and any subaccounts are to be maintained in an account at the city treasurer's affiliated depository bank of the city and shall be secured in the manner prescribed by law for funds of Texas cities. In addition, all revenues from the sale of any tax increment bonds and notes hereafter issued by the city, revenues from the sale of any property acquired as part of the tax increment financing plan and other revenues to be dedicated to and used in the zone shall be deposited into such fund or subaccount from which money will be disbursed to pay project costs for the zone or to satisfy the claims of holders of tax increment bonds or notes issued for the zone. 
(Ord. No. 670, § 7, 11-12-13)  
Chapter 19 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty for Code violations, § 1-7; ambulance service, Ch. 2.5; moving of buildings, § 4-31 et seq.; emergency management, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 8; junked vehicles, § 10-71 et seq.; municipal court, Ch. 12; offenses, Ch. 13; regulations on use of vehicles in city parks, § 14-46 et seq.; planning and zoning, Ch. 15; police, Ch. 16; streets, sidewalls and other public places, Ch. 17; maintenance of liquid waste vehicles, § 20-149. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Chief of police authorized to determine and post certain traffic regulations. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine, designate and post signs regulating the following: 
(1)  Traffic stop signs; 
(2)  No parking areas; 
(3)  School zones; 
(4)  Speed zones. 
(b)  When official signs are erected as authorized in this section, no person shall operate his vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Ord. No. 358, §§ 1, 2, 8-12-86)  
Sec. 19-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 571, adopted Dec. 13, 2005, repealed § 19-2, which pertained to flashing lights on vehicles of volunteer firefighters and police reserves, and derived from § 1-116 of the 1977 Code.  
Sec. 19-3. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  Fire marshal authorized to designate. The fire marshal of the city is hereby empowered and vested with full authority to designate fire lanes on public property and on private property within the city. 
(b)  Signs to be installed. There shall be caused to be constructed and installed adequate and suitable signs informing all persons of the boundaries and existence of such fire lanes so designated by the fire marshal of the city within thirty (30) days after each such area is designated as a fire lane by the fire marshal of the city. Such sign shall not only inform all persons of the existence and boundaries of such fire lanes, but it shall additionally inform all such persons that the parking or the leaving of any vehicle or impediments to movement of emergency vehicles or personnel in such fire lane is prohibited by the ordinances of the city. 
(c)  May order removal of vehicles and impediments. Once such fire lanes are so designated by the fire marshal of the city and the boundaries and locations of such fire lanes are established by suitable signs, then the fire marshal and all police officers of the city are hereby invested with authority to order all persons not to park any vehicle in such fire lanes, to remove any vehicle in such fire lanes, and not to park or leave anything in such fire lanes which could or would impede the movement of emergency vehicles or personnel in, on, or across such fire lanes. Any person who fails or refuses to heed the orders of the fire marshal or any police officer of the city to remove any vehicle or anything else which could impede the movement of emergency vehicles or personnel through such fire lane shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined as hereinafter provided. 
(d)  Not to park in fire lanes or leave impediments. No person shall park or leave, or permit to be parked or left, a vehicle or any other thing which could impede the movement of emergency vehicles or personnel in, on or across such fire lanes hereinabove provided for. Any person parking such a vehicle in such a fire lane or leaving any impediment to the movement of emergency vehicles or personnel in the fire lane shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be fined as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1977, §§ 17-11—17-14)  
Sec. 19-4. - Loading or unloading on certain streets. 
(a)  No person shall load or unload, or cause to be loaded or unloaded, any products or materials on a public right-of-way in the city on those streets or portions thereof designated by ordinance from time to time. 
(b)  Each act or direction in violation of paragraph (a) of this section shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense and subject to an additional fine as provided for in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1977, §§ 17-31, 17-33)  
Sec. 19-5. - Special ordinances providing for traffic-control signs, devices, etc., at specific locations. 
Ordinances providing for placing stop signs, traffic lights, or other traffic-control signs, markings, or devices at specific locations on designated streets and other public ways of the city are special ordinances, and are not included in full in this Code; but all such ordinances shall continue in full effect until otherwise determined by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 17-51)  
Secs. 19-6—19-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 19-26. - Overtaking and passing school bus. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway inside or outside of a business or residence district upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus when there is in operation on such school bus a visual signal as specified in section 124 of article 6701d of the Revised Civil Statutes, and such driver shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion or is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or the visual signals are no longer actuated. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the school bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
(Code 1977, §§ 17-1, 17-2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 104.  
Secs. 19-27—19-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TRUCK ROUTES 
 
Sec. 19-51. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Authorized emergency vehicle: Any vehicle of the fire department, police department, or public and private ambulances for which permits have been issued by the State Board of Health; emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the governing body of an incorporated city; private vehicles operated by volunteer firemen or certified emergency medical services employees or volunteers while answering a fire alarm or responding to a medical emergency; and vehicles operated by blood banks or tissue banks, accredited or approved under the laws of this state or the United States, while making emergency deliveries of blood, drugs, medicines, or organs. 
Business destination: Any location within the city limits of Everman to which a commercial motor vehicle may travel for purposes of conducting the routine business activities normally associated with said vehicle. Business destinations shall include truck terminals, motor fuel stations, garages, places of repair, places of performing a service, and places of loading and unloading. 
Commercial motor vehicle: Any motor vehicle designed or used for the transportation of property, not including a passenger bus, passenger automobile, motorcycle, panel delivery truck, or pick up truck. 
Driver or operator: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
Motor vehicle: Every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
Place of business origin: Any place within the city limits of Everman from which a commercial motor vehicle embarks for the purpose of conducting the routine business activities normally associated with said vehicle. Points of business origin shall include truck terminals, motor fuel stations, garages, places of repair, places of performing a service, and places of loading or unloading. 
Roadway: That portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. If a street or highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
Semi-trailer: Every vehicle of the trailer type so designated or used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another motor vehicle. 
Street or highway: The entire width between the boundary lines of. every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Trailer: Every vehicle without motive power designed or used to carry property or passengers wholly on its own structure and to be drawn by a motor vehicle. 
Truck-tractors: Every motor vehicle designed or used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
Vehicle: Every mechanical device, in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon public highway, including motor vehicles, commercial motor vehicles, truck-tractors, trailers, and semi-trailers, severally, as herein defined, but excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 1, 12-1-87; Ord. No. 439, § 1, 11-3-92)  
Sec. 19-52. - Trucks to be operated on routes; exemptions; penalty. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any truck or other commercial motor vehicle on a public street in the city without a business destination or point of business origin within the corporate limits of the city except upon streets designated as truck routes; provided, however, this section shall not apply to emergency vehicles operating in response to emergency calls nor to vehicles operated by a public utility in the performance of inspection or maintenance functions. Such truck with a business destination or point of business origin within the corporate limits of the city shall be operated only on truck routes or on the shortest street route between such business destination or point of business origin and the nearest truck route. The driver of any such truck or commercial motor vehicle shall, at any time such truck or commercial motor vehicle is operated off a truck route, carry with him a bill of lading or other written evidence showing all points of business origin and business destination within the city. 
(b)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section will be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 386, §§ 2—4, 12-1-87; Ord. No. 439, § 2, 11-3-92)  
Sec. 19-53. - Designated; posting; designation of alternates. 
(a)  The following street is designated a truck route: 
Forest Hill Drive (Rendon Road). 
(b)  The following drainage structures are designated load limit structures, maximum axle load of five (5) tons: 
Enon Street at Chambers Creek 
Forest Hill at Chambers Creek. 
(c)  The street superintendent shall erect appropriate signs and markings to designate the truck routes and load limits described in this section. 
(d)  Whenever any street designated as a truck route is being repaired or is otherwise temporarily out of use, the city manager is authorized to designate alternate truck routes for such period as might be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 386, §§ 5—8, 12-1-87; Ord. No. 439, § 1, 11-3-92)  
Sec. 19-54. - Vehicle specifications. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or move, or to cause or permit to be driven, operated or moved, on any public street within the city, any commercial motor vehicle with or without load, contrary to any of the regulations contained in this section. 
(b)  No commercial motor vehicle shall exceed a total outside width, including any load thereon, of ninety-six (96) inches, except that the width of a farm tractor shall not exceed nine (9) feet and that the limitations as to size of a vehicle stated in this section shall not apply to implements of husbandry, machinery used solely for the purpose of drilling water wells, or to highway or street building or maintenance machinery owned or operated by or on behalf of the state or any of its political subdivisions or the city. No commercial motor vehicle unladen or with load shall exceed a height of thirteen (13) feet, six (6) inches including load. 
(c)  No commercial vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semitrailer nor combination of such vehicles shall be operated or caused or permitted to be operated upon any public street within the city having a weight in excess of any one (1) or more of the following limitations: 
(1)  In no event shall the total gross weight, with load, of any vehicle or combination of vehicles, exceed seventy-two thousand (72,000) pounds. 
(2)  No axle shall carry a load in excess of eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds. An axle load shall be defined as the total load transmitted to the road by all wheels whose centers may be included between two (2) parallel transverse vertical planes forty (40) inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle. 
(3)  The total gross weight concentrated on the highway surface from any tandem axle group shall not exceed thirty-two thousand (32,000) pounds for each such tandem axle group. "Tandem axle group" is defined to be two (2) or more axles spaced forty (40) inches or more apart from center to center having at least one (1) common point of weight suspension. 
(4)  Vehicles used exclusively to transport ready-mix concrete may be operated upon public streets of the city with a tandem axle load not to exceed thirty-six thousand (36,000) pounds and a gross load not to exceed forty-eight thousand (48,000) pounds. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person operating or causing to be operated a motor vehicle under a valid and subsisting permit for the operation of overweight or oversize equipment for the transportation of such commodities as cannot be reasonably dismantled issued by the State of Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation under the provisions of article 6701a of the Revised Civil Statutes as such article now exists or might from time to time be amended; 
(2)  Emergency vehicle operating in response to any emergency call; 
(3)  Vehicles which have obtained permission and routing from the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 9, 12-1-87)  
Sec. 19-55. - Operation so as to allow spillage of load prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any commercial motor vehicle on a public street in such manner as to permit any portion of its cargo, either liquid or solid, to fall out of, spill from, or blow out of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 10, 12-1-87)  
Secs. 19-56—19-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 19-76. - Special ordinances prohibiting or regulating parking of vehicles at specific places on designated streets. 
Ordinances prohibiting or regulating parking of vehicles at specific places on designated streets and other public ways of the city are special ordinances, and are not included in full in this Code; but all such ordinances shall continue in effect until otherwise provided by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 17-52; Ord. No. 564, § 1, 7-12-05)  
Sec. 19-77. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the indicated meaning: 
Commercial motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles used to transport passengers or property that: 
(1)  Has a gross combination weight rating of more than twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds, including a towed unit with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds; 
(2)  Has a gross vehicle weight rating of more than twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds; 
(3)  Is designed to transport sixteen (16) or more passengers, including the driver; or 
(4)  Is transporting hazardous materials and is required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F. 
A commercial motor vehicle includes a vehicle meeting this definition regardless of whether the vehicle is used for a commercial purpose. 
Front yard means "front yard" as defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Everman, Texas. 
Hard surface means that the surface is paved with cement, asphalt, or paving stones as approved by the building official. All parking surfaces shall be free of litter, debris, weeds, or other objectionable materials or objects. 
Recreational vehicle means any boat and any motor vehicle primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use. The term includes any boat, jet ski, boat or jet ski trailer, travel trailer, camping trailer, tent trailer, or detached truck camper, or motor home of any size. 
Side yard means "side yard" as defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Everman, Texas. 
Trailer means any vehicle of any size that is nonmotorized and intended to be transported, pushed or pulled by a motorized vehicle. 
Vehicle means every day device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, except devices moved by human power or are used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 2, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 7-8-03; Ord. No. 564, § 1, 7-12-05)  
Sec. 19-78. - Parking of commercial vehicles prohibited generally on public right-of-way and in commercial zoning areas; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to leave, park or stand a commercial motor vehicle or a trailer, regardless of size, on a public street, alley, parkway, boulevard, or public place. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to leave, park or stand a commercial motor vehicle, or a trailer that is over thirty (30) feet long or a fifth-wheel trailer, upon property within an area zoned as commercial according to the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Everman. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Vehicles or trailers used for street or road construction or maintenance; or 
(2)  Vehicles or trailers used by public service utility companies engaged in repairing or extending public service utilities; or 
(3)  Motor buses when taking on or discharging passengers at the customary bus stops; or 
(4)  Any vehicles and/or trailers when legally parked in a designated loading or unloading zone; or 
(5)  Any vehicle or trailer that developed a mechanical or physical defect in route, making it unsafe to proceed further and necessary to stop to make emergency repairs or to have the vehicle or trailer removed. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 2, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 564, § 1, 7-12-05)  
Sec. 19-79. - Parking of trailers, buses and recreational vehicles prohibited in residential areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person or owner to leave, park, or stand a trailer that is over thirty (30) feet long, a fifth-wheel trailer, bus or recreational vehicle within an area zoned as residential or multifamily according to the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Everman, except as provided in this section. 
(b)  Recreational vehicles may only be parked or stored on a portion of a front or side yard of any single-family or multifamily residential property if the recreational vehicle is wholly contained and enclosed in a garage or is parked: 
(1)  Wholly on a hard surfaced driveway or parking area permitted or required by the zoning ordinance, and the recreational vehicle does not extend within ten (10) feet of the curb or street line; or 
(2)  On a hard surface behind the front building line of residential property. 
(c)  This section shall not prevent the parking or standing of the above described vehicles in such zoned areas for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers, freight, equipment, or merchandise, but not for otherwise not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 2, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 7-8-03; Ord. No. 564, § 1, 7-12-05)  
Sec. 19-80. - Exceptions. 
This division shall not apply to the parking of church or public or private school buses on paved off-street parking areas in properly zoned areas. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 2, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 564, § 1, 7-12-05)  
Sec. 19-81. - Unattended motor vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle to be parked and left unattended upon any street or highway, or on public or private property accessible to the public, with the engine running or key in the ignition. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) if the unattended vehicle is parked in the driveway of a private single-family residence, or if the unattended vehicle is rendered undrivable by an anti-theft device. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 4-13-04)  
Secs. 19-82—19-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONDUCT IN PARKING AREAS 
 
Sec. 19-101. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the indicated meaning: 
Parking area means a privately owned or publicly owned accessway or parking area commonly used by the general public without charge, maintained for the convenience of customers, clients, or patrons of one (1) or more business establishments or public offices. 
Public place is any public road, street, alley, or public square, inn, tavern, store, grocery, workshop, or any place to which people commonly resort for the purposes of business, recreation or amusement other than a private residence. 
(Code 1977, § 17-21) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 19-102. - Prohibited uses of motor vehicles. 
No person in control or possession of a motor vehicle in a parking area may: 
(1)  Accelerate or race the motor of a vehicle so as to cause a loud noise in a manner calculated to disturb the person present; 
(2)  Bring a motor vehicle to a sudden start or stop or blow the horn of the vehicle when there is no necessity for the protection of a person or property, in such a manner calculated to disturb the person present; 
(3)  Hold a race or contest for speed with another motor vehicle or vehicles, without the written consent of the parking area owner or his authorized representative; 
(4)  Accelerate a vehicle in such a manner as to cause the vehicle to emit loud or disturbing noises. 
(Code 1977, § 17-22)  
Sec. 19-103. - Littering parking areas. 
No person may throw or deposit any trash, litter, or other waste on a parking area. 
(Code 1977, § 17-24)  
Secs. 19-104—19-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PARKING LOTS AND AREAS 
 
Sec. 19-126. - Operation or maintenance to comply with division. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a parking lot in violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 2, 9-8-87)  
Sec. 19-127. - Construction permit required; fee. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, improve, construct, or reconstruct any parking lot within the city unless first obtaining a permit from the city at a cost of thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(Ord. No. 380, § 1, 9-8-87) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 11.  
Sec. 19-128. - Parking requirements. 
As provided in the zoning ordinance, the following requirements apply to the indicated districts: 
(1)  In single- and two-family residential districts, off-street parking areas shall be reinforced concrete with a minimum four (4) inches thick. 
(2)  In multifamily residential districts, minimum construction requirements are: 
a.  Minimum two (2) inches hot mix asphaltic concrete; 
b.  Minimum six (6) inches approved base; 
c.  Parking area to be graded to one-half (0.5) percent minimum grade; 
d.  Unprotected edges of asphalt shall be protected by an approved header four (4) inches wide and six (6) inches high and shall not extend above the surface of the asphalt; 
e.  Garbage containers shall be stored on six (6) inches of reinforced concrete and with the loading end of the vehicle loading the container supported by the six (6) inches of reinforced concrete. 
(3)  In commercial districts, minimum construction requirements are: 
a.  Two (2) inches hot mix asphaltic concrete; 
b.  Six (6) inches of approved base; 
c.  Parking are to be graded to one-half (0.5) percent minimum grade; 
d.  Unprotected edges of asphalt shall be protected by an approved header four (4) inches wide and six (6) inches high and shall not extend above the surface of the asphalt; 
e.  Garbage containers shall be stored on six (6) inches of reinforced concrete and with the loading end of the vehicle loading the container supported by the six (6) inches of reinforced concrete; 
f.  All loading and unloading areas for vehicles weighing in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds shall be six (6) inches of reinforced concrete. 
(4)  In industrial districts, minimum construction requirements are: 
a.  Two (2) inches of hot mix asphaltic concrete. 
b.  Six (6) inches of approved base. 
c.  Parking area to be graded to one-half (0.5) percent minimum grade. 
d.  Unprotected edges of asphalt shall be protected with an approved header four (4) inches wide and six (6) inches high and shall not extend above the surface of the asphalt. 
e.  Garbage containers shall be stored on six (6) inches of reinforced concrete and with the loading end of the vehicle loading the container supported by the six (6) inches of reinforced concrete. 
f.  All loading and unloading areas for vehicles weighing in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds shall be six (6) inches reinforced concrete or loading and unloading shall be accomplished in the storage area.  
Sec. 19-129. - Parking space requirements. 
Parking space requirements are as required by the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 4, 9-8-87)  
Sec. 19-130. - Existing asphalt parking lots. 
(a)  All existing asphalt parking lots shall remain; however, any new addition to the parking lot shall conform to the requirements of this division. 
(b)  Should fifty (50) percent or more of the existing parking lot be reconstructed then the entire parking lot shall be made to conform to the requirements of this division. 
(c)  All existing asphalt parking lots shall conform to the maintenance requirements of this division within one (1) year after its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 5, 9-8-87)  
Sec. 19-131. - Weight of vehicles parking on asphalt lots restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle weighing in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds upon any asphalt parking lot with a sign posted at each entrance prohibiting vehicles in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds except vehicles of a regulated utility and emergency vehicles. 
(b)  A property owner at his discretion and expense may install signs at each entrance to an asphalt parking lot prohibiting vehicles in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds. 
(Ord. No. 380, §§ 6, 7, 9-8-87)  
Sec. 19-132. - Maintenance. 
All parking lots in all zoning districts which have an asphalt or concrete surface shall be maintained in a reasonable state of repair free from pot holes and areas bare of surface material. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 8, 9-8-87)  
Sec. 19-133. - Utility and emergency vehicles exempt from division. 
In performance of their official duties, vehicles of regulated utilities and emergency vehicles shall be exempt from the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 9, 9-8-87)  
Chapter 20 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 8; parks and recreation, Ch. 14. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Pipes for water, gas, etc. 
Any person desiring to lay pipes for water, gas, steam, or any purpose, in any street or alley upon which sewers are laid, shall give at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the superintendent of the water and sewer department before opening the street or alley; and the manner of excavating the trenches and laying the pipe and backfilling over the same shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent. All such work shall be planned and executed in accordance with the provisions of the plumbing and other ordinances of the city so that no injury shall occur to any street, public sewer or drain, or to any house or other sewer drain connected therewith. 
(Code 1977, § 15-42)  
Sec. 20-2. - Barriers and lights; backfilling. 
(a)  Proper barriers and lights must be maintained on the banks of the house or other sewer trench to guard the public against accidents during the progress of work. 
(b)  In backfilling, no stone shall be used and the earth shall be carefully rammed or flooded so as to keep the pipe in proper position and to avoid settling. 
(Code 1977, § 15-43)  
Sec. 20-3. - Amount of residential and commercial utility deposit. 
The residential utility deposit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) and thirty-four dollars and seventy-five cents ($34.75) for senior citizens and shall be deposited into the water and sewer fund. The commercial utility deposit shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) and shall be deposited into the water and sewer fund. 
(Code 1977, § 15-141; Ord. No. 348, § 2, 10-8-85)  
Sec. 20-4. - Revenues from utility deposit investments. 
All revenues received from investments of funds shall be prorated to the general fund in the amount of fifteen (15) percent of the total earned and to the water and sewer fund in the amount of eighty-five (85) percent of the total earned as the individual investments are combined. 
(Code 1977, § 15-142)  
Sec. 20-5. - Applying deposits to customer bills. 
Deposits applied to final bills as partial or complete payment shall be applied to satisfy one (1) months garbage fee first, then applied to the water and sewer accounts receivable next. If the total deposit is not consumed and a balance is still due for the garbage fees, then it shall be satisfied to the extent that the utility deposit is consumed. Any utility balance remaining shall be refunded to the utility customer. 
(Code 1977, § 15-143)  
Sec. 20-6. - Water and sewer service—Multifamily dwellings. 
(a)  No water or sewer service shall be provided to any multifamily dwelling unless the owner or his authorized agent shall apply in writing with the city for such service and shall make the required deposit for such service with the city. 
(b)  The deposit for water and sewer service to a multifamily dwelling is hereby set at fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(c)  The owner of a multifamily dwelling shall be liable for and shall be billed for any water or sewer service provided, to his dwelling, regardless of whether the property is rented, leased or used by a third party. 
(Ord. No. 349, §§ 1—3, 11-12-85)  
Sec. 20-7. - Insufficient check charge. 
A charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be made to any customer who provides the city with an insufficient check in payment of a water or sewer bill. An additional ten (10) percent penalty will be added if the check was paid before the fifteenth of the month. These charges and the water or sewer bill must be paid by cash or money order if a customer has given the city an insufficient check. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 3, 10-8-85; Ord. No. 441, § 1, 6-15-93)  
Sec. 20-8. - Penalty; other remedies. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the rules, regulations or provisions of this chapter or any part of it, by any act either of omission or commission, or cause the same to be done, will be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(b)  But, in the case of any willful or continued violation of the terms, conditions and provisions of this chapter, the city in addition to imposing the penalties above provided, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in any court having jurisdiction to restrain, correct, or abate such violation; and the definition of any violation of the terms, conditions and provisions of this article as a misdemeanor shall not preclude the city from invoking the civil remedies given it by the laws of the state, but same shall be cumulative and subject to the prosecution as hereinabove prescribed for such violation. 
(Code 1977, § 15-54)  
Sec. 20-9. - Temporary disconnections. 
Any customer who requests a temporary disconnection or discontinuance of water or sewer service shall be charged a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) to re-activate an account. Such amount is to be billed on the customer's following month's water bill. 
(Ord. No. 441, § 3, 6-15-93)  
Sec. 20-10. - After hours turn off charges. 
Any customer who requests that their water be turned on or off before 8:00 a.m. and after 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, or between midnight Friday night and 8:00 a.m. Monday morning shall be charged thirty dollars ($30.00) an hour with a minimum of one hour. 
(Ord. No. 441, § 3, 6-15-93; Ord. No. 630, § 3, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 752, § 3, 10-1-19)  
ARTICLE I.A. - WATER SOURCES PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 20-11. - Ground water source protection. 
Ground water sources shall be located so that there will be no danger of pollution from flooding or from unsanitary surroundings, such as privies, sewage, sewage treatment plants, livestock and animal pens, solid waste disposal sites and underground petroleum and chemical storage tanks and liquid transmission pipelines, or abandoned and improperly sealed wells. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 1, 9-13-05)  
Sec. 20-12. - Water wells near sanitary sewer lines. 
No water well site which is within fifty (50) feet of a tile or concrete sanitary sewer, sewage appurtenance, septic tank, storm sewer, or cemetery; or which is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a septic tank perforated drain field, areas irrigated by low dosage, low angle spray on-site sewage facilities, absorption bed, evapotranspiration bed or liquid transmission pipeline will be acceptable for use as a public drinking water supply. Sanitary or storm sewers constructed of ductile iron or PVC pipe meeting AWWA standards, having a minimum working pressure of one hundred fifty (150) psi or greater and equipped with pressure type joints may be located at distances of less than fifty (50) feet from a proposed well site but in no case shall the distance be less than ten (10) feet. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 1, 9-13-05)  
Sec. 20-13. - Water wells near sewage treatment and other systems. 
No water well site shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of a sewage treatment plant or within three hundred (300) feet of a sewage wet well, sewage pumping station or a drainage ditch which contains industrial waste discharges or the wastes from sewage treatment systems. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 1, 9-13-05)  
Sec. 20-14. - Minimum distances from waste locations. 
No water wells shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of animal feed lots, solid waste disposal sites, lands on which sewage plant or septic tank sludge is applied, or lands irrigated by sewage plant effluent. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 1, 9-13-05)  
Sec. 20-15. - Distance from livestock. 
Livestock in pastures shall not be allowed within fifty (50) feet of water supply wells. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 1, 9-13-05)  
Sec. 20-16. - Reporting to TCEQ. 
All known or abandoned or inoperative water wells (unused wells that have not been plugged) within one-quarter (¼) mile of a proposed well site shall be reported to the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) along with existing or potential pollution hazards. These reports are required for community and nontransient, noncommunity ground water sources. Examples of existing or potential pollution hazards which may affect ground water quality include, but are not limited to: landfill and dump sites, animal feedlots, military facilities, industrial facilities, wood-treatment facilities, liquid petroleum and petrochemical production, storage and transmission facilities, Class 1, 2, 3, and 4 injection wells and pesticide storage and mixing facilities. This information must be submitted to TCEQ prior to construction or as required by the Executive Director of TCEQ. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 1, 9-13-05)  
Sec. 20-17. - Variances. 
(a)  The director may grant variances from the provisions of this section to persons demonstrating extreme hardship and need, as determined by the director, if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The applicant signs a compliance agreement on forms provided by the director and approved by the city attorney, agreeing to irrigate or water a lawn or landscape or to use the water only in the amount and manner permitted by the variance; 
(2)  Granting a variance must not cause an immediate and significant reduction in the city's water supply; and 
(3)  Failure to grant the variance would result in an emergency condition adversely affecting health, sanitation or fire safety for the public or the person requesting the variance. 
(Ord. No. 730, § 2, 4-9-19)  
Sec. 20-18. - Lawn and landscape irrigation conservation. 
(a)  Lawns and landscaping may be watered on any day, at any time, by handheld hose, drip irrigation, a soaker hose or tree bubbler. (The intent of this measure is to allow for the protection of structural foundations, trees, and other high value landscape materials.) 
Except for hand watering, drip irrigation and the use of soaker hoses, a person may only irrigate, water, or cause or permit the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape, inclusive of structural foundations, trees, and other high value landscape materials, located on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person (i) on a day designated as an outdoor water use day for the property's address as shown below; and (ii) between the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to 11:59 p.m. on such day. 
(1)  Residential addresses ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6 or 8) may water on Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
(2)  Residential addresses ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9) may water on Thursdays and Sundays. 
(3)  All non-residential locations (apartment complexes, businesses, industries, parks, street and/or roadway medians, etc.) may water on Tuesdays and Fridays. 
(b)  Except for hand watering, drip irrigation and the use of soaker hoses, a person commits an offense if that person irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape located on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(c)  Except for hand watering, drip irrigation and the use of soaker hoses, a person commits an offense if that person irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape located on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person on a day that is not designated as an outdoor water use for that property address as shown in subsection (a) above. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if a person knowingly or recklessly irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of a lawn or landscape located on premises owned, leased or managed by the person in a manner that causes: 
(1)  A substantial amount of water to fall upon impervious areas instead of a lawn or landscape, such that a constant stream of water overflows from the lawn or landscape onto a street or other drainage area; or 
(2)  An irrigation system or other lawn or landscape watering device to operate during any form of precipitation. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if, on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person, a person operates a lawn or landscape irrigation system or device that: 
(1)  Has any broken or missing sprinkler head; or 
(2)  Has not been properly maintained in a manner that prevents the waste of water. 
(f)  Affirmative defenses: 
(1)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution of an offense under subsection (a) that at the time such person irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape, such activity was for the purpose of: 
a.  Dust control of a sports field; or 
b.  The maintenance, repair, or testing of an irrigation system. 
(2)  The activity described in subsection f(1)a. and b. may only occur within a period of two (2) days no more than once every thirty (30) days. Any such activity requiring a longer period or greater frequency shall require a variance as provided in subsection (g). 
(g)  Variances: 
(1)  The director may grant variances to the twice per week watering and irrigation restrictions and schedule, if one (1) or more of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Failure to grant such a variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting health, sanitation, or fire safety for the public or the person requesting the variance; 
b.  Compliance with the watering and irrigation restrictions and/or schedule cannot be accomplished due to technical or other limitations; or 
c.  Alternative methods that achieve the same level of reduction in water use can be implemented. 
(2)  The director may grant variances to allow for establishment of hydromulch, grass sod, or grass seed for new lawns. 
(3)  Variances shall be granted or denied at the discretion of the director. All petitions for variances shall be in writing and shall include the following: 
a.  Name and address of the petitioner(s); 
b.  Purpose of the water use; 
c.  Specific provisions from which relief is requested; 
d.  Detailed statement of the adverse effect of the provision from which relief is requested; 
e.  Description of the relief requested; 
f.  Period of time for which the variance is sought; 
g.  Alternative measures that will be taken to reduce water use; and 
h.  Other pertinent information requested. 
(h)  A person who irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering by use of an alternative water source such as a well, reclaimed or reused water, is exempt from prosecution if that person has: 
(1)  Registered such alternative water source with the city; 
(2)  Provided sufficient proof to the director that the alternative water source is from a well, reclaimed or reused water or from the Trinity River and has allowed inspection by the director if deemed necessary; and 
(3)  Complied with the city's backflow and cross-connection control policies in article IX of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 730, § 3, 4-9-19)  
Secs. 20-19—20-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 20-31—20-33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 8 of Ord. No. 534, adopted May 6, 2003, repealed Ord. No. 431, from which §§ 20-31—20-33 derived, and which pertained to purpose and policy, definitions, and discharge prohibitions and limitations. Similar provisions can be found in § 20-101 et seq.  
Sec. 20-34. - Prohibited discharges onto ground. 
It shall be unlawful to throw or allow to be thrown or deposited upon the surface of the ground or in any hole or vault in or under the surface of the ground on any lot within one hundred (100) feet of any city sanitary sewer, any water which has been used for domestic or manufacturing purposes or any liquid or any solid filth, feces, or urine. 
(Code 1977, § 15-37(4))  
Sec. 20-35. - Prohibited sewer deposits generally. 
(a)  No person shall deposit any garbage, offal, dead animals, filth, or any substance having a tendency to obstruct the flow of sewage in any manhole, flush tank or sewer opening. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, in any vessel or receptacle connected with the city sewer system, any newspaper, garbage, hair, fruit, ashes, vegetable peelings, refuse, rags, cotton, cinders, or any other matter whatsoever, except feces, urine, the necessary toilet paper, or liquid slops. 
(Code 1977, §§ 15-37(5), 15-40)  
Sec. 20-36. - Damage to system. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Obstruct or in any way to injure any of the pipes, drains, works or machinery belonging to or connected with the sewer system of the city or to place any substance whatever into any sink, water closet, bathtub, vessels, drains or other receptacles belonging to or connected with the sewer system which may obstruct or injure same. 
(2)  Enter in or upon the premises of the sewage disposal plant site and to in anyway tamper with or injure in any manner whatsoever the buildings, fixtures, and equipment of the sewage disposal plant, or any fixtures, equipment, or supplies that may be stored at the site. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any authorized person to maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewerage works. 
(Code 1977, §§ 15-37(7), (10), 15-41)  
Sec. 20-37. - Unlawful discharges to natural outlets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge into any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sanitary sewerage, industrial waste, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided. 
(Code 1977, § 15-37(8))  
Sec. 20-38. - Construction or maintenance of private facilities prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain within the city any septic tank, privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended for the disposal of sewerage. 
(Code 1977, § 15-37(9))  
Sec. 20-39. - Inspections; interference. 
It shall be the duty of the superintendent of the water department, or his duly authorized agents, to enter all premises as may be necessary in the enforcement of this article and he is hereby so empowered. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any inspection being made by the city plumbing inspector, the superintendent or his authorized agents, in carrying out the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 15-51)  
Sec. 20-40. - Extensions of mains. 
(a)  Any person desiring to construct, extend or make any extensions of any main or sublateral lines to be attached to any of the main sewer lines or manholes installed shall be required to file an application with and to secure a permit from the officer in charge of the city sewer system authorizing the extensions. He shall be required before receiving the permit to file with the officer in charge four (4) copies of plans and specifications of the proposed extensions and any subsequent changes thereto. Before any action is taken thereon, the same shall be submitted to the state health department for its approval. Upon receiving such approval, the plans and specifications shall be approved by the consulting engineer of the city. The application shall contain the provision that the applicant agrees that permission is thereby given to the agents of the state health department and to the city to inspect all of the work during its progress as often as may be desired. Further, the applicant shall agree that the plumbing work installed in all structures to be connected to the extensions shall comply with all applicable ordinances of the city and state laws, and that the extensions or lines being constructed with all easements therewith shall after the completion thereof be conveyed to the city without cost and without reservations of any kind. 
(b)  All plans and specifications for sewer improvements and extensions shall include the following: 
(1)  Profiles of all sewers proposed. 
(2)  Details of construction of manholes, flush tanks and substructure. 
(3)  Shall be drawn to a scale of not greater than one hundred (100) feet to the inch nor less than three hundred (300) feet to the inch. 
(4)  Lines and figures shall be clearly and distinctly made thereon and extensions to be built to be shown by solid lines: __________. Existing, sanitary sewers shall be shown by the following symbols:....; and combined sewers by a dot and dash .-.-.-.-. All topographical symbols shall be the same as those of the United States Geological Survey. 
(5)  Elevations of the surface of the streets shall be placed outside the street lines in the upper right angle, or opposite their respective positions in the street. The elevations of sewer inverts should be shown at street intersections, ends of lines, and wherever a change of grade occurs. The elevations of surface shall be shown to the nearest one-tenth of a foot; those of the sewer invert to the nearest one one-hundredth of a foot. The sizes and gradients of all proposed and existing sewers shall be marked along the line of the sewer. 
(6)  All sewer appurtenances and unusual features, such as manholes, lampholes, flush tanks, siphons, pumps, etc., shall be designated on the plans by suitable symbols and referenced by a legend near the title. 
(7)  Profiles of sewer lines shall be prepared and drawn to such a scale as to show clearly the structural features of the sewer. For ordinary use, the following scales are suggested: Vertically ten (10) feet to one (1) inch; horizontally one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. Both scales must be clearly shown upon each sheet. Upon these profiles shall be shown all manholes, flush tanks, lampholes, siphons and stream crossings, with elevations of stream bed and normal water. Figures showing the sizes and gradients of sewers, surface elevations, sewer inverts, etc., should be shown with the same frequency as required for the map. 
(8)  When grades lower than those given in the recommended practice are used, an explanation and reasons for the use of such grades should be included in the engineer's report. On each sheet of profiles must be given, under the title, an index of the streets appearing on that sheet. Profile sheets shall be numbered consecutively. 
(9)  The detail plans shall be drawn to such a scale as to show suitably and clearly the nature of the design and all details, such as manholes, frames, covers, iron pipes, valves, gates, etc. 
(10)  Legibly printed on each drawing, the name of the town or persons for whom the drawing is made, the name of the engineer in charge, the date, the scale and such references and the title as are necessary for the complete understanding of each drawing. 
(c)  The applicant shall furnish as many copies of built-in drawings as may be required by the city when the work is completed. 
(Code 1977, § 15-52)  
Sec. 20-41. - Control of inflow and infiltration of constructed lines. 
All sewer lines constructed within and discharging to the city sewage collection system shall have an exfiltration test performed on them prior to acceptance or approval by the city. This test may utilize either the hydrostatic or the pneumatic method of testing: 
(1)  Exfiltration test hydrostatic method. All sewer pipes shall be so installed that the completed sewer will have a maximum exfiltration of one hundred fifty (150) gallons per inch of internal diameter, per mile of pipe, per twenty-four (24) hours, where the maximum hydrostatic head at the centerline of the pipe does not exceed twenty-five (25) feet. In measuring the exfiltration, a temporary test stack to ground level shall be built in the sewer line just outside the manhole at the upper end of the new line. All open ends (service lines, etc.) shall be plugged and water introduced into the test stack, filling the line and the stack to ground level. After water has remained in the line twenty-four (24) hours, the water level is again brought up to the ground elevation. After one (1) hour, the water level is measured from the starting point and the quantity of leakage computed. If necessary, the line shall be repaired and the test run again until the exfiltration is within the requirements. The test stack shall be removed upon completion of tests. 
Water used in testing may be obtained at the nearest fire hydrant at the contractor's expense. 
In lieu of the exfiltration test, the contractor may use or be required to use the air test as specified in paragraph (2) below. 
(2)  Exfiltration test pneumatic method (air test): 
a.  General. Where specified, in accordance with the stipulated requirements on the project plans or specifications, air tests shall be made on sanitary sewer systems. Such air tests shall be made by the pressure drop versus time method. 
b.  Requirements. On sanitary sewer systems requiring air tests, the contractor shall furnish all material, equipment and labor. The air gage will be dead-weight tested and approved by the city. City personnel shall judge the results of the tests. The test shall be performed using the equipment and according to procedures set out in subparagraph (c) below. 
c.  Equipment. The equipment used shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
1.  Pneumatic plugs shall have a sealing length equal to or greater than the diameter of the pipe to be inspected; 
2.  Pneumatic plugs shall resist internal test pressures without requiring external bracing or blocking; 
3.  All air used shall pass through a single control panel; 
4.  Three (3) individual hoses shall be used for the following connections: 
(i)  From the control panel to pneumatic plugs for inflation; 
(ii)  From the control panel to a sealed line for introducing the low-pressure air; 
(iii)  From a sealed line to control panel for continually monitoring the air pressure rise in the sealed line. 
5.  Air compressor of adequate capacity for charging the system. 
d.  Procedures. All pneumatic plugs shall be seal-tested before being used in the actual test installation. One length of pipe shall be laid on the ground and sealed at both ends with the pneumatic plugs to be checked. Air shall be introduced into the plugs to 25 psig. The sealed pipe shall be pressurized to 5 psig. The plugs shall hold against this pressure without bracing and without movement of the plugs out of the pipe. After a manhole to manhole reach of pipe has been backfilled and the pneumatic plugs have been checked by the above-mentioned procedure, the plugs shall be placed in the line at each manhole and inflated to 25 psig. Low pressure air shall be introduced into this sealed line until the internal air pressure reached 4 psig. Allow at least two (2) minutes for the air temperature to stabilize, adding only the amount of air required to maintain pressure. If the pipe to be tested is submerged in ground water, insert a pipe probe by boring or jetting into the backfill material adjacent to the center of the pipe, and determine the pressure in the probe when air passes slowly through it. This is back pressure due to ground water submergence over the end of the probe. All gage pressure in the test should be increased by this amount. After the stabilization period (3.5 psig of minimum pressure in the pipe) start stop watch. Determine time in seconds that is required for the internal air pressure to reach 25 psig. Minimum permissible pressure holding time for runs of single pipe diameter are indicated in the table following section 26-42. 
(Code 1977, § 15-53)  
Sec. 20-42. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Removal credits. Where applicable, the authority may elect to initiate a program of removal credits as part of this article to reflect the POTW's ability to remove pollutants in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.7. 
(b)  Net/gross calculations. The authority may elect to adjust categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in the dischargers intake water, in accordance with 40 CFR Part 401.15. 
(c)  Preservation of records. All dischargers subject to this article shall retain and preserve, for no less than three (3) years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or on behalf of a discharger in connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the authority pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the discharger until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. 
(d)  Costs of administering program. The authority may make such charges, known as monitoring and pretreatment charges, as are reasonable for services rendered in administering the programs outlined in this article. Such charges may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Permitting industrial facilities; 
(2)  Inspection; 
(3)  Sample analysis; 
(4)  Monitoring; 
(5)  Enforcement. 
(e)  Right of revision. The authority reserves the right to amend this article to provide for more or less stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW where deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in section 20-31. 
(Ord. No. 378, § I(7), 6-9-87) 
TABLE 26-1 
AIR TEST TABLES 
MINIMUM HOLDING TIME IN SECONDS REQUIRED FOR PRESSURE 
TO DROP FROM 3½ to 2½ PSIG 
PIPE DIAMETER 
Length 
of 
Line 
in 
Feet 	4" 	6" 	8" 	10" 	12" 	15" 	18" 	21" 	24" 	27" 	30" 	33" 	36" 	39" 
 25 	  4 	 10 	 18 	 28 	 40 	 62 	 89 	121 	158 	200 	248 	299 	 356 	 418 
 50 	   9 	 20 	 35 	 65 	 79 	124 	178 	243 	317 	401 	495 	599 	 713 	 837 
 75 	 13 	 30 	 53 	 83 	119 	186 	267 	364 	475 	601 	743 	898 	1020 	1105 
100 	 18 	 40 	 70 	110 	158 	248 	356 	485 	634 	765 	851 	965 		
125 	 22 	 50 	 88 	138 	198 	309 	446 	595 	680 					
150 	 26 	 59 	106 	165 	238 	371 	510 							
175 	 31 	 69 	123 	193 	277 	425 								
200 	 35 	 79 	141 	220 	217 									
225 	 40 	 89 	158 	248 	340 									
250 	 44 	 99 	176 	256 										
275 	 48 	109 	194 	283 										
300 	 53 	119 	211 											
350 	 62 	139 	227 											
400 	 70 	158 												
450 	 79 	170 												
500 	 88 													
550 	 97 													
600 	106 													
650 	113 	170 	227 	283 	340 	425 	510 	595 	680 	765 	851 	965 	1020 	1105 
 
NOTE: TO BE USED WHEN TESTING ONE DIAMETER ONLY  
Secs. 20-43—20-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 20-66. - Permit—Required; prerequisites to issuance. 
(a)  No person shall have the right to connect any property with the sewer system of the city and no connection with the sanitary sewer system of the city shall be made, until the owner of such property or his duly authorized agent shall have received from the city a permit to do so, after having met the requirements specified in this article to obtain such permit. The owner of any property desired to be connected with the sewer system of the city, or his duly authorized agent, shall first make an application in writing signed by such owner or his agent, duly authorized in writing to sign such application for and in the name of the owner, upon blanks furnished by the city and delivered to the officer in charge of the sewer system of the city for a permit to connect any such property with the city sewer system. The application shall contain the precise location of the property to be drained, and the type of structure and the purpose of which same is used; give the name of the owner of the property, the number and class of plumbing fixture to be contained within the private system or property to be drained, and the name of the person employed to do the plumbing work contemplated to be done and connected with the sewer system. Such application shall further contain an agreement on the part of the applicant owner of the property sought to be connected and drained by the sewer system of the city that he will promptly pay to the city the rental charges then or thereafter to be prescribed by the city for the use of the sewer system, at the times and in the manner prescribed now or hereafter by the ordinances of the city; that he will abide by and observe the rules and regulations governing the use of the city sewer system; and that he will be responsible for the rental charges accruing up to the time that he gives actual notice in writing to the city of a change in ownership of the property or to discontinue service thereto. 
(b)  Any such permit issued shall remain in force only so long as the owner of the property and the applicant therefor shall comply with the rules and regulations nor or hereafter prescribed for the use of the sewer system, and shall pay the rental charges as provided. Upon the failure of such property owner in either or any respect to fully comply with the provisions of this article, the permit shall be subject to cancellation, and the city shall have the right to discontinue sewer service to such property. This stipulation shall also be contained in the application for a permit. 
(c)  Before any application for a permit shall be received and a permit granted, there must be paid to the city connection fees and one (1) month rental for sewer service in advance. This advance payment shall be applied in payment of the rental and service charge for the first month following commencement of service, if permit is issued following the fifteenth day of any calendar month. If the permit is issued on or prior to such day, charge for sewer service shall commence on the first day of the month in which the permit is issued. 
(d)  Whenever any property for which a permit has been issued and sewer service is being furnished changes ownership, the new owner shall make application for a continuation of sewer service to such property; and such application shall be made upon the same blanks and be subject to the same terms and conditions, and contain the same stipulations, as an original application. The application shall be marked application for continuation of sewer service. 
(e)  When any person owning any property served by the sewer system in the city shall change the plumbing in premises, other than single-family dwellings used exclusively as such, to be connected with the sewer system, so as to increase the number of plumbing fixtures connected with the city sewer system, such person shall make a new application, upon the same blanks, terms, and conditions as an original application as set out in this division. 
(f)  When sewer service for any property has been discontinued for any reason, same shall not again be continued until the owner of such property shall have made application as set out in this division for an original application. 
(g)  No permit shall be deemed to authorize anything not stated in the application. 
(h)  A permit to make a connection with the sewer system or for a continuation of sewer service will be issued only when the plumbing in the structure or property to be connected and drained is in accordance with the provisions for plumbing as are provided in the plumbing code for the city now in effect and hereinafter adopted, and has been inspected and approved by the city plumbing inspector. 
(i)  There shall be no reduction or abatement of sewer rental charge for any property so long as the property is connected with the sewer system of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 15-32) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 11.  
Sec. 20-67. - Permit—Fee. 
Every application for a permit filed to connect property situated in the city with the city sewer system shall be accompanied by a fee in the sum of one hundred ten dollars ($110.00) to cover the issuance of the permit authorizing such connection, plus one-month sewer rental charge in advance, which sum shall be paid directly to the city secretary; and no permit shall be issued unless such fee and charge has been so paid. The permit connection charge for sewer service to property situated outside of the city shall be double, plus twice the rate charged for like sewer service to property situated within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 15-33)  
Sec. 20-68. - Garages—Traps. 
(a)  Before any residential garage may be connected to the city sewer, same shall be equipped with a cast-iron sand trap provided with removal receptacle inside of trap to remove mud, sand and other refuse washed into same. This provision does not apply where such drain is located in such a manner as to receive drainage exclusively from a washing machine used for laundry purposes. 
(b)  Before any wash racks at all commercial garages and filling stations may be connected to the city sewer system, same shall be equipped so that wastewater therefrom shall discharge into a two-compartment sand and grease trap made of concrete. 
(Code 1977, § 15-35)  
Sec. 20-69. - General provisions; connection to sewer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, renting, leasing or controlling, in whole or in part, any premises situated within any section of the city where sanitary sewer shall exist and where the property line of such premises approaches or extends to within one hundred (100) feet of any such sewer, to construct, use, maintain or permit to be constructed, used or maintained, on such premises any septic tank, privy, cesspool, water closet, urinal basin, slop sink, slop drain, bathtub or wastewater drain from dwellings, laundries, livery stables, garages, filling stations or other places, or any receptacle whatever used or to be used for the purpose of receiving or removing sewer matter or slop of any kind unless the same shall be connected with the system of sanitary sewage of the city. 
(b)  All defective septic tanks, cesspools and other structures, devices or other class of outdoor facilities used for the purpose of receiving human sewage that may be on any premises, the property line of which, at any point, extends to within one hundred (100) feet of the city sanitary sewer, shall be removed or abated after the giving of notice as provided in this article for removal and abatement of same. 
(c)  The owner of every house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes that is situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line. All connections to the public sewer system shall be made under the supervision of the city and its representatives. 
(Code 1977, § 15-36)  
Sec. 20-70. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To uncover the public sewer or branches thereof unless by consent and under the supervision of the officer in charge of the city water and sewer department; 
(2)  For the owner or occupant of any building located on any lot reaching within one hundred (100) feet of any city sanitary sewer, any portion of which is used for any purpose during any portion of the day, to fail to have at least one (1) water closet connection with the public sewer; 
(3)  For the owner or occupant of any building located on any lot reaching within one hundred (100) feet of any city sanitary sewer in which food is cooked or clothing is washed to fail to have a suitable sink, slop stone or hopper for the reception of water and connected with the city sewer system; 
(4)  To fail or refuse to connect with the sanitary sewer all washstands or slop stands in a house or yard where a city sanitary sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line; or to allow any slops or any wash or waste water of any kind to flow over or under the pavement into the streets or alleys. 
(Code 1977, § 15-37(1)—(3), (6))  
Sec. 20-71. - Responsibility for injuries to sewer or streets. 
The property owner or plumber, or both, shall be held responsible for any injuries the plumber shall cause to the sewer or street in making connections to the city sewer system. 
(Code 1977, § 15-38)  
Sec. 20-72. - Not to connect gutters, septic tanks, etc., to sewer. 
No person shall connect any open gutter, septic tank, cesspool, privy, vault or cistern with any public sewer or any private sewer connected with the public sewer. 
(Code 1977, § 15-39)  
Sec. 20-73. - Connections outside the city. 
The owner or occupant of any building not located within the city shall be allowed to make connection with the sewer system after obtaining a permit as provided in this article, and such work of connection shall be subject to the regulations and inspections provided for in this article; and the owner or occupant of any building thus connected shall be required to pay the inspection, installation, and service charges exacted in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 15-44)  
Sec. 20-74. - Connecting old plumbing. 
It shall be unlawful to connect any old house plumbing to the city sanitary sewer system unless same conforms in all respects to all requirements of the plumbing code of the city and shall be approved by the plumbing inspector. 
(Code 1977, § 15-45)  
Sec. 20-75. - Connections to be in accordance with city plumbing code. 
All connections of house sewer lines into the main and lateral sewer lines shall be in accordance with the specifications provided in the plumbing code of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 15-46)  
Sec. 20-76. - Basement drains; agreement. 
No permit for a basement drain shall be granted until the owner of the building has executed and signed a written agreement releasing the city from any damage that may result from the basement being flooded by the stoppage of sewers, which agreement shall be filed with the city secretary. 
(Code 1977, § 15-47)  
Sec. 20-77. - Rainwater pipes, etc., not to be connected with sewers. 
No rainwater, or downspout pipes, range boiler pipe or other pipe used to convey water or other substances of like character, except the pipes necessary to plumbing systems, shall be connected to the sewer system. 
(Code 1977, § 15-48)  
Sec. 20-78. - Sewer service pipes. 
All drains from four (4) feet outside of the building to the main sewer must be vitrified clay or cement pipe with bells, or extra heavy cast-iron pipe laid to a uniform grade. Joints of clay pipe shall have bell holes provided for hemp gaskets put in and joints well-cemented with two (2) parts of well-screened sand and one (1) part of best portland cement, and cast iron pipe shall be caulked with molten lead and oakum. No vitrified clay or cement pipe shall be used for sewer connections unless it is at least twelve (12) inches underground. Extra heavy castiron shall be used where the depth of such pipes is less than twelve (12) inches under ground. 
(Code 1977, § 15-49)  
Sec. 20-79. - Fall of lines. 
All sewer, soil, and waste pipe drains shall have a continuous fall of not less than one-quarter of an inch to the foot of the obtainable. A service cleanout shall be installed in all house lines as close to the building as may be expedient. 
(Code 1977, § 15-50)  
Secs. 20-80—20-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES AND WASTES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 8 of Ord. No. 534, adopted May 6, 2003, repealed Ord. No. 431, from which §§ 20-101—20-103, 20-105, and 20-106 derived. Similar provisions were enacted by §§ 1—7 and 10 of Ord. No. 534 and designated as §§ 20-101—20-107. The provisions of § 20-104, not having derived from Ord. No. 431, have been retained and redesignated as § 20-109. 
 
Sec. 20-101. - Definitions. 
When used in this division, these terms shall be defined as follows: 
Abnormal sewage: Any industrial waste discharged into the authority's sanitary sewer which, when analyzed, shows by weight a total suspended solids (TSS) concentration greater than two hundred forty (240) mg/L or a biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) concentration greater than two hundred ten (210) mg/L. In addition, the authority may judge independently a waste's suitability for discharge to the POTW that requires additional treatment, based upon BOD, TSS or other characteristics, as abnormal. Any waste in this classification must be made acceptable for discharge into the POTW as defined in this division. 
Act: The Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), as amended. 
Approval authority: The director of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality ("TCEQ") where the state has been delegated TPDES permit authority and has an approved pretreatment program. 
Authority: The City of Everman, Texas. 
Authorized representative: Authorized representatives (authorized signatories) for wastewater discharge permit applications and for reports submitted under section 20-105, of this division are: 
(a)  A responsible corporate officer, if the discharger submitting the application or report is a corporation. This includes the president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation. 
(b)  The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit or any control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(c)  For a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner of the proprietor, respectively. 
(d)  The principal executive officer or director having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility if the discharger is a federal, state or local governmental entity, or their agents. 
(e)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in (a), (b), (c) or (d) above if: (1) the authorization is made in writing by the individual described above in (a), (b), (c), or (d), (2) the authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates (such as a plant manager), or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and (3) the written authorization is submitted to the city. If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility, a new authorization must be submitted to the city prior to or together with any reports signed by an authorized representative. 
Best management practices (BMP): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Section 3 E 11 [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)] and to prevent or reduce the pollution. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, expressed as parts per million by weight or in terms of milligrams per liter. 
Bypass: The intentional diversion of waste streams or wastewater from any portion of a discharger's wastewater treatment equipment or pretreatment facility. 
Categorical industrial user: An industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. 
Categorical pretreatment standards: Limitations on pollutant discharges to POTWs promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307 of the Clean Water Act, that apply to specified process wastewaters of particular industrial categories (40 CFR 403.6 and Parts 405-471). 
CFR: Code of Federal Regulations. 
City: City of Everman, Texas. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD): A measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/L as determined by the amount of oxidant consumed from a chemical reflux. Such term does not, however, differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter, and therefore does not necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. 
Combined wastestream formula (CWF): A procedure found in 40 CFR 403.6(e) for calculating fixed alternative discharge limits at industrial facilities applicable when regulated process wastewater, subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, is mixed with nonregulated wastewaters prior to treatment. 
Composite sample: A mixture of grab samples collected at the same sample point at different times and composed of not less than four (4) samples. The series of samples may be collected on a time or flow proportional basis. 
(a)  Time proportional composite sample: A sampling method which combines discrete samples of constant volume collected at constant time intervals (e.g., two hundred (200) milliliter samples collected every one-half (½) hour for a twenty-four-hour period). 
(b)  Flow proportional composite sample: A sampling method which combines discrete samples collected over time, based on the flow of the waste stream being sampled. There are two (2) methods used to collect this type of sample. One (1) method collects a constant sample volume at time intervals which vary based on the stream flow (e.g., two hundred (200) milliliters of sample collected for every five thousand (5,000) gallons discharged). The other method collects samples of varying volume, based on stream flow, at constant time intervals. 
(c)  Flow proportional composite will be used only in locations that have the capability to measure flow during the sampling period. 
Control authority: The City of Fort Worth, Texas, as holder of the respective Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit. 
Cooling water: The water discharged from any system of condensation such as air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or water used as a coolant in cooling towers where the only pollutant is thermal. 
Director: The director of public works of the City of Everman, or his authorized representative. 
Discharge: The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
Discharger: Any user discharging an effluent into a POTW by means of pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water intercepting ditches, intercepting ditches, and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant thereto. The term includes owners and occupants of such premises. 
EPA: Environmental Protection Agency of the federal government. 
Existing source: Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by the EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
Garbage: Solid waste from domestic or commercial preparation, cooking or dispensing of food or from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
gpd: Gallons per day. 
Grab sample: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow of the waste stream and without consideration of time. The sample is collected over a period of time not exceeding fifteen (15) minutes. 
Indirect discharge or discharge: The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act. 
Industrial user or user: A source of indirect discharge. A person who discharges or causes or permits the contribution of wastewater to the POTW. 
Industrial waste: Solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, trade, or business process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit: The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference: A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(a)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(b)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's TPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
May: Is permissive. 
Maximum daily average: The maximum concentration of a substance allowed in a discharge as determined from a laboratory test of a daily composite sample. The daily composite sample is the concentration of discharge of a pollutant measured during a calendar day or any twenty-four-hour period that reasonably represents the calendar day for purposes of sampling. 
Maximum grab: The maximum concentration of a substance allowed in a discharge as determined from a laboratory test of a grab sample. 
mg/L: Milligram per liter. 
Monthly average limit: The highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
New source: Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(a)  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
(b)  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(c)  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(d)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of (b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(e)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has; 
(1)  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
a.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
(2)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Noncontact cooling water: Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with raw materials, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Nonsignificant categorical industrial user: An industrial user that is subject to categorical pretreatment standards may, at the discretion of the director, be permitted as a nonsignificant categorical industrial user (NSCIU) based on a finding that the industrial user never discharges categorical wastewater and the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The industrial user, prior to city's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(b)  The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in Section 5 C3 (11) [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)], together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and 
(c)  The industrial user never discharges any categorical process wastewater into the sanitary sewer. 
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS): A system used by the federal government for collecting and organizing industry-related statistics. The NAICS codes are updated every five (5) years to stay current with industry developments. 
NPDES: National pollutant discharge elimination system permit program of the Environmental Protection Agency, and/or the program of the state agency delegated to act on EPA's behalf with an approved pretreatment program (e.g., TPDES or Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System). 
O and M or O&M: Operation and maintenance. 
Other wastes: Decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse, ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar, and all other substances except sewage and industrial wastes. 
Owner or occupant: The person, firm, or public or private corporation, using the lot, parcel of land, building or premises connected to and discharging sewage, industrial wastewater or liquid, into the sanitary sewage system of the city, and who pays, or is legally responsible for the payment of, water rates or charges made against the said lot, parcel of land, building or premises, if connected to the water distribution system of the city, or who would pay or be legally responsible for such payment if so connected. 
Pass through: The discharge of pollutants through the POTW into waters of the United States and which, alone or in conjunction in quantities or concentrations from other sources, which are a cause of or significantly contribute to a violation of any requirement of the POTW's TPDES permit, (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
Permit: Wastewater discharge permit, issued to nondomestic dischargers of industrial waste into the sanitary sewerage system of the POTW. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, political subdivision or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of solution; a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Pollutant: Dredged spoil; solid waste; incinerator residue; filter backwash; sewage (including sewage from boats); garbage; sewage sludge; munitions; medical wastes; chemical wastes; biological materials; toxic materials; radioactive materials; heat; wrecked or discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar dirt; industrial, municipal, recreational, agricultural and other waste; and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). It shall not mean sewage sludge, rock, sand, dredged spoil, or cellar dirt when said material is used by the city for fill or reuse. 
POTW (publicly owned treatment works): Any sewage treatment plant owned and operated by an entity (i.e., the control authority) other than a private industry and the sewers, pipes and conveyances owned in whole or part by the authority and/or control authority that convey wastewater to the sewage treatment plant. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature. 
Pretreatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sanitary sewer. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
Pretreatment standard: The term "pretreatment standard," or "standard" means prohibited discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR Part 403.5, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Process wastewater: The water that comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct, waste product, or wastewater. 
Public works utility superintendent or superintendent: Public works utility superintendent of the City of Everman, or his authorized representative. 
Sanitary sewer: A publicly owned pipe or conduit designed to collect and transport industrial waste and domestic sewage to the POTW. 
Severe property damage: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can be reasonably expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
Sewage: Water-carried human wastes or a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, storm or other waters as may be present. 
Shall: Is mandatory. 
Significant change: An increase or decrease in the volume of wastewater discharged by more than twenty (20) percent from the data submitted in the permit application, or the deletion or addition of any pollutant regulated by the authority or by a categorical standard. Volumes are those measured by the water service meter, a verifiable estimate, or a permanently installed effluent flow meter approved by the authority. 
Significant industrial user (SIU): All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards and any other industrial user that: 
(a)  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater to a POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling or boiler blowdown wastewater); 
(b)  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of a POTW; or 
(c)  Is designated as such by the authority on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting a POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. Upon a finding that a noncategorical industrial user meeting the criteria for a significant industrial user has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting a POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the authority may at any time on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a noncategorical industrial user, determine such user is not a significant industrial user. 
(d)  An industrial user that is subject to categorical pretreatment standards may, at the discretion of the director, be permitted as a nonsignificant categorical industrial user (NSCIU) based on a finding that the industrial user never discharges categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The industrial user, prior to city's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(2)  The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in Section 5 C3 (11) [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)], together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and 
(3)  The industrial user never discharges any categorical process wastewater into the sanitary sewer. 
Slug or slug load: Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but is not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards of this ordinance. 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code: The codes which best describes the activities conducted at the facility or establishment. SIC codes are four-digit numbers used by the Bureau of Census as part of a system to categorize and track the types of business activities conducted in the United States. The first two (2) digits of the code represent the major industry group and the second two (2) digits represent the specific subset of that group. 
Standard methods: "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", a publication prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation, as it may be amended from time to time. 
Stormwater: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation including snowmelt. 
Total suspended solids (TSS): Solids that either float on the surface of, or in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquid and which are removable by laboratory filtering. TSS is expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Total toxic organics (TTO): The sum of masses or concentration of the toxic organic compounds listed in 40 CFR 122 Appendix D, Table II, excluding pesticides, found in industrial users' discharges at a concentration greater than 0.01 mg/L. Only those parameters reasonably suspected to be present, to be determined by the city, if any, shall be analyzed for with noncategorical industries. With categorical industries, the list of TTOs is specific for every applicable federal category. TTOs will be sampled for as stipulated in the particular category or those parameters reasonably suspected to be present, to be determined by the city, where not stipulated. 
TPDES: Permit issued by the state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group or general area-wide basis. 
Unpolluted water or waste: Any water or liquid waste containing none of the following: phenols or other substances to an extent imparting taste and odor in receiving waters; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; noxious or odorous gases; more than ten thousand (10,000) parts per million, by weight, of dissolved solids, of which not more than twenty-five hundred (2,500) parts per million are chloride; not more than ten (10) parts per million each of TSS and BOD; color not exceeding fifty (50) color units; nor pH value of less than 5.5 nor higher than 11.0 and any water or waste approved for discharge into a stream or waterway by the appropriate state authority. 
Upset: An exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the standards established in this ordinance, due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the discharger and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation thereof. Any affirmative defenses to upset only apply to federal court actions as per Section 6G of this ordinance. 
U.S.C: United States Code. 
User: A person who discharges or causes or permits the contribution of wastewater to the POTW. A source of indirect discharge. 
V.T.C.A.: Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated. 
Wastewater: Liquid and water-carried industrial waste and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 534, § 1, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 644, § 1, 11-1-11)  
Sec. 20-102. - Purpose and policy. 
This division provides for prohibitions on discharges of certain substances into the public sewer system of the city from all sources, domestic, commercial, or industrial. A further purpose of this division is to set forth uniform requirements for industrial dischargers into the authority's wastewater collection and treatment systems, and to enable the authority to protect the general public's health and POTW personnel in conformance with all applicable state and federal laws relating thereto. Parts of this division are enacted pursuant to regulations established by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). All applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code 1251 et seq.) and as set forth in 40 CFR Part 403. 
All categorical pretreatment standards, lists of toxic pollutants, industrial categories and other standards and categories, record-keeping requirements and other applicable regulations which have been or which will be promulgated by the EPA shall be incorporated as a part of this ordinance, as will EPA regulations regarding sewage pretreatment established pursuant to the Act, and amendment of this ordinance to incorporate such changes shall not be necessary. The Authority shall maintain current standards and regulations which shall be available for inspection and copying. 
The objectives of this division are: 
(a)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the authority wastewater system which will interfere with the normal operation of the system, including interference with the use or disposal of sludge, or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(b)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the authority wastewater system which do not receive adequate treatment in the POTW, and which will pass through the system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or which are otherwise incompatible with the system; 
(c)  To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim municipal and industrial wastewaters and sludges; 
(d)  To provide for the fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the POTW; and 
(e)  To enable the authority to comply with control authority's TPDES permit conditions, sludge and disposal requirements, and any other federal and state laws to which the POTW is subject. 
The regulation of discharges into the authority's wastewater system under this ordinance shall be accomplished through the issuance of permits, as specified in section 20-105 herein, and by monitoring and inspection of facilities, according to this ordinance. For the purpose of promoting consistency of enforcement throughout the city's jurisdiction and service area, the director shall promulgate an enforcement response plan. 
The director shall have the authority to promulgate such administrative regulations as are from time to time necessary for the enforcement of this division. 
(Ord. No. 534, § 2, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 644, § 2, 11-1-11)  
Sec. 20-103. - Discharge prohibitions and limitations. 
(a)  Discharges to storm drains and watercourses. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any wastewater into any storm drain or watercourse within the city, except for those persons with approved permits for such discharges. 
(b)  Prohibited discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater or drainage from downspouts, yard drains, yard fountains and ponds, or lawn sprays into any sanitary sewer. Water from unpolluted industrial water or cooling water from various equipment shall not be discharged into sanitary sewers if an alternate acceptable means of disposal is available. If an alternate acceptable means of disposal is not available, such water may be discharged into the sanitary sewer provided the water is metered and meets the discharge prohibitions and limitations of this division. 
(1)  General prohibition. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)  Specific prohibitions. Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW. 
a.  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or product of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
b.  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the authority in accordance with subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Prohibited sewer connections. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or discharge into the sanitary sewer any liquid or solid waste, including trucked or hauled wastes, unless such deposit or discharge has been approved by the authority. 
(d)  Prohibited wastewater constituents. No person shall contribute or cause to be discharged directly or indirectly, into any public sanitary sewer any of the following described substances, materials, water or waste: 
(1)  Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees centigrade); or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit (forty (40) degrees centigrade). 
(2)  Solidifying substance. Any water or waste which contains wax, grease, oil, petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin, plastic or other substance that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) degrees to one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit, thereby contributing to the clogging, plugging or otherwise restricting the flow of wastewater through the collection system. 
(3)  Explosive. Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewer system or POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit or sixty (60) degrees centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR Part 261.21. This includes flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases such as gasoline, kerosene, benzene, naphtha, etc., which by reason of their chemical properties or quantity may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction, to cause fire or explosion. 
(4)  Obstruction. Solid or viscous substances in quantities capable of causing obstruction in the flow in sewers or other interference with proper operation of the POTW, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, asphalt, concrete, cement, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, paint residues, or bulk solids. 
(5)  Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted or shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (½) inch in any dimension. 
(6)  Gases. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(7)  Sludge. Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or treatment residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process as determined pursuant to criteria in this division. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act or any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state standards applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(8)  TPDES. Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its TPDES or other disposal system permits, or the receiving stream water quality standards. 
(9)  Objectionable color. Any substance with objectionable color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(10)  Slugload. Any dump or slugload. 
(11)  Hazard to human life. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(12)  Toxicity test. Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
(13)  Swimming pool. Swimming pool drainage from private residential pools may not be discharged to the sanitary sewer system. Swimming pool drainage from public and semipublic swimming pools may be discharged to the POTW with the prior consent of the authority. Swimming pool filter backwash may be discharged to the POTW. 
(14)  Detergents. Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW. 
(15)  Medical waste. Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director in a wastewater discharge permit. 
(16)  Pollutants. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(17)  Interference. Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW. 
(18)  Oils. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(19)  Trucked or hauled pollutants. Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the authority in accordance with subection (c) of this section. 
(20)  Gases. Hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous oxide in excess of 10 parts per million. 
(21)  Radioactive. Radioactive wastes or isotopes with a half-life or concentration exceeding limits established by the authority in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(22)  Temperature. A temperature which inhibits or interferes with biological activity in the POTW treatment plant. In no case shall wastewater be introduced which would have a temperature exceeding forty (40) degrees centigrade (one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit) upon entering the POTW treatment plant. 
(23)  Explosive. Wastewaters which emanate vapors causing the atmosphere in the sewer system to exceed twenty (20) percent of the lower explosive limit in the immediate area of the discharge. 
(e)  Wastewater limitations. No person shall contribute or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, into any sanitary sewer any wastewaters containing or having: 
(1)  Fats, oils and greases. Free or emulsified fats, oils, and greases exceeding two hundred (200) mg/L as determined by approved EPA method listed in 40 CFR Part 136. A concentration of 250 mg/L is allowable providing the authority has specifically determined that the waste: 
a.  Derives from animal or vegetable materials; 
b.  Biodegrades readily in the POTW; 
c.  Does not cause any obstruction of flow in the sewer line; and 
d.  The discharge is pretreated by discharge through an approved grease trap or other pretreatment process. 
(2)  Acids or alkalies. Acids or alkalies capable of causing damage to sewage disposal structures or personnel or having a pH value lower than 5.0 or higher than 12.0. 
(3)  Metals. Metals in the form of compounds or elements with total concentrations exceeding the following: 
Pollutant 	Maximum Daily Average mg/L 
Arsenic 	0.25 
Cadmium 	0.15 
Chromium 	5.0 
Copper 	4.0 
Lead 	2.9 
Mercury 	0.01 
Nickel 	2.0 
Silver 	1.0 
Zinc 	5.0 
 
(4)  Cyanide. Cyanide or cyanogen compounds (expressed as total CN) in excess of 1.0 mg/L. 
(5)  Categorical. Pollutants in excess of the limitations established in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard set forth in Title 40, Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 of the Code of Federal Regulations are hereby incorporated into this division. A user shall not discharge in violation of categorical pretreatment standards. 
(6)  The director may develop best management practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits to help implement local limits and other pretreatment standards and the requirements of this section 20-103. 
(f)  Accidental discharge/slug control plan. The authority shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs accidental discharge/slug control plan or other action to control slug discharges at the time of SIU determination or at least by the first year. All the activities associated with slug control evaluation and results are to be kept in the industrial user file. The director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. Alternatively, the authority may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the authority of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 20-104(b) of this division; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(g)  Pretreatment facilities. 
(1)  Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 20-103 of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA or TCEQ, the state, or the director, whichever is more stringent. 
(2)  The user shall provide, operate, and maintain any facilities necessary for compliance at the user's expense. 
(3)  The director may require a user to submit detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures to the director for review. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(h)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
(1)  When necessary to prevent interference, pass through, or sanitary sewer overflow the director may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and to determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The director may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control structure to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(Ord. No. 534, § 3, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 585, §§ 1—3, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 644, § 3, 11-1-11)  
Sec. 20-104. - Special rules relating to industrial dischargers. 
(a)  Compliance with standards. 
(1)  Applicable laws. All dischargers shall be subject to those federal, state, and local requirements and limitations which are the most stringent. 
(2)  Dilution. No discharger shall increase the use of potable or process water in any way for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the standards set forth in this ordinance. The authority may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(3)  Mass limitations. Where deemed appropriate the authority may apply mass limitation expressed in pounds per day of pollutant discharged. 
(4)  Categorical pretreatment standards. 
a.  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the authority may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
b.  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
c.  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
d.  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.25. 
(b)  Accidental discharge. Each discharger shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited or regulated materials or substances established by this division. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the discharger's cost and expense. When applicable, detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the authority for review, and shall be approved by the authority before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the authority shall not relieve the discharger from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this division. 
Dischargers shall notify the authority immediately upon the occurrence of a "slug" or accidental discharge of substances prohibited by this division. The notification shall include location of discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, corrective actions taken by the user. Within five (5) days following such discharge the user must submit a detailed written report, and be signed by the discharger's authorized representative which specifies: 
(1)  A description and cause of the discharge, including location of the discharge, type, concentration, and volume of water; 
(2)  Duration of noncompliance including exact dates and times of noncompliance and, if the noncompliance is continuing, an immediate response to cause the noncompliant discharge to cease; and 
(3)  All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate, and prevent continuation or recurrence of such an upset, slug load, or accidental discharge, spill, or other conditions of noncompliance. 
Any discharger discharging slugs of prohibited materials shall be liable for any expense, loss or damage to the wastewater system and the POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the authority under state or federal law. 
Each employer shall instruct all applicable employees, who may cause or discover such a discharge, with respect to emergency notification procedure including the proper telephone number of the authority to be notified. 
(c)  Wastewater discharges into private sewer systems. All dischargers who discharge wastewater into a private sewer system shall comply with this division including section 20-105; provided, however, that flow measurement may be based on metered water consumption. Each discharger shall provide an agreement, signed by the owner of the sewer system, which authorizes the authority's personnel to enter onto the owner's property for purposes of inspection and monitoring of discharger's premises, and for enforcement pursuant to the term of this division. 
(d)  Prohibition of bypass. 
(1)  Bypass of a discharger's treatment equipment or treatment facility is prohibited and the authority may take enforcement action against the discharger unless: 
a.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; and 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastewater, or maintenance during normal periods of downtime. This condition is not satisfied if, in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment, adequate back-up equipment should have been installed to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or maintenance; and 
c.  The discharger submitted advanced, written notice of the need for a bypass. 
(2)  The discharger shall submit oral notice to the authority of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds categorical standards or other discharge limits within twenty-four (24) hours of the time the discharger becomes aware of the bypass. Written notice shall be provided within five (5) days of the time the discharger becomes aware of the bypass. The written notice shall include a description of the bypass and its causes, duration of the bypass, steps taken to prevent the reoccurrence of the bypass, and must be signed by the authorized representative of the discharger. 
(3)  The authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if it determines that the bypass will meet all of the conditions of paragraph (1) above. 
(e)  Notification of hazardous waste discharges. All dischargers shall notify the authority, the control authority, the EPA's regional waste management division director, and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality in writing of any discharge into a wastewater system or POTW of any substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Any notification under this paragraph must be submitted in conformance with 40 CFR Part 403.12(p). 
(Ord. No. 534, § 4, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 644, § 4, 11-1-11)  
Sec. 20-105. - Administration by permit. 
(a)  Classification of dischargers and permits. 
(1)  All nondomestic users which discharge into the sanitary sewer system of the authority shall be grouped according to the following definitions: 
Group I. Significant industrial users are defined in section 20-101, Definitions. 
Group II. Commercial facilities and small industrial users nonsignificant industrial users (NSIU) are those commercial facilities and industrial users which are not included in Group I and which do not discharge a significant amount of regulated pollutants on a regular basis. Examples include automotive service shops, small food processors and photographing developing shops. 
Group III. Classed high strength users are restaurants, car washes or other businesses which can be classed according to an average strength or abnormal strength of their wastewater. 
Group IV. Wastewater haulers are transporters of wastewater desiring to discharge into the authority's sanitary sewage system. 
Group V. Nonsignificant categorical industrial user (NSCIU). Facility that never discharges categorical wastewater even though categorical process(es) are located on-site. 
All Group I and Group V dischargers shall submit a wastewater discharge permit application to the authority on a form provided by the authority. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit, who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW, shall obtain such permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge. For significant industrial users, an application shall be filed with the director at least ninety (90) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. Nonsignificant categorical industrial users (NSCIU) and nonsignificant industrial users (NSIU) shall be required to submit applications at dates specified by the director. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(2)  The application shall contain: 
a.  All information required by subsection (c). 
b.  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged into the POTW; 
c.  Number and type of employee, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
d.  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
e.  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
f.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
g.  Time and duration of discharge; and 
h.  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the authority to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
All Group II, III and IV dischargers shall submit an industrial waste questionnaire. The questionnaire will be reviewed by the public works utility superintendent or authorized representative. If deemed necessary, Group II, III or IV dischargers may also be required to obtain a permit as outlined herein. 
(3)  No new Group I or Group V user shall be allowed to discharge until issued a valid permit. 
(4)  The authority will evaluate the completed applications and data furnished by the discharger and may require additional information. If, after evaluation, the application is deemed satisfactory, then a wastewater discharge permit shall be issued within sixty (60) days after the evaluation is complete. The wastewater discharge permit shall be subject to the terms and conditions specified herein and to the regulations of the authority. 
(5)  If the application is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing within thirty (30) days of the reasons for such denial. If denial is based on the authority's determination that the applicant cannot meet the wastewater discharge limitations of this division, the authority may specify that the applicant be required to provide pretreatment of the waste before it is deemed acceptable for sewer discharge. 
(6)  Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will be required to comply with this division, pursuant to subsection (5) above, the discharger shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule by which the discharger will provide such additional pretreatment and/or implement added operational and maintenance activities. 
a.  The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the discharger to comply with the requirements of this division including, but not limited to, dates relating to hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract(s) for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, and all other acts necessary to achieve compliance with this division. 
b.  The time increments established between milestone dates shall be the shortest practicable for the completion of the required work. Under no circumstances shall the authority permit a time increment for a single step in the compliance schedule to exceed nine (9) months. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for applicable categorical pretreatment standards. 
c.  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the discharger shall submit a progress report to the authority, including a statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented by that milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the discharger to return the construction to the approved schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the authority. 
(7)  Prior to the approval of a permit, unless exempted by the authority, all dischargers shall provide monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and/or flow measurement of wastewaters before entering the sanitary sewer of the authority. Each monitoring facility shall be located on the discharger's premises; provided, however, where such location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the discharger, the authority may approve the placement of monitoring facilities in the public street or sidewalk area. All monitoring equipment and facilities shall be maintained in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the discharger. Failure to provide proper monitoring facilities shall be grounds for denial of a permit. 
(8)  Wastewater discharge permit decisions. 
a.  The director will evaluate the data furnished by a user's permit application, and may require additional information. 
b.  Within a reasonable period of time following receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director will determine whether to issue a wastewater discharge permit. 
c.  The director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. A permit denial may be appealed in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. 
(b)  Permit conditions. Permits are issued to a specific discharger for specific operation and are not assignable to another discharger or transferable to any other location without the prior written approval of the authority. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permit transfer may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least ninety (90) days advance notice to the authority and the authority approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the authority must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
a.  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and process; 
b.  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
c.  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as [of] the date of facility transfer. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permit requirements: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with subsection (b)(1) of this section, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits and best management practices based on applicable general pretreatment standards as set forth in CFR 403, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; 
d.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include and identification of pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
e.  Permits shall contain a statement of the civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by federal, state, and local law. 
f.  Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the city to be necessary. 
(3)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW, the unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharge to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge of schedule of user charges and fees for management of the wastewater discharge to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the authority to ensure compliance with this division, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(c)  Reporting requirements for dischargers. 
(1)  Baseline report. Within one hundred eighty (180) days following the effective date for new or revised categorical pretreatment standards, or at least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW by a new discharger, any discharger subject to a categorical pretreatment standard shall submit to the authority a report (in a form provided by the authority), indicating the nature and concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its discharge, and the average and maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall state whether the applicable categorical pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M or pretreatment is necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standards. The report shall also contain: 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of nature, average rate of production, standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
2.  The result of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the authority, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 20-105 of this division. In cases where the standard requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the city or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard. 
3.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 20-105(c)(4). 
4.  The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph. However, the city may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures. Historical data than can represent the current discharge only can be accepted as a baseline report. 
5.  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment, best management practice and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment[, best management practice] and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 20-106 of this division. 
h.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports shall be signed by an Authorized Representative and certified by a qualified professional as stated in 40 CFR Part 403.12(b)(6). 
(2)  Ninety-day compliance report. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance by the discharger with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or ninety (90) days following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW by a new discharger, any discharger subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall submit to the authority a report indicating the nature and concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its discharge, and the average and maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall state whether the applicable categorical pretreatment standards or requirements, including BMPs are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M or pretreatment is necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standards or requirements. This report shall be signed by an authorized representative of the discharger. 
(3)  Periodic compliance reports. Any discharger subject to a categorical pretreatment standard made a part of this division shall submit to the authority a report indicating the nature and concentration of prohibited or regulated substances in the effluent which are limited by the categorical pretreatment standards hereof. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by city or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. Reports are required after the compliance date of such a pretreatment standard, or in the case of a new discharger, after commencement of the discharge, and are to be submitted at least once every six (6) months (on dates specified by the authority). In addition, where applicable, this report shall include a record of all measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows which, during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily flow specified in section 20-105(b)(1) and (2) hereof. Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement, provided however, where cost or feasibility considerations justify, the authority may accept reports of average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques. The authority, taking into consideration extenuating factors, may authorize the submission of said reports on months other than those specified above. 
a.  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director but in no case less than twice per year (once in July covering the six-month period December 1 through May 31 and once in January covering the six-month period June 1 through November 30), submit a report containing at a minimum: 
1.  The nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards; 
2.  The measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period; 
3.  In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by city or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user; and 
4.  Contributing information as is determined necessary to account for water usage, materials recovery, or disposal practices. 
b.  All nonsignificant categorical industrial (NSCIU) users shall submit a report annually in the month specified by the director. The report shall be completed according to the city's current reporting requirements, including the submittal of any applicable certification statements. 
c.  If the director has determined that a nonsignificant industrial user (NSIU) needs a permit, then the NSIU shall submit a report annually in the month specified by the director. The report shall be completed according to the city's current reporting requirements, including the submittal of any applicable certification statements. 
d.  All periodic compliance reports shall be signed and certified in accordance with section 20-105(c)(3) of this article. 
e.  All wastewater samples shall be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring equipment in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
f.  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in sections 20-103, 20-105(c)(4), 20-107(b) and 20-105(b)(2) of this article, the results of this monitoring along with chain-of-custody forms shall be included in the report. 
(4)  Analysis and sampling procedures. All analyses including sampling techniques with chain-of-custodies, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or any other reports shall be performed in accordance with procedures contained in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the administrator of the EPA. Samples shall be collected in such manner as to be representative of the character and concentration [of] the waste under operating conditions. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by EPA. Nondetectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR Part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, or where EPA determines that the Part 136 techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by EPA. 
Sample Collection: 
a.  Except as indicated in subsection b. and c., below, the user must collect wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the authority may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate. 
b.  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
c.  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety-day compliance reports required in [40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the city superintendent may authorize a lower minimum. 
For the reports required by paragraphs (40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(5)  Reporting additional monitoring. If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the authority, using the procedures prescribed in subsection (4) of this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the control authority within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis in a report which addresses: 
a.  The time, date, location, processes, and operations associated with the violation, and the personnel assigned responsibility and/or present during the violation; 
b.  The cause or probable cause of the noncompliance; and 
c.  The actions taken and implemented to meet permit conditions; and repeat the sampling and pollutant analysis and submit to the authority a written report of the results of this second analysis to the control authority within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation, except the industrial user is not required to resample if: 
1.  The control authority performs sampling at the industrial user at a frequency of at least once per month, or 
2.  The control authority performs sampling at the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(6)  Significant noncategorical industrial user reporting. Significant noncategorical industrial users shall submit to the authority at least once every six (6) months (on dates as specified by the authority) a description of the nature, concentration, and flow of the pollutants required to be reported by the authority. These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report and performed in accordance with the techniques described in subsection (4) of this section. This sampling and analysis may be performed by the authority in lieu of the significant noncategorical industrial user. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by authority or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user; 
(7)  All nonsignificant categorical industrial (NSCIU) users shall submit a report annually in the month specified by the director. The report shall be completed according to the city's current reporting requirements, including the submittal of any applicable certification statements. 
(8)  If the director has determined that a nonsignificant industrial user (NSIU) needs a permit, then the NSIU shall submit a report annually in the month specified by the authority. The report shall be completed according to the city's current reporting requirements, including the submittal of any applicable certification statements. 
(9)  Notification of changed discharge. Dischargers shall give prior written notification to the authority of any potential and actual significant changes in the volume or character of pollutants in the discharge. Significant industrial users that discharge wastewater to treatment plants operated by the City of Fort Worth shall provide prior written notification to the authority, City of Fort Worth and the treatment plant of changes to its wastewater discharges and any changes at its facility that affect the potential for a slug discharge. 
a.  The notification to the authority shall be received at least ninety (90) days prior to change. 
b.  The authority may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application. 
c.  The authority may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
d.  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases or decreases of twenty (20) percent or greater, the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, and the deletion of any pollutant regulated by this article or a permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(10)  Authority monitoring. Sampling and analysis for the reports required by subsections (1), (2), (3) and (6) above may be performed by the authority in lieu of the discharger. If all information required for the report, including flow data, is collected by the authority, the discharger will be required to submit the report or certifications. 
(11)  Signatory requirements. All applications and compliance reports submitted to the authority must contain the following certification statement and be signed by the authorized representative: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information and for not reporting known violations, including possibility of fine and imprisonment." 
Annual certification for nonsignificant categorical industrial users—A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user by the director pursuant to sections 20-101 and 20-105(a) must annually submit the following certification statement signed in accordance with the signatory requirements in 40 CFR 403.120(1). This certification must accompany an alternative report required by the director: 
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR ________, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from ________, ___ to ________, ___ [months, days, year]: 
(a)  The facility described as ___________ [facility name] met the definition of a Nonsignificant Categorical Industrial User as described in sections 20-101 and 20-105(a); 
(b)  The facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and requirements during this reporting period; and 
(c)  The facility never discharged categorical process wastewater on any given day during this reporting period. 
(12)  Wastewater analysis. When requested by the authority, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) days of the request. The authority is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(d)  Inspection and sampling. 
(1)  Inspection. Inspection and sampling of IUs by the authority at least once a year: Randomly inspect and sample and analyze the effluent from significant industrial users (SIU), nonsignificant categorical industrial users (NSCIU) and nonsignificant industrial users (NSIU) at least once a year and conduct surveillance activities to obtain independent of information supplied by industrial users, in order to identify, occasional and continuing noncompliance with pretreatment standards. The authority may inspect and sample the facilities of any discharger as frequently as needed to determine compliance with the requirements of this division. The discharger shall allow the authority or its representatives to enter upon the premises of the discharger at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection, sampling, or examination of records. All reports and records related to the provisions of this division including documentation associated with best management practices established under section 20-103(e)(11) shall be made available for copying and inspection by the authority. The inspectors, agents or representatives of the authority charged with the enforcement of this section shall be deemed to be performing a governmental function for the benefit and health and welfare of the general public and neither the authority nor any individual inspector, agent or representative shall be held liable for any loss or damage, whether real or asserted, caused or alleged to have been caused as a result of the performance of such governmental function. The failure or refusal of such owner or discharger to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the disconnection of water or sewer service to the facility. 
a.  Users shall allow the director ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. Users shall also comply with all applicable provisions of federal and state law allowing authorized representatives of the U.S. EPA and TCEQ access to all parts of the premises and records for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of other authorized functions. 
b.  User shall provide ample room in or near the monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples and analysis and whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring facilities should be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications, and such facilities shall be constructed and maintained in such manner so as to enable the city to perform independent monitoring activities. 
c.  The director shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
d.  The director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated as determined by the director to ensure their accuracy. 
e.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
f.  Unreasonable delays in allowing the director, or authorized representatives of the U.S. EPA and TCEQ, access to the user's premises shall be a violation of a wastewater discharge permit and of this article. 
(2)  Measurement of flow. The volume of flow used in computing sewage charges shall be based upon metered water consumption or discharge as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the Everman Water Department. 
Where it can be shown to the satisfaction of the director that a substantial portion of the metered water does not enter the sanitary sewer, the director may require or permit the installation of additional approved meters at the owner's expense, to measure the quantity of water actually entering the sewer system. If approved by the director, the measured quantity of water actually entering the sewer system will be used to determine the sewer service charge. 
Any discharger who procures all or part of its water supply from sources other than the Everman Water Department, all or part of which is subsequently discharged into the sanitary sewer, shall install and maintain at its expense an effluent meter or flow measuring device approved by the director for the purpose of determining the proper volume of flow to be used in computing sewer service charges. Such meters or measuring devices shall be read monthly. 
If the director determines that it is not practicable to measure the quantity or quality of waste by the aforesaid meters or monitoring devices, the quantity or quality of the waste shall be determined in any manner or method the director may find practicable in order to arrive at the percentage of water entering the sanitary sewage system of the authority and/or the quality of the sewage to be used to determine the sewer service charge. 
(e)  Permit modifications. 
(1)  The authority reserves the right to amend any permit issued hereunder in order to assure compliance by the authority with applicable laws and regulations. The authority may amend any permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
b.  Material or substantial alterations or additions to the discharger's operation processes, or discharge volume or character which were not considered in drafting the effective permit. 
c.  A change in any condition in either the industrial user or the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge. 
d.  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the authority's collection and treatment systems, POTW personnel or the receiving waters. 
e.  To incorporate, revise, or revoke new or existing best management practices. 
f.  Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit. 
g.  Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting. 
h.  To correct typographical or other errors in the permit. 
i.  To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator. 
j.  Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any applicable requirements, standards, laws, or rules and regulations. 
(2)  All categorical pretreatment standards promulgated and adopted by the EPA after the effective date of this division shall automatically become a part of this division. Where a discharger, subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a permit as required by subsection (a)(2) above, the discharger shall apply for a permit from the authority within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable categorical pretreatment standard by the EPA. In addition, the discharger with an existing permit shall submit to the authority within one hundred eighty (180) days after promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, the information required by subsection (c)(1) above. The discharger shall be informed of any proposed changes in its permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(f)  Confidential information. 
(1)  All information and data submitted by a discharger to the authority or POTW may be submitted to any state or federal agency governing the POTW. Such information shall be considered subject to public disclosure; provided, however, that the discharger may request that information not be subject to public disclosure, in accordance with 40 CFR Part 2 as follows: 
a.  A discharger may assert a business confidentiality claim covering part or all of the information in a manner described below, and that information covered by such a claim will be disclosed only by means of the procedures set forth below. 
b.  If no claim of business confidentiality is asserted, all information will be subject to public disclosure without further notice to the discharger. 
(2)  Method and time of asserting business confidentiality claim: A discharger which is submitting information to the authority may assert a business confidentiality claim covering the information by placing on or attaching to the information, at the time it is submitted to the authority, a cover sheet, stamped or typed legend, or other suitable form of notice employing language such as "trade secret," "proprietary," or "company confidential." Allegedly confidential portions of otherwise nonconfidential documents should be clearly identified by the discharger, and may be submitted separately to facilitate identification and handling by the authority. If the discharger desires confidential treatment only until a certain date or until the occurrence of a certain event, the notice should so state. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the disclosure of information and data regarding the nature and content of a discharger's effluent, and the frequency of discharge, or a standard or limitation to be met by the discharger, and this information shall be available to the public with no restrictions. Effluent data which cannot be held as confidential is as defined in 40 CFR 2.302. 
(4)  The provisions of this section shall be subject to any public disclosure requirements which may exist under the Texas Public Information Act, Chapter 552 of the Texas Government Code, as amended. 
(g)  Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with subsection (a)(2) of this section, a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(h)  Right of entry. 
(1)  A director may enter premises or vehicles regulated by this chapter at all reasonable times, whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, to inspect permits and records required by this chapter, to collect air, water, waste, or wastewater samples, or whenever probable cause exists to believe that a violation of this chapter or other environmental laws exists on such premises. 
(2)  A director shall first present his credentials and demand entry if the premises are occupied. If the premises are unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable attempt to locate the owner or person in control of the premises and demand entry. 
(3)  Where premises have security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the person in control of the premises shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(4)  If entry is denied or if a person in control cannot be located, the director shall have every recourse provided by law to secure entry. Such recourse shall include the right to obtain a search warrant under the guidelines of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure; and for the purposes of same, any person with enforcement authority. 
(5)  Facilities regulated under this chapter are subject to the authority of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under Section 308 of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 3318), as amended, concerning access to information and right of entry onto property for purposes of implementing and enforcing the federal pretreatment program and other applicable provisions of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
(6)  Facilities regulated under this chapter are subject to the authority of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) under Sections 26.014 and 26.015 of the Texas Water Code, as amended, and Sections 361.032 and 361.037 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, concerning access to information and right of entry onto property for purposes of implementing and enforcing the State of Texas pretreatment program and other applicable provisions of the Texas Water Code and Texas Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 534, § 5, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 644, § 5, 11-1-11)  
Sec. 20-106. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notice of violation. 
(1)  When a director finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, the director may issue to such person a written notice of violation. 
(2)  No later than the tenth day after receipt of the notice, the violator shall submit to the issuing director an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of a reoccurrence of the violation. Such plan shall include specific actions to be taken by the violator. 
(3)  If the violator denies that any violation occurred, or contends that no corrective action is necessary, he shall submit to the director no later than the tenth day after receipt of the notice, a written explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention. 
(4)  Submission of an explanation and/or plan in no way relieves a violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Issuance of a notice of violation shall not be a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a violator. 
(b)  Nonemergency termination/revocation of permit. The authority may revoke the permit or terminate water or sewer service of any discharger which fails to: 
(1)  Factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; or 
(2)  Report significant changes in wastewater constituents or characteristics; or 
(3)  To fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; or 
(4)  Provide accurate self-monitoring reports; or 
(5)  Keep the monitoring equipment from tampering; or 
(6)  Allow reasonable access to the discharger's premises by representatives of the authority for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
(7)  To meet effluent limitations, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards; or 
(8)  Pay fines; or 
(9)  Pay sewer charges; or 
(10)  Meet compliance schedules; or 
(11)  Fulfill the conditions of its permit, or this division, or to obey any final judicial order with respect thereto; 
(12)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(13)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; 
(14)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this ordinance, individual wastewater discharge permit. 
Whenever the authority finds that any discharger has engaged in conduct which justifies revocation of a permit, pursuant to section 20-106(b) hereof, the authority shall serve or cause to be served upon such discharger a written notice, either by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, stating the nature of the alleged violation. 
Within ten (10) days of the date of receipt of the notice, the discharger shall respond in person or in writing to the authority, advising of its position with respect to the allegations. Thereafter, the parties shall meet to ascertain the veracity of the allegations and where necessary, establish a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof. 
(b)  (1)  The user will be notified of the proposed termination of its water supply and/or discharge, and may petition for a reconsideration and hearing pursuant to subsections (d) and (f) of this section. 
(2)  The user shall not recommence its discharge until the director so authorizes and: 
a.  The user presents proof satisfactory to the director that the noncomplying discharge has ceased; 
b.  The user presents proof satisfactory to the director that the conditions creating the threat of imminent and substantial danger have been eliminated; 
c.  The user pays the city for all costs the city will incur in reinstating services. 
(3)  Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, nor a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(c)  Administrative orders. Where the violation of subsection (a), hereof, is not corrected by means of enforcement action listed in subsection (b), the following enforcement escalations may be used. Terms may or may not be negotiated with industrial users. 
(1)  Consent order. An agreement between the authority and the industrial user normally containing three (3) elements: (1) compliance schedules; (2) stipulated fines or remedial actions; and (3) signatures of the authority and authorized representatives. 
a.  Such agreement may include specific action to be taken by the violator to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the agreement. 
b.  Such agreements have the same force and effect of compliance orders and remediation, abatement, and restoration orders, and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(2)  Show cause order. An order which directs the user to appear before the city to explain its noncompliance and show cause why more severe enforcement actions against the user should not be levied. Typically used after informal contacts or NOVs have failed to resolve noncompliance; however, it can be used at any time. 
(3)  Compliance order. An order which directs the industrial user to achieve or restore compliance by a date specified in the order. Terms need not be discussed with the industry in advance. Typically used when noncompliance cannot be resolved without construction, repair, or process changes, or to require development of management practices, spill prevention programs, and other pretreatment program requirements. 
(d)  Right of appeal of administrative ruling. Any discharger or any interested party shall have the right to request in writing an interpretation or ruling by the authority on any matter covered by the ordinance and shall be entitled to a prompt written reply. In the event that such inquiry is by a discharger and deals with matters of performance or compliance with this ordinance or deals with a permit issued pursuant hereto for which enforcement activity relating to an alleged violation is the subject, receipt of a discharger's request shall stay all enforcement proceedings pending receipt of the aforesaid written reply; provided, however, the authority may take any action it deems necessary to protect its wastewater collection and treatment system or to comply with its TPDES permit or to comply with any contract the authority has for the treatment of wastewater. 
(e)  Judicial proceedings. The authority, with respect to the conduct of any discharger contrary to the provisions of this division may authorize its attorney to commence any legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction for equitable and/or legal relief. 
(1)  Injunctive relief. When the authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the authority may petition a district court or other court of proper jurisdiction of Tarrant County, Texas, through its attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this division on activities of the user. The authority may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunction relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(f)  Emergency suspension of service and discharge permits. The authority, may, for good cause shown, suspend water or wastewater service to the discharger's facility when it appears to the authority that an actual or threatened discharge presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons, substantial danger to the environment, interfere with the operation of a POTW, violate any pretreatment limits imposed by this division or any permit issued pursuant to this division. Any discharger notified of the suspension of the authority's water or wastewater service and/or the discharger's permit, shall within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the authority, cease all discharges. In the event of the failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order within the specified time, the authority may commence judicial proceedings to compel the discharger's compliance with such order or may immediately disconnect such discharger's service line from the city water and sanitary sewer system. In the case of emergency disconnection of service, the director shall make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner or discharger before disconnecting the service line. The party whose service has been disconnected shall have an opportunity for hearing on the issue of the illegal discharge and the disconnection as soon as possible after such disconnection has taken place. The authority may reinstate the permit and/or the wastewater or water service upon proof by the discharger of the cessation of the noncomplying discharge or elimination of conditions creating the threat of imminent or substantial danger as set forth above. The water and/or wastewater service shall be reconnected at the discharger's expense. 
(g)  Affirmative defenses to discharge violations for action in municipal or state court. 
(1)  Act of God. In an action brought in municipal or state court, if a person can establish that an event that would otherwise be a violation of this article or a permit issued under this article was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe, the event is not a violation of this article or the permit. In an enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an act of God, war; strike, riot, or other catastrophe shall have the burden of proof. In the event that an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe has been established the user shall control production of all discharges to the extent possible until such time as the reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. 
(g1)  Affirmative defenses to upset. In an action brought in federal court, it is an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards that the noncompliance was caused by upset, if the user demonstrates, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information is provided orally, a written submission shall be provided within five (5) days: 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(g2)  Affirmative defenses to specific prohibited discharge standards. It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against a user for noncompliance with the general prohibition of section 20-103(b)(1) or a specific prohibition of section 20-103(d)(4), (16), (17), (18), (22) that the user did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NTPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
Any discharger who experiences an upset in operations which places the discharger in a temporary state of noncompliance with this division shall inform the authority within twenty-four (24) hours of first awareness of the commencement of the upset. Where such information is given orally, the authority may at its discretion require the discharger to file a written report within five (5) working days. The report shall specify: 
(1)  Description of the upset, its cause and the upset's impact on a discharger's compliance status. 
(2)  Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur. 
(3)  All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such an upset or other conditions of noncompliance. 
(h)  Recovery of costs incurred by the authority. Any discharger who discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the authority's wastewater system, shall be liable to the authority for any expense, loss, or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The authority shall bill the discharger for the costs incurred by the authority for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Failure to pay such bill may result in the termination of water or wastewater service. 
(i)  Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division, or falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this section, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 20-108 of this division. 
(j)  POTW pretreatment requirements. All POTWs shall be able to seek injunctive relief for noncompliance by industrial users with pretreatment standards and requirements. All POTWs shall also have authority to seek or assess civil or criminal penalties in at least the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) a day for each violation by industrial users of pretreatment standards and requirements. POTWs whose approved pretreatment programs require modification to conform to the requirements of this paragraph shall submit a request for approval of a program modification in accordance with Section 403.18 [40 CFR], unless the state would be required to enact or amend a statutory provision, in which case the POTW shall submit such a request. 
(Ord. No. 534, § 6, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 585, § 4, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 644, § 6, 11-1-11)  
Sec. 20-107. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Net/gross calculations. The authority may elect to adjust categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in the discharger's intake water, in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.15. 
(b)  Preservation of records. All dischargers subject to this ordinance shall retain and preserve for no less than three (3) years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or on behalf of a discharger in connection with its discharge including documentation associated with best management practices established under section 20-103(e). All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the authority pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the discharger until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. 
(c)  Costs of administering program. The authority may make such charges, known as monitoring and pretreatment charges, as are reasonable for services rendered in administering the programs outlined in this division. Such charges may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Permitting industrial facilities; 
(2)  Inspection; 
(3)  Sample analysis; 
(4)  Monitoring; and 
(5)  Enforcement. 
(d)  Right of revision. The authority reserves the right to amend this ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits to provide for more or less stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the sanitary sewer or POTW where deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in section 20-102 of this division. 
(e)  Publication of list of significant violators. The authority shall annually publish in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the city, a list of users that have significantly violated federal pretreatment requirements during the previous twelve (12) months. Definition of significant violation shall be the definitions listed in 40 CFR Part 403.8(f)(2)(vii), and in the POTW's TPDES permit. The director, or the director's designee, shall be responsible for calculating the users who have committed significant violations. 
Significant industrial users are subject to the SNC criteria listed in subsections (1) through (8) below. Group II nonsignificant industrial users that have been issued a permit shall be subject to SNC criteria listed in subsections (3) through (8) below. Group VI nonsignificant categorical industrial users shall be subject to SNC criteria listed in subsections (3) through (8) below. All other industrial users are subject to the SNC criteria listed in subsections (3), (4) and (8) of this section. 
Significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation of a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limits or a narrative standard) that the director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director's exercise of his emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within forty-five (45) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic reports (such as self-monitoring reports), and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which may include a violation of best management practices, which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 534, § 7, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 644, § 7, 11-1-11)  
Sec. 20-108. - Fines, injunctive relief, and civil penalties. 
Notwithstanding any notice provisions contained in this division, any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this division shall be fined not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Additionally, the city may seek injunctive relief pursuant to Section 54.016, Texas Local Government Code and civil penalties of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day pursuant to Section 54.017, Texas Local Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 534, § 10, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 644, § 10, 11-1-11)  
Sec. 20-109. - Rates for disposal of industrial wastes. 
The rates for disposal of industrial wastes shall be as provided by the city council by ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 15-70) 
Note— See editor's note to Div. 3 of this Art. II.  
Secs. 20-110—20-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 20-126. - Sewer rates. 
(1)  Residential rates. It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary for the city to levy and collect the following charges from all residential customers using the city sewer system and securing service therefrom: 
(a)  A monthly base service charge shall be charged to all residential customers in the amount of fourteen dollars and twenty-seven cents ($14.27). 
(b)  A monthly volume charge shall also be charged to all residential customers in the amount of two dollars and seven cents ($2.07) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used. 
(c)  For all residential customers, monthly volume charges will be based on the individual customers actual water use. 
(2)  Commercial rates. It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary for the city to levy and collect the following charges from all commercial customers (defined for purposes of this section to mean all nonresidential sewer customers) using the city sewer system and securing service therefrom: 
(a)  A monthly base service charge shall be charged to all commercial customers in the amount of seventeen dollars ($17.00). 
(b)  A monthly volume charge shall also be charged to all commercial customers in the amount of three dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 1, 2-8-00; Ord. No. 510, § 1, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 563, § 1, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 685, § 2(Att. A), 8-11-15)  
Secs. 20-127—20-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - LIQUID WASTE HAULERS 
 
Sec. 20-146. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved means accepted as satisfactory under the terms of this division and given formal and official sanction by the approving authority. 
Approving authority means the director or any other official designated by the city manager of any city party to this division, or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Director means the director of the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this division. 
Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid or semisolid grease trap waste, grit trap waste and/or septage into or onto any land or water so that such waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment, be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground waters. 
Disposal site means a permitted site or part of a site at which grease trap waste, grit trap waste or septage is processed, treated and/or intentionally placed into or onto any land and at which the waste will remain after closure. 
Disposer means a person who receives, stores, retains, processes or disposes of liquid waste. 
Generator means a person who causes, creates, generates or otherwise produces liquid waste. 
Grease trap means a watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of greasy, fatty liquid, semiliquid and/or solid wastes generated from commercial operations into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected. 
Grease trap waste means greasy, fatty liquid, semiliquid and/or solid wastes removed from commercial operations by a grease trap. 
Grit trap means a watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of petroleum-based oil, grease wastes and solids into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected. 
Grit trap waste means petroleum-based oil, grease wastes and solids from commercial automotive or heavy machinery repair and/or washing facilities. 
Hazardous waste means any liquid, semiliquid or solid waste (or combination of wastes), which because of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Have any of the following characteristics: Toxic, corrosive, an irritant, a strong sensitizer, flammable or combustible, explosive or otherwise capable of causing substantial personal injury or illness; 
(2)  Pose a substantial hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of, or otherwise improperly managed, and is identified or listed as hazardous waste as defined by the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act or the administrator, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 and as may be amended in the future. 
Liquid waste means water-borne solids, liquids and gaseous substances derived from a grease trap, grit trap, chemical/portable toilet and/or septic tank and described as a grease trap waste, grit trap waste or septage. 
Manager means the person conducting, supervising, managing or representing the activities of a generator, transporter or disposer. 
Manifest system means a system consisting of a four-part trip ticket used to document the generation, transportation and disposal of liquid waste. 
Owner means the person who owns a facility or part of a facility. 
Permit means the formal written document issued to a person by the approving authority authorizing collection of grease trap waste, grit trap waste and septage. 
Permittee means a person granted a permit under this division. 
Person means an individual, corporation (including a government corporation), organization, government, governmental subdivision or agency, federal agency, state, political subdivision of a state, interstate agency or body, business or business trust, partnership, association, firm, company, joint stock company, commission or any other legal entity. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not normally admitted. 
Septage means wastes removed from a portable toilet, chemical toilet or septic tank. 
Shall means that, wherever used in this division, the word "shall" will be interpreted in its mandatory sense, while the word "may" is permissive. 
Special wastes means any solid waste or combination of solid wastes that, because of its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics or biological properties, require special handling and disposal to protect the human health or the environment. 
Spill means the accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharge of grease trap waste, grit trap waste and septage. 
Tank means a device, designed to contain an accumulation of grease trap waste, grit trap waste and septage, which is constructed primarily of nonearthen materials (e.g., concrete, steel, plastic) to provide structural support for the containment. 
TDH means Texas Department of Health. 
TWC means Texas Water Commission. 
Toxic waste means any liquid, semiliquid or solid waste material which has the ability to chemically produce injury once it reaches a susceptible site in or on the body. 
Transporter means a person who operates a vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste. 
Trip ticket means the shipping document originated and signed by the transporter which contains the information required by the approving authority. 
Vehicle means a mobile device in which or by which liquid waste may be transported upon a public street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 1-1, 4-14-87) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 20-147. - Permit—Required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste without an applicable permit. A permit shall be issued for transportation of liquid waste and the approving authority shall designate on the permit the liquid waste authorized for transportation in the vehicle. A separate vehicle permit number is issued for each vehicle operated. 
(b)  A person who desires to obtain a permit must make application on a form provided by the approving authority. 
(c)  A person who desires to obtain a permit must submit to the approving authority at the time of application a photocopy of the manager's driver's license. The approving authority shall be notified of manager employment changes during the permit period and shall be provided a copy of the new manager's driver's license. 
(d)  The approving authority shall not issue a permit unless the applicant submits for inspection by the approving authority the vehicle the applicant proposes to use to transport liquid waste and the vehicle is found by the approving authority to be constructed and equipped in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(e)  A permit is not transferable. 
(f)  A permit issued by the city excludes the hauling of materials that are hazardous in nature. 
(g)  Transporters transporting hazardous wastes must have the applicable Texas Water Commission and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) registration number and use the appropriate EPA manifest system. 
(h)  Each applicant must specify the disposal site or sites to be used for the authorized disposal of liquid wastes. The approving authority shall be immediately notified of additional disposal sites used during the permit period. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 2-1, 4-14-87) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 11.  
Sec. 20-148. - Same—Fee and display. 
(a)  The approving authority shall not issue a permit to an applicant until the appropriate established fee is paid. A person shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first vehicle and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each additional vehicle operated by the person. Each permit must be renewed annually. 
(b)  The approving authority shall number permits consecutively, and each permit holder shall cause to be displayed on each side of each vehicle in a color contrasting with the background in three-inch letters or larger the business name, TDH registration number and the following: 
EVM ____________________________________ 
The first three (3) letters (EVM) shall represent the city issuing the permit. The blank space shall contain the permit number. The permit holder shall place business name, TDH registration number and the vehicle permit number on each vehicle before the vehicle is operated. The permit holder shall keep the permit receipt, or a copy, in the vehicle at all times. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 2-2, 4-14-87)  
Sec. 20-149. - Liquid waste vehicles—Maintenance. 
(a)  A liquid waste transporter shall: 
(1)  Maintain hoses, tanks, valves, pumps, cylinders, diaphragms, pipes, connections and other appurtenances on a vehicle in good repair and free from leaks; 
(2)  Provide a safety plug or cap for each valve of a tank; 
(3)  Cause a vehicle exterior to be clean and the vehicle odor-free at the beginning of each workday. 
(b)  The approving authority may cause to be impounded a vehicle which is being operated in violation of this division, and he may authorize the holding of the vehicle until the violation is corrected. The approving authority may also revoke the permit for the improperly operated vehicle. If a vehicle is impounded or if a permit is revoked an appeal may be filed by the transporter pursuant to section 20-158. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 2-3, 4-14-87) 
Cross reference— Traffic generally, Ch. 19.  
Sec. 20-150. - Same—Inspection. 
A liquid waste transporter's vehicle shall be inspected by the approving authority prior to the issuance of a vehicle permit with qualifications as follows: 
(1)  Use a vehicle with a single tank as an integral portion of vehicle to transport liquid wastes; portable tanks or other containers temporarily installed in vehicles are prohibited; 
(2)  Piping, valves and connectors shall be permanently attached to tank and/or vehicle; 
(3)  Tank to be liquid tight; 
(4)  Tank to be constructed so that every interior and exterior portion can be easily cleaned; 
(5)  Piping, valves and connections shall be accessible and easy to clean; 
(6)  Inlet, or opening of tank to be constructed so that collected waste will not spill during filling, transfer or during transport; 
(7)  Outlet connections to be constructed so that no liquid waste will leak, run or spill out from the vehicle; 
(8)  Outlets to be of a design and type suitable for the liquid waste handled and capable of controlling flow or discharge without spillage or undue spray on or flooding of immediate surroundings while in use; 
(9)  Pumps, valves, cylinders, diaphragms and other appurtenances to be of a design and type suitable for the type of waste handled, capable of operation without spillage, spray or leakage, and capable of being easily disassembled for cleaning. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 2-4, 4-14-87)  
Sec. 20-151. - Responsibilities of a liquid waste transporter. 
(a)  Before accepting a load of liquid waste for transportation, a liquid waste transporter shall determine the nature of the material to be transported and that his equipment is sufficient to properly handle the job without spillage, leaks or release of toxic or harmful gasses, fumes, liquids or other substances. Upon delivery of the waste to the disposer, the transporter shall inform the disposer of the nature of the waste. 
(b)  A transporter with a city liquid waste transporter permit shall not transport materials that are hazardous as defined in section 20-146 in vehicles permitted by the city for transporting liquid waste. 
(c)  A transporter holding a city permit must use a disposal site permitted and approved by the city, the state or the federal government. 
(d)  A manifest system, consisting of a four-part trip ticket which is used to document the generation, transportation and disposal of all applicable liquid waste generated in the city, shall be used as follows: 
(1)  The trip ticket books are purchased by the transporter from the city's department of industrial waste, for an established fee; 
(2)  A transporter will complete one (1) trip ticket for each location serviced, with the exception of chemical/portable toilet companies servicing their own units. Chemical/portable toilet companies servicing their own units shall be exempt from trip ticket requirements but shall be required to submit a monthly total of volumes disposed and location of disposal to the approving authority; 
(3)  The white copy of trip ticket shall be signed by the transporter and generator at the time of waste collection and the yellow copy maintained by generator; 
(4)  The white copy of trip ticket shall be signed by disposer at time of disposal and the pink copy shall be maintained by the disposer; 
(5)  The green copy of trip ticket shall be maintained by the transporter; 
(6)  All completed trip ticket books containing the white copy of the trip ticket will be delivered at least monthly by the transporter to the city's department of industrial waste; 
(7)  A copy of all trip tickets shall be maintained for a period of two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 2-5, 4-14-87)  
Sec. 20-152. - Accumulation of liquid waste. 
A person commits an offense if he allows liquid waste that emits noxious or offensive odors or is unsanitary or injurious to public health to accumulate upon property under his control. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3-1, 4-14-87)  
Sec. 20-153. - Disposal of liquid waste. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he unloads or offers for sale or exchanges liquid waste, except at a place permitted by the city, state or federal government. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he deposits or discharges liquid waste onto a street or into a storm or sanitary sewer or an area that drains into the storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3-2, 4-14-87)  
Sec. 20-154. - Responsibilities of liquid waste generator. 
(a)  A generator of liquid waste shall have all liquid waste material picked up from his premises by a liquid waste transporter who holds a valid permit from the city and the liquid waste shall be transported to an approved site for disposal. 
(b)  A generator of liquid wastes shall not have hazardous wastes or liquid waste in combination with hazardous waste removed from his premises by a liquid waste hauler operating under a city permit. 
(c)  A generator shall sign the trip ticket from the transporter when a load is picked up by the transporter and shall keep a copy of all trip tickets for a period of two (2) years. The approving authority may inspect these records during normal business hours. 
(d)  A generator shall: 
(1)  Install or provide a collection device of size and type specified by approving authority; 
(2)  Maintain such collection device in a continuous, proper operation; 
(3)  Supervise proper cleaning of such collection device; 
(4)  Report spills and accidents involving such collection device to approving authority within twenty-four (24) hours; 
(5)  Clean up all spills and accidents immediately and have material disposed of by permitted transporter by proper means. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3-3, 4-14-87)  
Sec. 20-155. - Responsibilities of liquid waste disposers. 
(a)  A liquid waste disposer commits an offense if he allows accumulation of liquid waste on his premises so that rainfall could carry the material to storm sewers or adjacent property or create a noxious odor or health hazard. 
(b)  A liquid waste disposer shall: 
(1)  Obtain and maintain compliance with all licenses and/or permits required by local, state or federal law; 
(2)  Accept waste only from a permitted transporter; 
(3)  Maintain trip ticket copies for a period of two (2) years; 
(4)  Accept only those classes of wastes authorized by license or permit; 
(5)  Make available all records required to be kept for inspection by the approving authority during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 3-4, 4-14-87)  
Sec. 20-156. - Rules and regulations. 
The approving authority may promulgate rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this division and protect the public from health and safety hazards. The approving authority may undertake immediate actions as may be necessary to protect the public from health and safety hazards. The approving authority may amend any permit issued under this division to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 4-1, 4-14-87)  
Sec. 20-157. - Denial, suspension, revocation of permit. 
(a)  The approving authority may deny a permit if it is determined that an applicant is not qualified under sections 20-147 through 20-151 of this division and may suspend or revoke a permit if it is determined that a permittee: 
(1)  Is not qualified under sections 20-147 through 20-151 of this division; 
(2)  Has violated a provision of this division; 
(3)  Has failed to pay a required fee; 
(4)  Has failed to comply with maintenance or inspection requirements; 
(5)  Has failed to deliver trip tickets to the approving authority. 
(b)  After suspension under this section, a permittee may file a request for reinstatement of the permit. When the approving authority determines that the permittee is again qualified, all violations have been corrected, precautions has been taken to prevent future violations, and all required fees have been paid, he shall reinstate the permit. 
(c)  The approving authority may revoke for a period of one (1) year or less all permits held by a liquid waste transporter if the transporter or an employee of the transporter violates any of the provisions of this division, any rule or regulation promulgated by the approving authority or applicable provisions of this Code or state law. 
(d)  A permittee whose permit is suspended or revoked shall not collect, transport, or dispose of any waste materials within the jurisdiction of the approving authority. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 4-2, 4-14-87)  
Sec. 20-158. - Appeal. 
If the approving authority denies the issuance of a permit, or revokes a permit, he shall send to the applicant, or permit holder, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and the right to an appeal. The applicant, or permit holder, may appeal the decision of the approving authority in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 4-3, 4-14-87)  
Sec. 20-159. - Responsibility of corporations or associations. 
(a)  In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by natural persons, it is the intent of this division to hold a corporation or association legally responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting in behalf of a corporation or association and within the scope of his office or employment. 
(b)  Any person, operator or owner who shall violate any provision of this division, or who shall fail to comply with any provision hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and each violation and each day a violation continues, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(c)  Any person found to be guilty of violating provisions of this division shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city for reason of appropriate clean up and proper disposal of the waste materials. Additionally, an administrative fee equal to one-half (½) of assessed clean up costs shall be levied by the city against the guilty person. 
(Ord. No. 375, § 4-4, 4-14-87)  
Secs. 20-160—20-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WATER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Sprinkler system is city's right-of-way, § 17-3. 
 
Sec. 20-181. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the term "customer" shall mean each person who contracts with the city to avail himself of water service provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 370, § 1, 9-9-86) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 20-182. - Application for service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any property with the water system of the city. No connection with the water system shall be made, until the owner of such property, his duly authorized agent or the occupant thereof shall have first filed with the city secretary an application for water service where a meter has theretofore been installed, and where no meter has theretofore been installed, for water service and installation of meter, and shall have received from the city secretary a permit authorizing such installation of meter and service. Such application shall be in writing signed by the owner, agent or occupant, on forms to be furnished by the city and shall contain the precise location of the property to which such connection is desired; and that the applicant will promptly pay to the city all charges then or thereafter to be prescribed by the city for the use of the system and services rendered thereunder; that such applicant will abide by and observe the rules and regulations governing the administration of the water system; and that he will be responsible for all charges accrued by reason of the use thereof and service rendered thereunder. 
(Code 1977, § 15-11)  
Sec. 20-183. - Issuance of permit; connection to be made. 
Upon the payment of the tapping fee, the superintendent shall make, or have made, the necessary connections and furnish a cast-iron curb stop box and curb cock, the cost of which is included in the tapping fee; and every premises connected with any water main, or being supplied with any water from the city waterworks, shall have a separate service connection, curb stop box, and curb cock. If the application is approved by the superintendent or any other person designated by him, a permit will be issued. All fees and charges shall be paid for at amounts and rates fixed by this article or by resolutions of the governing body. 
(Code 1977, § 15-12)  
Sec. 20-184. - Security deposit; tapping fee. 
No permit shall be issued for installation of meter and service from the water system and water shall not be made available unless such application shall be accompanied by a payment in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) as a security deposit to guarantee payment of service charges rendered by the water system, and the tapping and meter installation charge, such sums to be paid to the city secretary. Upon discontinuance of service at the request of any applicant, if all charges for service rendered theretofore have been paid in full, the aforementioned security deposit shall be returned to the applicant, upon surrender of the original certificate given theretofore by the city at the time the security deposit was originally made. 
(Code 1977, § 15-13; Ord. No. 370, § 5, 9-9-86)  
Sec. 20-185. - Change in ownership or occupancy. 
Whenever any property for which a permit has been issued and water service is being furnished changes ownership or occupants, the new owner or occupant shall make application for continuation of the water service to the property in the same manner and be subject to the same terms, stipulations and conditions as in the case of an original application, which application shall also be accompanied by a remittance in the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) as a deposit. There shall be no reduction or abatement of water service charge to any property so long as same is connected with the water system of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 15-14)  
Sec. 20-186. - To give notice of discontinuance; fee for transferring water/sewer/sanitation service. 
Any person wishing to discontinue the use of water supplied from the waterworks system must give notice thereof to the city; otherwise, the charge will be entered until such notice has been given. The charge for transferring water/sewer/sanitation service from one (1) location to another location within the service areas will be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for such transfer. 
(Code 1977, § 15-15; Ord. No. 441, § 2, 6-15-93  
Sec. 20-187. - Rates; tapping charge. 
It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary for the city to levy and collect the following charges from all persons using the city water system and securing service therefrom: 
May 2019 
Services and Rate Schedule 
Services and Rate Schedule 
	Base Rate by Meter Size (Includes First 1,000 Gal) 	Step Rate per 1,000 Gallons Consumption 
Service 	Service Code 	Account Type 	Rate Code 	Inside/
Outside City 	¾" 	1" 	1.5" 	2" 	3" 	4" 	6" 	8" 	2,000—
5,000 	6,000—
10,000 	11,000—
25,000 	25,000+ 
WATER 	WT 	Residential 	1 	Inside 	$16.23 	$20.53 	$33.43 	$48.91 	$85.03 	$128.03 	$265.63 	$427.31 	$4.2625 	$4.5925 	$4.9775 	$5.1975 
			1 	Outside 	17.52 	22.47 	37.30 	55.10 	96.64 	146.09 	304.33 	490.26 	4.8813 	5.2608 	5.7035 	5.9565 
		Commercial 	2 	Inside 	16.23 	20.53 	33.43 	48.91 	85.03 	128.03 	265.63 	427.31 	4.2625 	4.5925 	4.9775 	5.1975 
			2 	Outside 	17.52 	22.47 	37.30 	55.10 	96.64 	146.09 	304.33 	490.26 	4.8813 	5.2608 	5.7035 	5.9565 
		Senior Citizen 	3 	Inside 	13.23 	17.53 	30.43 	45.91 	82.03 	125.03 	262.63 	424.31 	4.2625 	4.5925 	4.9775 	5.1975 
			3 	Outside 	14.73 	19.03 	31.93 	47.41 	83.53 	126.53 	264.13 	425.81 	4.8813 	5.2608 	5.7035 	5.9565 
		Multi-Unit 	9 	Inside 	16.23 	20.53 	33.43 	48.91 	85.03 	128.03 	265.63 	427.31 	4.2625 	4.5925 	4.9775 	5.1975 
			9 	Outside 	17.52 	22.47 	37.30 	55.10 	96.64 	146.09 	304.33 	490.26 	4.8813 	5.2608 	5.7035 	5.9565 
All Base Rates Increased $2.50 
 
				Base Rate 	Step Rate per 1,000 	Consumption Basis 
 SEWER  	  SW   	 Residential  	  1  	16.77 	2.2770 	Actual Water Use 
		Commercial 	  2  	19.50 	3.8500 	Actual Water Use 
		Senior Cit 	  3  	16.77 	2.2770 	Actual Water Use 
Increase $2.50 
 
  Refuse  	  RF   	 Residential  	  1  	  10.60   
		 Commercial  	  2  	NONE 
		 Senior Cit  	  3  	9.23 
 
Recycle 	  RCY  	     All      	$4.00 per month 
Sales Tax 	  TX  	All 	8.25% of RF plus RCY 
Penalty 	  PN  	All 	10.00% of Past Due Balances 
Service 
Charge 	SC 	All 	Involuntary cutoff $50; Extension fee $50 
NSF 
Check 
Fee 	  NSF  	All 	$34 each Insufficient Funds Check or Draft 
Transfer 
Fee 	  TF  	All 	$15 transfer service to new address 
Water Dep 	  WTD  	All 	Based on the amount of the new Water Deposit 
Any other charge 	  OT  	All 	Variable amounts 
 
(Code 1977, § 15-16; Ord. No. 370, §§ 2, 4, 9-9-86; Res. No. 1987-6-2, 6-9-87; Ord. No. 413, § 1, 4-10-90; Ord. No. 429, § 1, 10-1-91; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 6-16-92; Ord. No. 493, § 2, 2-8-00; Ord. No. 613, § 1, 8-12-08; Ord. No. 685, § 2(Att. A), 8-11-15; Ord. No. 692, § 2(Att. A), 8-23-16; Ord. No. 718, § 2(Att. A), 11-14-17; Ord. No. 722, § 2(Att. A), 5-9-18; Ord. No. 731, § 2(Att. A), 5-14-19)  
Sec. 20-188. - What number of units to be considered. 
For the purpose of computing minimum rates and charges made pursuant to the provisions of this article, each single-family dwelling, commercial or industrial establishment shall be considered as a single unit. Each duplex apartment occupied by two (2) families and each single-family dwelling with an accessory building being used as a single-family dwelling, being served through one (1) water meter, shall be considered two (2) single units each. When two (2) or more single-family dwellings are being served through one (1) water meter, each of the single-family dwellings shall be considered one (1) single unit. When any single-family dwelling, or a single-family dwelling with an accessory building being occupied as a single-family dwelling, or a duplex apartment occupied by two (2) families, is being served through a meter attached to any commercial or industrial establishment, each of the dwelling units, as well as the commercial or industrial establishment through which same are being served, shall be considered a single unit. 
(Code 1977, § 15-17)  
Sec. 20-189. - Bill due when; delinquency; etc. 
(a)  All bills for water services furnished and/or rendered by the city water system shall be paid monthly by each customer not later than the fifteenth day of each month after the billing date; late charges, ten (10) percent of current balance, will be applied after the fifteenth day of each month. Current charges paid with an insufficient check will have a charge assessed in the amount of thirty-four dollars ($34.00) and will have a late charge assessed if the check has not been redeemed before the fifteenth of the month in which the bill was due; if not paid within ten (10) days after the due date, service will be discontinued. If service is discontinued an additional sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged for reconnection of each service to the system. In addition to any charges listed above, except as provided by subsection (b) of this Section, any customer who has not paid their bill by the twentieth of the month in which the bill is due shall have their service disconnected and shall be charged an additional service charge of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  In the event of hardship, customers who are unable to pay their water bill by the disconnect date may request an extension to pay. If an extension is granted, a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee will be assessed in addition to the late payment fee, but the water will not be disconnected during the extension in period. If an extension is granted, payment must be received before the third day of the month following the disconnect date, or water service will be subject to disconnection. 
(Code 1977, § 15-18; Ord. No. 348, § 1, 10-8-85; Ord. No. 370, § 3, 9-9-86; Ord. No. 416, § 1, 5-8-90; Ord. No. 503, § 1, 11-14-00; Ord. No. 586, § 1, 8-8-06)  
Sec. 20-190. - Meters; to be set by city; out of order; all water charged for. 
All meters, whether private or belonging to the water system, shall be set by the employees of the city. If a meter gets out of order and fails to register, the consumer will be charged at the average daily consumption, as shown by the meter when in order. All water that passes through the meter shall be charged for, whether used or not. 
(Code 1977, § 15-19)  
Sec. 20-191. - Separate connections; minimums. 
Each consumer of water living in a separate house must have a separate connection and meter for each house; provided that, where a residence is not in reach of a city water main, arrangements may be made, at the option of the city, to secure water from another user of city water; in which case the minimum monthly charge shall be made for each additional residence taking water through such meter. Each minimum will entitle the user to two thousand (2,000) gallons per month. The regular minimum, the additional minimum of all water used over the minimums by such consumers, shall be charged to the customer having the meter. 
(Code 1977, § 15-20)  
Sec. 20-192. - Extensions. 
(a)  Any person desiring to construct or extend or make any extension to the city water system for the purpose of installing the same in new additions or subdivisions, or for any other purpose whatsoever, in or outside and adjacent to the city limits, shall be required to file an application with, and to secure a permit from the city council or its duly authorized representative in charge of the city water system, authorizing such extensions; and shall be required, before receiving such permit, to file with the city council or the officer in charge, four (4) copies of plans and specifications of the proposed extensions, and any subsequent changes thereto. Before any action is taken thereon, same shall be submitted to the city consulting engineer and also to the chief engineer of the board of fire insurance commissioners at Austin if necessary. The application shall contain the provisions that the applicant agrees that permission is thereby given to the agents of the city to inspect all the work during its progress as often as may be desired; and applicant further shall agree that the plumbing work installed in all structures to be connected to such extensions shall comply with all applicable ordinances of the city and state law, and that the extensions or lines being constructed with all easements therewith shall, after the completion thereof, be conveyed to the city without costs and reservations of any kind. 
(b)  In residential areas, no pipe shall be installed in the construction of main waterlines of less than six (6) inches in diameter looped; and to all waterlines installed in the area as provided in this section, there shall be also installed or replaced in the residential areas a standard three-way fire hydrant with a maximum valve opening of not less than five (5) inches for every one thousand (1,000) lineal feet of line installed, or at the nearest street intersection, so that all property situated in such residential areas of such installation will be protected by a fire hydrant located not in excess of five hundred (500) lineal feet from all of such property. All street service lines running from main waterlines shall not be less than two (2) inches in diameter. 
(c)  In business, commercial, and industrial areas, there shall be installed pipe of not less than eight (8) inches in diameter; and a fire hydrant shall be at every intersection and at a minimum of more than four hundred (400) feet from all property in such areas. All water mains and lines constructed within the city under this provision shall be made of duly approved cast iron and any other material as will meet the approval of the city council or officer in charge of the water system, as well as the consisting engineer for the city. 
(d)  All necessary mains, lines, fire hydrants, gate valves, and all other necessary fittings furnished and installed shall be under the direction of the city council or officer in charge of the department, and at the cost of the property owners. Such mains, lines, fire hydrants, and gate valves shall become the property of the city following installation thereof; and the city shall have full control, management, and jurisdiction of such mains, lines, fire hydrants, and gate valves. The city shall have the right to receive all rents and revenues for water service provided through such mains or lines. 
(Code 1977, § 15-21)  
Sec. 20-193. - Securing service on extensions. 
After all installation of mains and lines and their acceptance by the city, as provided in section 20-192, those persons desiring water service may procure the same by following the procedure set forth in this article for applicants using lines under present operation. 
(Code 1977, § 15-22)  
Sec. 20-194. - Maps and plats to be kept. 
The officer in charge of the city water system shall keep in his office maps and plats of the city showing all mains and pipes laid or belonging to the city, and in addition, the location of each and every fire hydrant, giving the size of all of the same, and showing the location of all valves and other equipment attached thereto. 
(Code 1977, § 15-23)  
Sec. 20-195. - Users to obey regulations, pay for water used. 
The officer in charge of the city water system shall see that all users of the system obey the rules and regulations prescribed for the management of the water system of the city; and such officer shall see that all persons using water from the system have paid for the same, and for this purpose shall keep a list of all users thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 15-24)  
Sec. 20-196. - Depth of pipes. 
All pipes installed for the furnishing of water through the city water system, whether by installation by the city or by other persons, shall be installed at a depth of not less than eighteen (18) inches below the gutter grade. 
(Code 1977, § 15-25)  
Sec. 20-197. - Extensions to be inspected, etc. 
All new extensions to the city water system and appurtenances thereto shall be inspected and approved by the officer in charge of the city water system and the consulting engineer of the city or their duly authorized representatives, before backfilling any part thereof. Any person violating this provision is subject to the penalty provided in section 1-7 of this Code, and shall be compelled to uncover the extension or any part thereof so that same may be fully inspected as provided herein. 
(Code 1977, § 15-26)  
Sec. 20-198. - Employees to report leaks and waste of water. 
It shall be the duty of all employees of the city, including officers and members of the police force, to report to the superintendent of the department, upon blanks furnished for that purpose, any leaks or unnecessary waste of water that may come to their attention and also any violations of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 15-27)  
Sec. 20-199. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to do, commit, or assist in committing any of the following things or acts in the city: 
(1)  To open or close any fire hydrant or stop cock connected with the waterworks system of the city, or lift or remove the covers of any gate valves or shutoffs thereof, without permission of the superintendent of the department, except in case of fire, and then only under the direction of officers of the fire department. 
(2)  To interfere with, destroy, deface, impair, injure, or wantonly force open any gate or door, or in any way whatsoever destroy, injure, or deface any meter or meter box, any part of any engine house, reservoir, standpipe, elevated tank, building or buildings or appurtenances thereto, fences, trees, shrubs, or fixtures or property appertaining to the waterworks system. 
(3)  To go upon or ascend the stairway, steps, or ladders, on any elevated water storage tank or standpipe of the water system, except by permission of the superintendent. 
(4)  To place any telegraph, telephone, electric light pole, or any obstruction whatsoever within three (3) feet of any fire hydrant. 
(5)  To resort to any fraudulent device or arrangement for the purpose of procuring water for himself or others from private connections on premises contrary to the city regulations or ordinances. 
(6)  To interfere in any manner with employees and agents of the city in removing meters and meter boxes or in any other activity of the employees and agents in the fulfillment of their duties in the protection of the equipment of the city water system and the operation thereof. 
(7)  To interfere with or injure any reservoir, tank, fountain, hydrant, pipe, cock, valve, or other apparatus pertaining to the waterworks system; or to turn on or off without authority the water in any street hydrant or other water fixture; or to hitch or tie any animal thereto. 
(8)  To make or permit to be made any connections with the main or service pipes of the waterworks system or to turn on or use the water of the system without first obtaining a permit therefor. 
(9)  To cover over or conceal from view any water valve box, service or meter box. 
(10)  To remove any water meter that has been placed by the city, or to in any manner change, interfere with, or tamper with any water meter; provided that, the provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to the employees of the city when acting in their official capacity. 
(11)  To turn on the water supply to any building or to any supply pipe where the supply has been turned off for the nonpayment of the monthly water charge or for the violation of any rule or ordinance governing the water system. 
(Code 1977, § 15-28)  
Sec. 20-200. - Rationing during emergencies. 
(a)  In the event of deficient water pressure or deficient water reserve, or in case of emergency caused by a shortage of water in the city water system, the mayor is authorized and empowered to declare by proclamation any provisions deemed necessary to control water pressure or reserves. During such times he may designate which group of persons may use water and on which day such persons may use water. Notice of such restricted use of water shall be given by posting at three (3) places in the city. Such restricted water use shall continue until such time as the mayor and city council declare otherwise. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person during the existence of the restricted water use to use water other than as directed by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 318, §§ 1, 2, 6-26-84)  
Sec. 20-200.1. - Emergency water demand management plan—Action by mayor. 
(a)  The City of Everman, Texas has adopted a water conservation and emergency water demand management plan dated March 1, 1994. 
(b)  The emergency water demand management plan establishes certain drought trigger conditions and actions to be taken by the citizens of the City of Everman during the periods of defined drought conditions. 
(c)  This section authorizes the mayor, or his/her duly appointed representative, to define the trigger condition as detailed in the adopted emergency water demand management plan, to upgrade or downgrade the condition, to initiate the appropriate actions as detailed in the adopted emergency water demand management plan, and to terminate the condition when the emergency has ended. 
(d)  The mayor, or his/her duly appointed representative, shall have the authority to enact any or all of the prescribed procedures, and to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations if necessary to protect health and safety in case of system failure. 
(e)  Violations of this section will be classified as Class "C" misdemeanors. Penalties may vary from ten dollars ($10.00) to two hundred dollars ($200.00). The police department will be the enforcing agency. 
(f)  The authority established by this section will remain in effect, as long as, the City of Fort Worth has state revolving fund loans from the Texas Water Development Board, or until the ordinance from which this section derives has been repealed or amended by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 446, §§ 1—6, 3-1-94) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 446, §§ 1—6, adopted March 1, 1994, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as § 20-200.1 was at the discretion of the editor, after conference with the city. It should also be noted that the water conservation and emergency water demand management plan referenced in § 20-200.1 was adopted pursuant to Res. No. 1994-2-2, passed and approved by the city council on Feb. 1, 1994; and, in the event of conflict between these provisions and the rationing provisions contained in § 20-200, it is presumed that these provisions will prevail.  
Sec. 20-201. - Penalty; other remedies. 
(a)  Any person or any agent or employee thereof, who shall violate any of the rules, regulations or provisions of this article or any part of it, by any act, either of omission or commission, or cause the same to be done, will be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. Each violation of each part of this article shall be and constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In case of any willful or continued violation of the terms, conditions, and provisions of this article, the city in addition to imposing the penalties above provided, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in any court having jurisdiction to restrain, correct, or abate such violation; and the definition of any violation of the terms, conditions, and provisions of this article as a misdemeanor, shall not preclude the city from invoking the civil remedies given it by the laws of the state, but the same shall be cumulative and subject to prosecution as hereinabove prescribed for such violation. 
(Code 1977, § 15-29)  
Sec. 20-202. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 681, adopted Feb. 10, 2015, superseded the former provisions of § 20-202 which pertained to the drought contingency and water emergency management plan of the city and derived from Ord. No. 580, §§ 1—5, 8, adopted March 14, 2006. See §§ 20-501 et seq. for current provisions.  
Secs. 20-203—20-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWER EXTENSIONS 
 
Sec. 20-221. - Pro rata charge. 
There shall be a service charge due on all property to which water and/or sewer lines are extended and construction completed and accepted by the city. This charge shall be called the pro rata charge for water and/or sewer, and shall be due and payable before the service is provided. The pro rata charge shall represent a portion of the costs of providing water and/or sewer facilities to serve the property on which the pro rata charge is paid. 
(1)  Amount. When a person desires water and/or sewer service to property that requires an extension of existing facilities from service adjacent to the property, or when the service connection is to be made to a line (construction of which is completed and accepted by the city), the person desiring service shall pay a nonrefundable pro rata charge, hereafter also called the pro rata. This charge shall be as follows: 
a.  Eight dollars and twenty-five cents ($8.25) per front foot of lot or tract of land to which sewer service is to be provided; 
b.  Eight dollars and twenty-five cents ($8.25) per front foot of lot or tract of land to which water service is to be provided; and as more specifically provided in this article. 
(2)  Costs exceeding. When an extension of water and/or sewer facilities is required to serve the property, the costs of which exceed the pro rata charge as defined in this section the person desiring service shall pay the total cost of the extension required for domestic and/or fire protection service, and shall be refunded (as provided in this article) that portion of the costs providing water and/or sewer facilities that exceeds the pro rata charge. 
The preceding front-foot rates in subparagraph (1) of this section shall apply to property fronting on streets in areas platted into the usual rectangular lots or tracts of land with a depth not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet. Where lots or tracts have greater depth than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the front street line and are occupied, or are to be occupied, exclusively as dwelling places, the additional depth shall not be assessed. If the property is later subdivided, requiring an extension of mains to serve the same, then the terms of this article shall govern. 
(3)  Irregular-shaped lots or tracts. Where residential lots or tracts are irregular in size or shape, the pro rata charges shall be based upon equivalent rectangular lots or tracts, using one (1) front foot for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of area, or the average frontage of such lots or tracts, whichever is less. 
(4)  Commercial or industrial property. Where lots or tracts are intended to be used for business, commercial or industrial purposes, the pro rata charge shall be paid on the frontage on all streets which the property may abut. Should such property be resubdivided whereby water main extensions are required to serve the same, the terms of this article shall apply. 
(5)  Property previously platted. A payment of the water and/or sewer pro rata charge on property already platted shall entitle the person desiring service to acquire a connection to the water and/or sewer lines in accordance with the ordinances of the city, when the lines to which the connection is to be made are in the alley or comparable easement adjacent to the property; or shall entitle him to the extension of water and/or sewer lines equal in length to the frontage on which he paid the pro rata charge, plus one hundred fifty (150) feet when the service line is not adjacent to his property, provided that only one (1) such one hundred fifty-foot free extension may be provided to any person in any one (1) calendar year. When the nearest service line is more than one hundred fifty (150) feet distant from the property on which the service is desired, the person desiring service shall pay the total cost of the extension required to provide service, less the cost of the first one hundred fifty-foot of extension. However, in no event shall the cost paid be less than the pro rata charge on the frontage served. That portion of the cost paid above the pro rata charge on the frontage shall be refunded as provided in this article for approach mains. 
 When two (2) or more individuals desire water and/or sewer service, and the nearest individual is more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from existing lines, the city will extend the service lines a distance equivalent to that on which the pro rata charge is paid, plus one hundred fifty (150) feet for each individual pro rata payment when such distance is adequate to serve the individuals. In the determination of the distance necessary to serve the individuals, the distance across street intersections or property already served with other temporary service shall not be considered. 
(6)  Property in process of being platted. When property is being platted in accordance with the subdivision regulations of the city, the owners or developers of the property being platted and to be served by water and/or sewer shall pay the pro rata charge as calculated on the basis of the frontage to be served or the total costs of the extensions necessary to completely serve the property, whichever is greater. The extensions required to completely serve the property shall conform to the utility plan of the city and shall include the requirements for domestic service and fire protection service to the area through which the lines extend. That portion of the cost paid by the owners or developers which is in excess of the pro rata front-foot charges shall be refunded as provided in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 15-111)  
Sec. 20-222. - Size of service lines and meters. 
(a)  The pro rata charge is established to provide fire protection service from the street and domestic water and/or sewer service from the alley or comparable easements adjacent to the property. The size of the lines in the alleys or easements shall be adequate to provide for a maximum size water meter of one and one-half (1½) inches per lot for each seventy-five (75) feet of frontage. Payment of the pro rata charge shall permit the property owner to acquire a maximum water tap and meter of one and one-half (1½) inches or the equivalent in two (2) or more meters per lot of each seventy-five (75) feet of frontage. 
(b)  When water service larger than one and one-half (1½) inches is desired, the property owner desiring such service shall pay the additional cost of extending or reconstructing a line of adequate size to provide the service desired. Adequate size shall be considered as twice the diameter of the water tap requested. The additional cost for making such an extension shall be refunded only when property adjacent to the extension obtains services greater than one and one-half (1½) inches, after payment of their proportionate part of the cost of the original extension. 
(c)  Payment of the sewer pro rata charge provided in this article shall entitle the property owner to a sewer connection of four (4) inches in size per lot on each seventy-five (75) feet of frontage. 
(Code 1977, § 15-112)  
Sec. 20-223. - Location of service connection. 
(a)  Water and/or sewer service shall only be provided to property from dedicated alleys or comparable easements excepting in zoning districts, if any, where alleys or easements are not required. 
(b)  Water service for private fire protection systems requiring service lines greater than three-fourths the size of the waterline in the alley or easement may be provided from street mains with the person receiving such service paying the total cost, including paving repair where necessary because of the tap and extension to the property line. 
(Code 1977, § 15-113)  
Sec. 20-224. - Cost of large mains. 
When the utility plan of the city requires the extension of a size main that is larger than that determined by the city engineer as adequate to serve the property on which the pro rata charge is paid or to be paid, the city may, when funds are available, pay the cost in excess of that required to serve the property on which the pro rata charge is paid. 
(Code 1977, § 15-114)  
Sec. 20-225. - Cost of extensions. 
The estimated cost of water and/or sewer extensions required to serve the property on which the pro rata charge is to be paid shall be based on the plans for the extensions prepared by or approved by the city engineer, and the unit prices shall be those determined by the last competitive bids. The city shall use the unit prices included in this article for the determination of the value of the system installed by private contractor for the developer, or may, at the city's discretion, require the developer to receive competitive bids in accordance with the city's form, plans and specifications. The value allowed the developer toward payment of his pro rata charges, or for refunds as provided in this article, shall be determined by the unit prices as provided above, or, at the city's option, as determined by competitive bids. The cost of the extensions shall include engineering costs, materials, labor, paving repair, etc., which are necessary to complete the facility required to serve the property on which the pro rata charge is paid. 
(Code 1977, § 15-115)  
Sec. 20-226. - Installation by developers. 
(a)  The property owner or developer of a tract of land being platted and served by water and/or sewer may hire a private contractor to install the complete water and/or sewer facilities, including mains, approach mains, valves, manholes, hydrants, etc., except work that is required to be done by the city, such as: engineering, paving repair, wet connections, etc., all in accordance with the plans made or approved by and under the supervision of the city engineer. Payment for the work to be done by the city shall be made prior to the starting of any construction. 
(b)  The developer may construct the water and/or sewer improvements before the property is platted, in which case no security shall be required by the city; but upon filing the plat for record in the county clerk's office, and upon connection of the facilities to the existing city mains, the facilities shall become the property of the city as part of the pro rata payments for the service. 
(c)  When the developer chooses to construct the water and/or sewer facilities after the plat is filed for record in the county clerk's office, performance security shall be provided the city as required in this article. 
(d)  The developer shall provide the city with a copy of the contract between him and his contractor for the construction of the improvements for the development and shall, at the city's option, receive sealed competitive bids for such work in order to determine the fair value of the system. 
(Code 1977, § 15-116)  
Sec. 20-227. - Relinquishment of vested rights. 
Upon completion of the water and/or sewer facilities by private contractor and acceptance by the city, or upon completion by the city, the facilities so constructed shall become and remain the property of the city and shall be maintained as a part of its water and/or sewer system. No person shall acquire any vested rights under the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 15-117)  
Sec. 20-228. - Engineering for extension and payment of costs. 
(a)  The engineering work necessary to prepare plans and inspect the construction required to provide water and/or sewer service shall be done by the city engineering department or by a private professional registered engineer, and the work must be approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  The cost of the extension required to serve the property shall include the actual cost of engineering for the total construction, including inspection, and shall be paid for by the property owner or developer. Plans for the extensions shall conform to the ultimate utility plan, and shall include all necessary mains, lines and appurtenances required to provide domestic service and fire protection. No construction of water and/or sewer facilities will be started until the developer has provided property survey corners for all lots to be served by the extension. 
(c)  The city shall provide the property owner or developer with copies of plans and cost estimates upon request, and make a final breakdown of the actual quantities of materials and costs of work done when the developer has employed a private contractor to do the construction. If the engineering for water and/or sewer extensions is performed by a private engineer, such engineer shall furnish the city engineer with reproducible drawings as shall be requested, together with estimates of quantities of materials and costs. The cost estimates as provided shall be subject to change to conform to the actual work required to satisfy conditions existing at the location, except when the city does the work; in which case, the estimated costs will be the actual cost to the developer. 
(Code 1977, § 15-118)  
Sec. 20-229. - Contracts. 
Contracts for refunds, as provided in this article shall be executed by the developer and the mayor or city manager. The term of the contracts shall be fifteen (15) years, and the city shall not be liable for refunds after the expiration of the contract. No interest shall be paid by the city for any money on which refunds are due. 
(Code 1977, § 15-119)  
Sec. 20-230. - Refunds. 
(a)  When an approach main or boundary main is in an alley and the total cost of the extension is greater than the pro rata charge on the applicant's property, then the cost above the pro rata charge shall become refundable. 
(b)  Computation shall be made in such a manner that when eighty-five (85) percent of the lots served by the extension have paid their pro rata charge, the original applicant will have received all of the original deposit in excess of his pro rata charge in consonance with contract provisions. Furthermore, when there is a refund to be paid on the installation of an approach main and/or a boundary main located in a street, this refund shall be made in such a manner that all of the refundable money will be returned at the rate of one (1) unit for each fifty (50) feet of approach main and/or boundary main when there has been a pro rata payment on property outside the area originally served. 
(c)  Refunds of monies paid in excess of the pro rata charge and earned during the preceding six (6) months shall be made within thirty (30) days after April first or October first of each year. Refunds shall be earned when pro rata payments have been made for property on which the refund is based. 
(d)  When an owner or developer has a refund due as a result of payment of the pro rata charge on adjacent property which he also owns, this earned refund may be credited to the pro rata payment due on the adjacent property at the time the adjacent property is platted. 
(e)  When temporary lines or facilities are constructed as an expedient to developing a particular area (such as across easements within the subdivision on which no frontage can be connected) or when sewers are constructed which otherwise are not required in the ultimate plan of development for the sanitary sewer system, the developer shall bear the total cost including the pro rata charge, without refund. 
(Code 1977, § 15-120)  
Sec. 20-231. - Extensions beyond the pro rata areas. 
The city may extend water and/or sewer through an entire block upon payment of the pro rata charge on one (1) or more lots if the city engineer determines that it is more economical than making the extension in several short sections as pro rata payments are received. 
(Code 1977, § 15-121)  
Sec. 20-232. - Exception to the front-foot rule. 
The intent and purpose of this article is to provide an equitable charge for water and sanitary sewer connections by means of a proportionate distribution of the cost of water and sanitary sewer main extensions in the city on a front-foot basis. When property or a tract of land is so situated or shaped that the front-foot rule creates an inequitable basis between it and other tracts of land in the city, in such event, the city engineer shall determine the proper charges in accordance with the intent and purpose of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 15-122)  
Sec. 20-233. - Joint extension of water and sewer mains. 
With the exception of cases where the applicant has an adequate private water supply or a satisfactory sewage disposal system, the city shall not extend water or sewer services unless both services are provided in the area, except in those cases where either city sanitary sewer mains or water mains are not accessible. All connections with existing city water mains shall be made by the city water department at the direction of the superintendent. 
(Code 1977, § 15-123)  
Sec. 20-234. - Extension by city at own expense. 
When, due to the absence of water in densely-populated areas and other specified locations, the city council may, after due investigation and consideration, make it the express policy of the council to extend water and sanitary sewer mains into these areas at its own expense, when money is available for such purposes, without a deposit being required from the property owner, when the public welfare would be best served by making the water and sewer extension, or when extension would avoid or eliminate extremely unhealthful conditions which are contributing factors to epidemics. However, when lines are extended following such a resolution, the property owner shall be required to pay the pro rata charges established by this article when such property is connected to the water and sewer mains. 
(Code 1977, § 15-124)  
Sec. 20-235. - Provisions for deferred payments. 
When the owner of a lot or other undivided parcel of land has duly requested in writing, on forms provided by the city engineer, water and/or sewer extensions abutting the tract of land described in the application, and the land meets the following specifications: (1) the area does not exceed one (1) acre; and (2) the owner has not secured an extension under this provision within the next preceding twelve-month period; then when the parcel of land is connected with city water service, or is to be connected with such service upon the completion of the requested extension, the city engineer is authorized to determine the applicable pro rata payment to be made for such extension and to provide the extension. However, this pro rata payment may be authorized only when: 
(1)  The owner-applicant of the parcel of land has paid to the city a minimum initial payment of fifteen (15) percent of the total pro rata charge; and 
(2)  The owner of the parcel of land shall have executed a contract with the city creating a valid lien against the parcel of land described in the application to secure payment of the deferred part of the pro rata charge within thirty-six (36) months, with minimum monthly payments of ten dollars ($10.00) each, the annual unpaid balance to bear prime plus one (1) percent interest, with a ninety-day adjustment; and further providing for accelerated maturity with customary provisions applicable to default in payments; and further providing that the city water and sewer department is authorized to discontinue water service to the described parcel of land and any premises thereon located, if, for any reason, the water service bill and/or any deferred pro rata charge is not paid when due. The contract is to contain such other provisions as the mayor or city manager may deem expedient and in the public interest. The mayor or city manager is further authorized to prescribe and approve the form of application provided for in this article, the form of contract required, and such other instruments and requirements as may be deemed necessary or expedient in making the provisions of this section adequately effective. 
(Code 1977, § 15-125)  
Sec. 20-236. - Sewer extension without water extension. 
If a property owner does not have city water service, or does not propose to have city water service, but the property owner desires city sewer service, then, in that event, if such property owner is otherwise entitled to a sewer extension under this article, such property owner may secure sewer service (without city water service) upon the election of the property owner to pay the pro rata sewer charge properly chargeable to the property as a deferred pro rata sewer rental charge. However, the acceptance and approval of such election by the city council shall be contingent upon such property owner-applicant for sewer extension agreeing to the following: 
(1)  The applicant shall pay fifteen (15) percent of the sewer pro rata charge with the execution of the agreement and shall pay the balance as a deferred pro rata sewer rental charge in equal payments of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) a month over a period of not more than thirty-six (36) months, each payment being due and payable on the first day of each succeeding month thereafter until the balance and interest, if any, are fully paid. The annual unpaid balance is to bear prime plus one (1) percent interest, with a ninety-day adjustment until fully paid. The failure of applicant to make any such payment as, and when, same shall become due, shall, at the option of the city, without notice, mature the indebtedness created thereby; and such amount plus a reasonable attorney's fee, if collection is necessary by an attorney, shall become due and payable at once as to the balance due to the city. If such a default occurs in payment by the applicant, the city and/or its agents, servants or employees are hereby authorized, without notice to the applicant (and applicant expressly waives notice), to disconnect the sewer extension serving applicant's parcel of land; and, thereafter, the city shall be under no duty to furnish sewer service to the applicant's parcel of land until the applicant has paid all monies due to the city, as well as the cost of disconnection from and reconnection to the city, sewer system, as estimated and/or determined by the city engineer. The applicant agrees at all times to defend, indemnify and otherwise hold the city, its agents, servants and employees harmless of and from any and all claims, demands, actions, causes of action, suits at law, inequity and costs of whatsoever kind or nature which may grow out of, relate to or in any manner be connected with the making and carrying out of this agreement, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, disconnection, connection and/or reconnection of sewer extension to applicant's parcel of land. Payments made pursuant to this agreement shall be made in addition to any uniform sewer charge which may be imposed or assessed by the city against property owners in the city. 
(2)  The applicant gives and grants to the city an express contract lien upon the parcel of land and premises and improvements therein provided for to secure payment of the indebtedness therein created; and the applicant agrees to the fixing of a mechanic's materialman's lien upon the parcel of land and premises to secure the indebtedness until such indebtedness is fully paid off and discharged. Applicant thereby waives in favor of the indebtedness all homestead exemption, if any, in any manner pertaining to the parcel of land. The applicant authorizes the recording of such instrument in the office of the county clerk. 
(3)  Such agreement is made subject to all applicable provisions of ordinances, resolutions and regulations with respect to sewer service, extension, connection, disconnection, reconnection, construction, reconstruction, maintenance and any other matters related thereto. 
(4)  The applicant warrants and represents that no extensions for sewer have been secured for the deferred pro rata rental charge from the city within the next preceding twelve-month period to the date of such agreement. Such agreement and all obligations thereunder shall be binding upon the applicant and his successors, heirs, assigns and occupants of the premises of the applicant. 
(5)  If there are any other encumbrances except taxes against the parcel of land, the applicant shall, if possible and if requested to do so by the city, secure from the holder of encumbrance a subordination of the encumbrance to the lien created by this agreement. 
(6)  The mayor or city manager is hereby authorized to execute all contracts and other instruments necessary or convenient to the carrying out of the purposes of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 15-126)  
Secs. 20-237—20-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEM FACILITY ACCESS FEES 
 
Sec. 20-261. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building permit means a permit application required by the city for the construction of any new dwelling or building. 
Commercial means any customer served by a single meter or meters that is engaged in any type of business, except the processing, fabrication or manufacturing of any goods or products and any type of dwelling unit. 
Commercial-multiple unit means any customer that has a single meter or meters serving more than one (1) business per meter and/or three (3) or more dwelling units per meter. 
General benefit facility means the wastewater facilities that provide utility services and benefits common to all customers of the utility; this includes wastewater treatment plants, control systems and appurtenances, and all major collectors and interceptors that are eighteen (18) inches and greater in diameter. 
Industrial means any customer served by one (1) or more meters whose sewage contains wastewater from a product fabricated, processed or manufactured by the customer. 
Industrial-monitored class means any customer determined by the director to be a producer of any sewage having a suspended solids or B.O.D. content which is significantly in excess of that found in normal sewage, but is otherwise acceptable into the city sanitary sewerage system. 
Initial wastewater service means the first wastewater service to be provided at a specific property location. 
Living area means the enclosed area of a dwelling that does not include garages, carports and outside patios or porches. 
Meter means a device that measures the quantity of water used. The types of meters used are those described in the American Water Works Association C700 through C703 and M6 Standards. 
Public utility means any person or entity including a municipal corporation, water supply or sewer service corporation, or any other political subdivision of the state, or their lessees, trustees and receivers, owning or operating for compensation equipment or facilities for the provision of potable water to the public or for the collection and treatment of sewage for the public, but does not include any person or entity not otherwise a public utility that furnishes the services only to itself or its employees or tenants as an incident of that employee's service or tenancy when that service is not resold to or used by others. 
Residential means any customer living in a dwelling having the necessary living facilities for one (1) unit that is served by a single water meter. This class also includes a duplex dwelling where no more than two (2) living units are supplied water through a single meter. 
Superintendent means the superintendent of the water department of the city or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 379, § 1, 6-9-87) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 20-262. - System facility access fee. 
(a)  No person or other entity shall be entitled to initial wastewater service until payment of the appropriate system facility access fee as set forth in section 20-263. Payment of the system access fee is required as a condition precedent to establishing initial wastewater service. All other conditions for initiating service, such as deposit requirements, tap fees, extension agreements, and service charges as covered elsewhere in this Code and are in addition to the system access fee. 
(b)  Prior to initial connection of any building, structure, premises or lot after June 9, 1987 to the city's wastewater system, the owner of that building, structure, premise or lot shall pay the system facility access fee as established in section 20-263, such fee to be paid in cash prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
(Ord. No. 379, § 2, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 20-263. - Schedule of fees. 
(a)  The system facility access fees for the residential class using a five-eighths by three-fourths-inch water meter shall be those as set out in Table I below: 
TABLE I 
Living Area
(sq. ft.) 	Wastewater System
Access Fee 
Under 1000 	$ 88.00 
1001—1200 	102.00 
1201—1400 	116.00 
1401—1600 	130.00 
1601—1800 	144.00 
1801—2000 	158.00 
Over 2000 	172.00 
 
(b)  The system facility access fees for all other customer classes and the residential class using a water meter larger than five-eighths by three-fourths-inch meter shall be those as set out in Table II below: 
TABLE II 
Wastewater System Facility Access Fees 
Meter Size 	?" x ¾" 
Simple 	1" 
Simple 	1½" 
Simple 	2" 
Simple 	2" 
Turbine 	3" 
Simple 	3" 
Turbine 	4" 
Turbine 	6" 
Turbine 	8" 
Turbine 	10" 
Turbine 
Equivalent Meter
Factor 	1 	2.5 	5 	8 	10 	15 	24 	42 	92 	160 	250 
Residential 	See Tbl. I 	$ 324 	$ 649 	$ 1,038 	$ 1,297 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 
Commercial 	409 	1,022 	2,044 	3,270 	4,088 	$ 6,131 	$ 9,810 	$ 17,168 	$ 37,606 	$ 65,402 	$102,190 
Comm. Multi-Unit 	481 	1,202 	2,403 	3,845 	4,807 	7,210 	11,536 	20,188 	44,222 	76,908 	120,168 
Industrial 	194 	485 	969 	1,551 	1,938 	2,907 	4,652 	8,141 	17,832 	31,011 	48,455 
Indus.-Monitored Class 	2,740 	6,849 	13,698 	21,917 	27,396 	41,094 	65,751 	115,064 	252,044 	438,338 	684,902 
 
(c)  The full amount of the fees set out in this article, as amended from time-to-time through cost-of-service-based studies, will be phased-in gradually as specified below: 
For City
Fiscal Year Beginning
October First 	Percentage of System Facility
Access Fee in Effect During
Fiscal Year to be Charged
for Wastewater 
1986 	20 
1987 	40 
1988 	60 
1989 	80 
1990 	100  
 
(Ord. No. 379, § 3, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 20-264. - Private and public facilities. 
(a)  If any property within or without the city's corporate limits utilized a water well, a septic tank or an individual waste disposal system and the property owner requests to be connected to the city's wastewater system, the customer shall be assessed the fee established by this article before the property is connected to the city's wastewater system. Should the property owner request only a wastewater connection while retaining a private water well, the appropriate fee to be assessed will be determined by the director of the city water and sewer department. 
(b)  A system facility access fee will not be assessed to any property which is receiving service from a wastewater treatment plant owned by a public utility when such public utility is acquired by the city and connected into the city's wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 379, § 4, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 20-265. - Clarifications and determinations. 
Where a question arises as to the classification of a customer's service class, the superintendent shall make the determination in accordance with the existing city code as of the date the question arises. Any customer shall have the right to request in writing from the superintendent an interpretation or clarification of the basis upon which a system facility access fee was assessed. 
(Ord. No. 379, § 5, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 20-266. - Increasing size of meter. 
(a)  If a customer requests an increase in meter size to an existing service, the customer shall pay the fee difference between the new level of service and the existing level of service as set out in section 20-262. The additional fee shall be paid prior to the installation of the enlarged meter service. 
(b)  A request for additional sewer connections for improved property shall not result in the assessment of an additional system facility access fee, so long as no increase in the size of the waste meter is made. 
(Ord. No. 379, § 6, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 20-267. - Dedicated funds. 
All systems facility access fees, together with all interest derived therefrom, that are generated by this article shall be deposited into a dedicated fund account to be used solely for the financing of the construction, design, inspection and other related expenses of general benefit wastewater capital improvement projects. 
(Ord. No. 379, § 7, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 20-268. - Assessment on application not required, conditions. 
No system facility access fee shall be assessed on an application for initial wastewater service provided: 
(1)  Such application for the initial wastewater service was presented to the city prior to June 9, 1987; 
(2)  The application for a building permit for the same property as the initial wastewater service application was presented to the city within twelve (12) months from June 9, 1987. 
(Ord. No. 379, § 8, 6-9-87)  
Sec. 20-269. - Conflicting provisions, repeal. 
This article shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances and of the Code of the city as amended, except where the provisions of this article are in direct conflict with the provisions of such ordinances and such Code, in which event conflicting provisions of such ordinances and such Code are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 379, § 9, 6-9-87)  
Secs. 20-270—20-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTRIC RATES 
 
Sec. 20-291. - Rate schedules approved. 
The Texas Electric Service Company, having filed a set of rate schedules with the city secretary, the same are hereby approved as schedules of rates under which the company is authorized to collect charges from its customers for the sale of electric service within the corporate limits of the city, until such time as the rate schedules may be changed, modified, amended or withdrawn with approval of the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 15-94)  
Sec. 20-292. - Filing of schedules constitutes notice. 
The filing of the rate schedules and the approval of same by the city council, in the manner herein provided, shall constitute notice to the consumers of electricity within the city of the availability and application of such rate schedules to all electric service provided by the Texas Electrical Service Company beginning with the first meter reading made on and after December 1, 1975, and applied to all bills calculated and rendered from meter readings made on an after January 1, 1976. The rate schedules are hereby attached and made a part hereof for all purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 15-92)  
Sec. 20-293. - In case lower rates are approved by Fort Worth. 
If corresponding rate schedules lower than rate schedules approved in this article are approved by the City of Fort Worth and/or if the same or substitute rate schedules are made effective later than the effective date approved in this article then such rate schedules and effective date as approved by the City of Fort Worth are automatically substituted for the rate schedules and effective date approved in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 15-93)  
Secs. 20-294—20-315. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - GAS RATES 
 
Sec. 20-316. - Gas rates adopted. 
(a)  Rates. Subject to applicable adjustments, the following rates are the maximum applicable to residential and commercial customers per meter per month or for any part of a month for which gas service is available at the same location. 
Residential: 
Customer charge: $8.00 
All consumption at $3.8301 Mcf 
If the service period is less than twenty-eight (28) days in a given month the customer charge shall be $0.2857 times the number of days' service. 
Residential off-peak sale discount: 
An off-peak sales discount of $0.25 per Mcf will apply to residential customers' volume purchased in excess of 8 Mcf for the billing months May through October. 
Commercial: 
Customer charge: $14.00 
First 20 Mcf at $4.1150 per Mcf 
First 30 Mcf at $3.8150 per Mcf 
First 50 Mcf at $3.6650 per Mcf 
If the service period is less than twenty-eight (28) days in a given month the customer charge shall be $0.5000 times the number of days' service. 
(b)  Gas cost adjustment. The residential and commercial rates set forth above shall be adjusted upward or downward from a base of $2.7535 per Mcf by a gas cost adjustment factor expressed as an amount per thousand cubic feet (Mcf) of natural gas for changes in the intercompany city gate rate charge as authorized by the Railroad Commission of Texas or other regulatory body having jurisdiction for gas delivered to the City of Everman distribution system, according to the following: 
(1)  The city gate rate increase or decrease applicable to current billing month residential and commercial sales shall be estimated to the nearest $0.0001 per Mcf based upon: 
a.  The city gate rate estimated to be applicable to volumes purchased during the current calendar month, expressed to the nearest $0.0001 per Mcf (shown below as "Re"), less 
b.  The base city gate rate of $2.7535 per Mcf, multiplied by 
c.  A volume factor of 1.0216 determined in establishing the above rates for the distribution system as the ratio of adjusted purchased volumes divided by adjusted sales volumes. 
(2)  Correction of the estimated adjustment determined by subsection (b)(1) above shall be included as part of the adjustment for the second following billing month. The correcting factor (shown below as "C") shall be expressed to the nearest $0.0001 per Mcf based upon: 
a.  The corrected adjustment amount based upon the actual city gate rate, less 
b.  The estimated adjustment amount billed under subsection (b)(1) above, divided by 
c.  Distribution system residential and commercial sales Mcf recorded on the company's books during the prior year for the month that the correction is included as part of the adjustment. 
In summary, the gas cost adjustment (GCA) shall be determined to the nearest $0.0001 per Mcf by subsections (b)(1) plus (b)(2) as follows: 
GCA = [(1.0216) (Re - $2.7535) + C] 
(c)  Weather normalization adjustment. Effective with bills rendered during the October 2000 through May 2001 billing months, and annually thereafter for the October through May billing months, the above residential and commercial consumption rates for gas service, as adjusted, shall be subject to a weather normalization adjustment each billing cycle to reflect the impact of variations in the actual heating degree days during the period included in the billing cycle from the normal level of heating degree days during the period included in the billing cycle. The weather normalization adjustment will be implemented on a per Mcf basis and will be applicable to the heating load of each customer during the period included in the billing cycle. It will be determined separately for residential and commercial customers based on heating degree data recorded by the D/FW Airport weather station. The adjustment to be made for each billing cycle will be calculated according to the following formula: 
		NDD - ADD 	
WNA 	= 	____________ 	× M × AHL 
		ADD 	
 
Where: 	WNA 	= 	Weather normalization adjustment 
	NDD 	= 	Normal heating degree days during the period covered by the billing cycle 
	ADD 	= 	Actual heating degree days during the period covered by the billing cycle 
	M 	= 	Weighted average margin per Mcf included in the commodity portion of the rates effective during the October through May billing months 
	AHL 	= 	Actual heating load per customer 
 
The heating load to which the weather normalization adjustment is to be applied for residential and commercial customers shall be determined by subtracting the base load for the customer from the total volume being billed to the customer. The base load of a customer is the average level of nonheating consumption. 
The weather normalization adjustment is subject to a fifty (50) percent limitation factor based on temperatures being fifty (50) percent warmer or colder than normal. The weather normalization adjustment will be calculated to the nearest $0.0001 per Mcf. 
(d)  Tax adjustment. The residential and commercial rates set forth above shall be adjusted upward or downward for changes in municipal franchise fees, street and alley assessment and state gross receipts taxes imposed by Sections 182.021 through 182.024 of the Texas Tax Code occurring after the effective date of this section [December 19, 2001]. 
(e)  Schedule of service charges. In addition to the aforesaid rates, the company shall have the right to collect the following charges: 
(1)  Connection charge. The company shall charge and collect the sum of: 
Business hours ..... $35.00 
After hours ..... 52.50 
For each reconnection of gas service where service has been discontinued at the same premises for any reason, for the initial inauguration of service, and for each inauguration of service when the billable party has changed, with the following exceptions. 
a.  For a builder who uses gas temporarily during construction or for display purposes. 
b.  Whenever gas service has been temporarily interrupted because of system outage or service work done by company; or 
c.  For any reason deemed necessary for company operations. 
(2)  Read for change charge. The company may assess a maximum "read for change" charge of twelve dollars ($12.00) when it is necessary for a company employee to read the meter at a currently served location because of a change in the billable party. 
(3)  Returned check charge. A returned check handling charge of sixteen dollars and twenty-five cents ($16.25) is made for each check returned to the company for any reason. 
(4)  Delinquent notification charge. A charge of four dollars and seventy-five cents ($4.75) shall be made for each trip by a company employee to a customer's residence or place of business when there is an amount owed to the company that is past due. This charge shall not be made when the trip is required for safety investigations or when gas service has been temporarily interrupted because of system outage or service work done by company. 
(5)  Main line extension rate. The charge for extending mains beyond the free limit established by franchise for residential, commercial, and industrial customers shall be the actual cost per foot of the extension. 
(Code 1977, § 15-101; Ord. No. 428, § 1, 7-2-91; Ord. No. 436, §§ 2, 3, 9-1-92; Ord. No. 457, §§ 1—6, 8-22-95; Ord. No. 505, §§ 2—6, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 582, Att. A, 5-16-06)  
Sec. 20-317. - Rate may be changed, etc. 
The rates set forth in section 20-316, may be changed and amended by either the city or the company furnishing gas in the manner provided by law. Service under this article is subject to the orders of regulatory bodies having jurisdiction, and to the company's rules and regulations currently on file in the company's office. 
(Code 1977, § 15-102)  
Secs. 20-318—20-320. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - UTILITY AND TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES WITHIN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 20-321. - Definitions. 
In this article: 
AASHTO means American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
Abandon and its derivatives means the facilities installed in the right-of-way (including by way of example, but not limited to: poles, wires, conduit, manholes, handholes, cuts, network nodes and node support poles, or portion thereof) that have been left by user in an unused or non-functioning condition for more than one hundred twenty (120) consecutive calendar days unless, after notice to provider, provider has established to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that the applicable facilities, or portion thereof, is still in active use. 
ADA means Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended. 
Alley shall have the same meaning as street or right-of-way, depending upon context. 
Ancillary means secondary, supporting, or subordinate. 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
Applicable codes means: (i) uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization; and (ii) local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with this chapter. 
Applicant means a person submitting an application, proposal or notice to the city for a license, franchise, permit or notice to install facilities or equipment or work in the rights-of-way. 
Application or proposal are synonymous for the purposes of this chapter. An "application" or "proposal" means the process by which the applicant submits a request and indicates a desire to be granted a license, permit or franchise for all, or a part, of the city. An "application" or "proposal" includes all written documentation, and official statements and representations, in whatever form, made by an applicant to the city. A casual inquiry by a company concerning right-of-way use will not be considered an application or proposal and submissions will not be considered an application or proposal unless they meet the requirements of this chapter. 
Assignment of an authorization or transfer of an authorization means any transaction or action which effectively or actually transfers the authorization or franchise or changes operational or managerial control from one (1) person or entity to another. 
Authorization or agreement to use the right-of-way means a grant of authority allowing a person to occupy any portion of a street, right-of-way, or easement owned or controlled by the city, and may be for a limited period of time or for a specific purpose. 
Certificated telecommunications provider means a person who has been issued a certificate of convenience and necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority by the commission to offer local exchange telephone service or a person who provides voice service. 
City means the City of Everman, Texas. 
City council means the city council of the city. 
City manager means the city manager of the City of Everman, Texas. 
Collocate and collocation mean the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to an existing pole, structure, device or appurtenance, as allowed by state or federal law, municipal authorization or other legal authorization. 
Commission means the Public Utility Commission of Texas. 
Communications network means a component of facility that is, wholly or partly, physically located within a public right-of-way and that is used to provide video programming, cable, voice, or data services. 
Consumer price index means the annual revised consumer price index for all urban consumers for Texas, as published by the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
Concealment or camouflaged means any wireless facility or pole that is covered, painted, disguised, or blended into to its environment or otherwise hidden or kept from sight such that the wireless facility blends into the surrounding environment and is visually unobtrusive. A concealed or camouflaged wireless facility or pole also includes any wireless facility or pole conforming to the surrounding area in which the wireless facility or pole is located and may include, but is not limited to, hidden beneath a facade, blended with surrounding area, designed or painted to match the supporting area, or disguised with artificial tree branches. 
DAS or Distributed Antenna System shall be included as a type of network node and have the same meaning as "network node." 
Decorative pole or decorative streetlight means a streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to nondiscriminatory municipal codes. 
Decorative traffic signal pole means a traffic signal pole other than standard galvanized supports, that is painted, or powder coated with specially designed colors for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenance or attachments are allowed other than those necessary for traffic control and operations. 
Direction of the city means all ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions, and regulations of the city that are not inconsistent with this article and that are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted. 
Director of finance means the director of finance of the city or the director's designated representative. 
Director of public works means the director of public works of the city or the director's designated representative. 
Disaster emergency or disaster or emergency means an imminent, impending, or actual natural or humanly induced situation wherein the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the city is threatened, and includes, but is not limited to, any declaration of emergency by city, state or federal governmental authorities. 
Easement may include any public easement or private easement or other compatible use, depending upon usage, whether created by dedication or by other means, for uses which include electric, gas, telecommunications, cable or public utility purposes. 
Emergency conditions means a situation that could not be reasonably anticipated, and (a) where customer service has been interrupted, or (b) imminent harm to property or persons exists if repair is not immediately commenced. 
Excavation permit means the document giving consent to construct, install, repair, relocate or remove particular facilities within the right-of-way. 
Facilities means the plant, equipment, and property, including, but not limited to, any and all lines, poles, mains, pipes, conduits, ducts, duct spaces, cables, wires, fibers, manholes, underground and overheard passageways and other equipment, structures, and appurtenances and all associated physical equipment located under, on, or above the surface of the ground within the right-of-way of the city and valves, and related facilities and equipment used or useful for the providing of utility services. 
FCC or Federal Communications Commission means the Federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate interstate communications by radio, television, wire, satellite, and cable on a national level. 
Fiber optic or fiber optic cable means a communication transmission medium that uses light to send data, high quality video and sound. 
Franchise or franchise agreement means the initial authorization, or subsequent renewal granted by the city in order for a person to construct, operate, and maintain a system in all, or part, of the city right-of-way. 
Franchise expiration means the date of expiration, or the end of the term, of a franchised user, as a provided under a franchise, permit, or license agreement. 
Franchise fee means the user fee or charge that the city requires as payment for using the streets, rights-of-way, public ways, and easements of the city. 
Gross receipts means any and all compensation which is derived by the user from the operation of the system, and which is attributable to the systems operations within the city as allowed by law. 
Highway right-of-way means right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway. 
Historic district means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under municipal, state, or federal law. 
Incidental in nature means that work which can be completed, consistent with applicable federal or state laws or regulations, without: (i) obstructing the flow of vehicular traffic on a street, alley, or sidewalk; (ii) the open cutting of a paved area of a city street or easement; or (iii) underground boring or jacking within the paved area of a city street. 
Law means common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance. 
Local means within the geographical boundaries of the City of Everman, Texas. 
Local exchange telephone service has the meaning assigned by Section 51.002, Texas Utilities Code. 
Mayor means the Mayor for the City of Everman, Texas. 
Macro tower means a guyed or self-supported pole or monopole greater than the height parameters prescribed by Texas Local Government Code Section 284.103 and that supports or is capable of supporting antennas. 
Micro network node means a network node that is not larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than eleven (11) inches. 
Municipality owned utility pole means a utility pole owned or operated by a municipally owned utility, as defined by Section 11.003, Utilities Code, and located in a public right-of-way. 
Municipal park means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by municipal code as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity. 
MUTCD means Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices 
Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term: (i) includes: (a) equipment associated with wireless communications; (ii) a radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and (b) coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation; and (ii) does not include: (a) an electric generator; (b) a pole; or (c) a macro tower. 
Network provider means: (i) a wireless service provider; or (ii) a person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider; (a) network nodes; or (b) node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. 
Node support pole means a pole as defined by Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
Park has the same meaning as "municipal park." 
Permit means a document issued by the city authorizing installation, removal, modification and other work for user's equipment or facilities in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. 
Person means a natural person, corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, or other such entity. 
Pole means a service pole, municipally owned pole, node support pole, or other utility pole, and shall include network node support pole. 
PROWAG means the Public Rights-of-way Accessibility Guidelines. 
Person means a natural person, corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, or other such entity. From context within sections of this chapter, it refers to persons using, applying or seeking to use the right-of-way. 
Provider has the same meaning as "Network Provider." 
Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the municipality has an interest. The term does not include the airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
Public Right-of-Way Management Ordinance means this article VIII, of the Everman City Code and includes all other ordinances that comply with Chapters 283 and 284 of the Texas Local Government Code or other state laws referencing right-of-way management ordinances or regulations. 
Registration means the document giving consent to own and operate facilities within the right-of-way. 
Service pole means a pole, other than a municipally owned utility pole, owned or operated by a municipality and located in a public right-of-way, including: (1) a pole that supports traffic control functions; (ii) a structure signage; (iii) a pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and (iv) a pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network nodes. 
Small cell shall be included as a type of network node and have the same meaning as "network node." 
State means the State of Texas. 
Street means only the portion of the right-of-way with a specially prepared surface used for vehicular travel, which surface may be concrete, asphalt or other material commonly used to prepare a surface for vehicular travel, and is limited to the area between the inside of the curb (when there is a curb) to the inside of the opposite curb, and does not include the curb area or the area between the two (2) parallel edges of the surface used for vehicular travel where there is no curb. A street is generally part of, but less than, or smaller in width than the size or width of the right-of-way. A street does not include the curb, sidewalk, or ditch, if any is present either at time or permitting or if added later. Streets shall be understood to be synonymous with alleys and the definition includes alleys. 
SWPPP shall mean Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan. 
TAS means Texas Accessibility Standards. 
Thoroughfare shall have the same meaning as "street." 
TMUTCD means Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
Traffic signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
Transport facility means each transmission path physically within right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
U.S.C. means United States Code. 
User means a person or organization that owns, places or uses facilities occupying the whole or a part of a public street or right-of-way, depending on the context. User does not refer to city unless specified. 
Utility pole means a pole that provides: (i) electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or (ii) services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by Section 51.002 of the Texas Utilities Code. 
Utility provider means a business that offers a public utility service, including, but not limited to, gas, electricity, cable, or telecommunications services. 
Visibility triangle or sight distance triangle means the triangular area adjacent to the intersection of any two (2) or more public streets, public alleys or driveways within which no obstruction may be places which would block the sight lines for vehicular, pedestrian, or bicyclist traffic, as defined in the current edition of AASHTO Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. The visibility triangle shall not contain any visual or physical impediments or obstructions to the vertical view up to seven (7) feet in height above the adjacent roadway. 
Voice service means voice communications services provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right-of-way, without regard to the delivery technology, including internet protocol technology. The term does not include voice service provided by a commercial mobile service provider as defined by 47 U.S.C. Section 332(d). 
Wireless service means any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of wi-fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless services to the public. 
Wireless facilities means "micro network notes," "network nodes," and "node support poles" as defined in Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 1, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), 9-10-19)  
Sec. 20-322. - Scope of article. 
(a)  This article governs the location, placement, installation, repair, maintenance and removal of all utility facilities within the right-of-way of the city. 
(b)  Any utility provider with a current, unexpired franchise, agreement or other authorization from the city to use the right-of-way that is in effect at the time this article takes effect shall continue to operate under and comply with that grant until (i) the grant expires, or (ii) it is terminated by mutual agreement. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 2, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-323. - Findings and purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to: 
(a)  Assist in the management of facilities placed in, on or over the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact and other adverse effects, and the costs to the citizens resulting from the placement of facilities within the public rights-of-way; 
(b)  Govern the use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way; 
(c)  Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(d)  Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the city; 
(e)  Preserve the physical integrity of the streets and highways; 
(f)  Control the orderly flow of vehicles and pedestrians; 
(g)  Keep track of the different entities using the rights-of-way to prevent interference between them; and 
(h)  Protect the safety, security, appearance, and condition of the rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 3, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-324. - Registration required. 
A person commits an offense if the person owns or operates facilities within the right-of-way within the city without first having obtained a registration from the city or having a contract or franchise with the city to operate facilities within the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 4, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-325. - Application for registration. 
(a)  To obtain registration, a person must submit an application on a form provided by the director of public works. The applicant must be the person who will own the facilities. 
(b)  The applicant for a license shall furnish the city the following information which shall be subscribed and sworn to before a notary public: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  Trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the contact person for the user; 
(4)  The name, address and telephone number of any contractor or subcontractor, if known, who will be working in the right-of-way on behalf of the applicant; 
(5)  The name(s) and telephone number of an emergency contact who shall be available twenty-four (24) hours a day; 
(6)  Proof of insurance and bonds, as follows: 
a.  Worker's compensation insurance meeting applicable statutory requirements and employers liability insurance with minimum limits of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each accident. 
b.  Comprehensive commercial general liability insurance with minimum limits of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) as the combined single limit for each occurrence of bodily injury, personal injury and property damage. The policy shall provide blanket contractual liability insurance for all written contracts and shall include coverage for products and completed operations liability, independent contractors liability; coverage for property damage from perils of explosion, collapse or damage to underground utilities, commonly known as XCU coverage. 
c.  Automobile liability insurance covering all owned, hired, and nonowned vehicles in use by applicant, its employees and agents, with personal protection insurance and property protection insurance to comply with the provisions of state law with minimum limits of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) as the combined single limit for each occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
d.  The coverage amounts set forth above may be met by a combination of underlying and umbrella policies so long as in combination the limits equal or exceed those stated. 
e.  The city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the State of Texas or letters written by the applicant in those instances where the state does not issue such letters, which provide the same coverage as required herein, so long as the applicant demonstrates by written information to the director of finance that it has adequate financial resources to be a self-insured entity. 
f.  All policies other than those for worker's compensation shall be written on an occurrence and not on a claims made basis and shall name the city, its officers and employees as additional insureds. 
g.  Applicant shall submit certificates of insurance for each insurance policy applicant is required to obtain to comply with this subsection to the director of public works each year during the term of the registration. 
h.  All insurance policies shall contain the following endorsement: 
"At least 30 days prior written notice shall be given to the City of Everman by the insurer of any intention not to renew such policy or to cancel, replace or materially alter same, such notice to be given by registered mail." 
i.  All insurance shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, insured by insurers licensed to do business by the State of Texas. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated A+ or better by A.M. Best Company. 
j.  The applicant shall file an annual surety bond which will be valid each year construction will occur through one (1) full year after the completion of the construction. The surety bond shall be issued by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Texas in the amount of the estimated amount of the cost to restore the right-of-way for the work anticipated to be done in that year, in the event the registration holder leaves a job site in the right-of-way unfinished, incomplete or unsafe. 
k.  A utility provider with a franchise in effect on the date of this article satisfies the requirements of this subsection if the providers franchise adequately provides insurance and bonds. 
(7)  A copy of the applicant's traffic control plan and policy for work performed within the right-of-way. 
(8)  Such other information as the director of public works may determine is reasonably necessary. 
(c)  Review of small nodes applications. The city shall review applications for network nodes, node support poles and transport facilities in light of their conformity with applicable law and city code and shall issue such permits on nondiscriminatory terms and conditions subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Within thirty (30) days of receiving an application for a network node or node support pole, or ten (10) days for a transport facility, the city shall determine and notify the applicant whether the application is complete; or if incomplete, the city must specifically identify the missing information in such notification. There shall be no fee charged for completion and resubmittal of an application. 
(2)  The city shall make its final decision to approve or deny a complete application no later than (i) twenty-one (21) days after receipt of a complete application for a transport facility, (ii) sixty (60) days after receipt of a complete application for a network node; and (iii) one hundred fifty (150) days after receipt of a completed application for a new node support pole. 
(3)  The city shall advise the applicant in writing of its final decision, and, if denied, the basis for that denial, including specific provisions of city code or applicable law on which the denial was based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the city denies the application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city and resubmit the application within thirty (30) days of the denial without paying an additional application fee. The city shall approve or deny the revised application within ninety (90) days of receipt of the amended application. The subsequent review by the city shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the original denial. 
(4)  An applicant seeking to collocate network nodes may, at the applicant's discretion, file a consolidated application and receive permits for up to thirty (30) network nodes. Provided however, the city's denial of any node within a single application shall not affect other nodes submitted in the same application. The city shall grant permits for any and all nodes in a single application that it does not deny, subject to the requirements of this section. 
(d)  Review of eligible facilities requests. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city shall approve and may not deny applications for eligible facilities requests within sixty (60) days according to the procedures established under 47 CFR 1.40001(c). 
(Ord. No. 496, § 5, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 736, 2(Att. A), 9-10-19)  
Sec. 20-326. - Municipal authorization required; registration; issuance or denial of registration; compensation and fees. 
(a)  This article does not constitute or create authority to place, reconstruct, or alter facilities in, on, or over the public rights-of-way, and said authority must be obtained by separate instrument in accordance with this section or by operation of other laws. 
(b)  Authorization required municipal authorization or agreement shall be required, except when clearly preempted by state law. Any person with a current, unexpired consent, franchise, agreement, or other authorization from the city (grant) to use the public rights-of-way that is in effect at the time this ordinance takes effect shall continue to operate under and comply with that grant until the grant expires or until it is terminated by mutual agreement of the city and the person, or is terminated as otherwise provided for in law. 
(c)  Registration required: 
(1)  In order for the city to know which persons own facilities in the public rights-of-way within the city, each person who owns facilities shall register with the city and provide the following information at a minimum: 
a.  Person's name, 
b.  The current name, address, and telephone number(s) of a contact employed by and with decision-making authority for the person and who is available twenty-four (24) hours per day. 
c.  Furnish the city with a city planning department street map marked in such a manner as to evidence which streets the person has placed facilities. The information may be required to be furnished digitally. 
d.  Insurance information as required by section 20-348 "Insurance;" and 
e.  Any required bonds. 
(2)  Registration shall be updated annually in accordance with section 20-326 "Municipal authorization required; registration; issuance or denial of registration; compensation and fees." 
(3)  Registration shall be a prerequisite to issuance of a construction permit. Each person shall update and keep current his/her registration with the city at all times. 
(4)  Any person who does not maintain registration requirements with the city may not receive notices or updates, including any notices regarding abandonment of right-of-way. 
(5)  Failure to maintain registration requirements. In addition to all other legal penalties, including criminal penalties, failure to register or to maintain and update registration information may result in removal of facilities. 
(6)  Registration requirements may be met by fulfilling franchise requirements addressing the topics of this section. 
(7)  The director of public works shall issue a registration to the applicant if the director, after review of the application, determines that the applicant: 
a.  Has complied with all requirements for issuance of the registration; and 
b.  Has not made a false or inaccurate statement as to a material matter on the application for registration; or 
c.  Has in effect an existing franchise or agreement with the city. 
(8)  Compensation and fees: 
a.  Municipal right-of-way use shall be compensated as required by the state constitution, state law, municipal authorization, franchise, license or other agreement. 
b.  The city may structure due dates on payments in such a manner so as to be administratively efficient. 
c.  Application fees, as allowed by state law, for work or installations in the right-of-way shall be the fees set by the city council. Such fees may be set by ordinance, resolution, in the budget or by any other lawful means. 
d.  Failure to pay application fees, or failure of any payment to properly process shall result in the denial or withdrawal of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 736, 2(Att. A), 9-10-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), adopted September 10, 2019, repealed the former § 20-326, and enacted a new § 20-326 as set out herein. The former § 20-326 pertained to issuance or denial of registration and derived from Ord. No. 496, § 6, adopted July 11, 2000.  
Sec. 20-327. - Term of registration. 
A registration shall be valid for a period of one (1) year. A person may renew a license by making application as provided in section 20-325 hereof. A registration is not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 7, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-328. - Registration fee. 
Each registration holder shall pay to the city a fee for the use of the right-of-way in an amount as established by the city council in accordance with applicable City Charter provisions, franchise provisions, or the provisions of Texas Local Government Code Chapter 283. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 8, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-329. - Revocation of registration. 
The director of public works shall revoke a registration if the director determines that the registration holder has: 
(a)  Given false or inaccurate information on the application for registration or in a hearing concerning the registration; 
(b)  Refused to cooperate in the redress of grievances submitted to the registration holder in writing by the city or registration holders customers; or 
(c)  Violated the provisions of this article, or if the registration holder has a franchise with the city, violated the terms of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 9, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-330. - Appeal from denial or revocation of registration. 
If the director denies or revokes a right-of-way registration, the director shall give notice by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or registration holder. The applicant or registration holder may appeal the decision to deny or revoke by filing written notice with the city manager, within five (5) days after receipt of notice. The city manager shall mail or cause to be personally delivered, written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the person appealing. The notice shall be mailed to the address specified in the notice of appeal form. The city manager shall conduct a hearing and shall make a decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 10, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-331. - Plans of record. 
(a)  A utility provider which has facilities in the right-of-way existing as of the effective date of adoption of this article and has not provided the city "plans of record" plans shall provide such information to the director of public works not later than one (1) year after the effective date of this article in the format specified by the director and with as much detail and accuracy as required by the director. The registration holder shall submit "plans of record" in digital format (ArcInfo or AutoCAD) as well as written or in any other format requested by the director. The registration holder is not required to include in the submission matters such as capacity of lines, customers, or details which it demonstrates, to the reasonable satisfaction of the director of public works, to be confidential information or a breach of security, so long as the plans show the location and physical dimensions of the facilities. 
(b)  For facilities constructed after the effective date of this article, a registration holder shall provide the director of public works with "plans of record" within ninety (90) days of completion of facilities in the right-of-way. The plans shall be provided to the city in a format prescribed by the city, and in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a). 
(c)  The director of public works, for good cause, may waive all, or portions of the requirements of subsections (a) and (b). Determination of good cause shall include an assessment of 1) the utility provider's ability to feasibly and economically remove customer specific, proprietary or confidential information from its plans; and 2) the utility provider's standard business practice relative to the preparation of construction and plans of record. The director may impose conditions on the waiver. The director may reassess waivers from time to time to determine whether the utility provider's ability to provide plans of record has changed. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 11, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-332. - Tree trimming; temporary removal of facilities. 
(a)  A registration holder or its contractor may trim trees in or over the rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use and maintenance of its facilities. All tree trimming in rights-of-way and easements shall be performed in accordance with guidelines established by the National Arborist Association and International Society of Arboriculture. The registration holder shall trim the trees in such a manner to preserve as much vegetation and natural shape of trees as reasonably possible, and still accomplish a safe and effective tree trimming program. The registration holder shall make reasonable efforts to contact affected property owners prior to necessary tree trimming operations with standards promulgated by the city. Should the registration holder or its contractor fail to remove the trimmings within twenty-four (24) hours of trimming, unless a longer period is required for extraordinary conditions and conditions beyond the control of the registration holder, the city may remove the trimmings. Should the city remove the trimmings, the registration holder shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred within thirty (30) days of receipt of an invoice from the city. 
(b)  A registration holder shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures, if the city first gives written notice of not less than five (5) days. The expense of the temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party requesting and benefiting from the temporary rearrangement. The registration holder may require prepayment or the posting of a bond from the party requesting the temporary rearrangement. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 12, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-333. - Other facilities. 
A person commits an offense if the person places or causes to be placed any facilities within the right-of-way in any other manner than specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 13, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-334. - Excavation permit required; exceptions; fees; construction obligations; permit required. 
(a)  A person shall obtain an excavation permit prior to performing any excavation, construction, relocation, removal, installation, repair, or maintenance of facilities within the right-of-way. A permit is required for construction on new, replacement or upgrading of a utility provider's network in the right-of-way, either aerial or underground. 
(b)  The following work undertaken by a person does not require an excavation permit: 
(1)  Work that is incidental in nature; 
(2)  Work required by emergency conditions, if the registration holder complies with subsection (c) hereof; or 
(3)  Work that obstructs the flow of vehicular traffic on a street, alley, or sidewalk for less than two (2) hours, if the person has complied with the following requirements: 
a.  The registration holder has submitted a traffic control plan to the director of public works in a form approved by the director; 
b.  The director has approved the traffic control plan; 
c.  The work is performed in compliance with the traffic control plan; and 
d.  Unless the work is performed under emergency conditions, the person has given the director of public works hours written notice of the proposed work. 
(c)  When performing work required by emergency conditions, the registration holder shall notify the city's police dispatcher, as promptly as possible, and the dispatcher shall notify the director of public works. The director shall determine if any city employee shall be required to be present for on-site inspection during emergency repairs. A registration holder who performs the emergency work shall submit to the city as soon as practicable, a reasonably detailed description of the work performed in the right-of-way and an updated map of the facilities that were relocated, if any. 
(d)  Police powers related to small nodes applications. A person is subject to reasonable police power regulation of the city to manage its public rights-of-way in connection with the construction, expansion, reconstruction, maintenance, repair of facilities or other work in the public rights-of-way, pursuant to the city's rights as a custodian of public property, based upon the city's historic rights under state and federal laws. Such regulations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  At the city's request, a person shall furnish the city accurate and complete information relating to the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and repair of facilities performed by the person in the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  A person shall be required to place certain facilities within the public rights-of-way underground absent a compelling demonstration by the person that, in any specific instance, this requirement is not reasonable, feasible, or equally applicable to other similar users of the public rights-of-way. 
(3)  A person shall perform excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way in accordance with all applicable city requirements, including the engineering division detailed standards for public right-of-way construction (detailed standards), as may be revised from time to time in accordance with the city's police powers, and the obligation to use trenchless technology whenever commercially economical and practical and consistent with obligations on other similar users of the public right-of-way. The city may waive the requirement of trenchless technology if it determines that the field conditions warrant the waiver, based upon information provided to the city by the person. All excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way shall be conducted so as to minimize interference with the use of public and private property and all facilities placed underground shall be locatable with above ground instruments. A person shall follow all reasonable construction directions given by the city in order to minimize any such interference. 
(4)  A person lawfully authorized to place facilities in the public rights-of-way must obtain a permit, as reasonably required by applicable city codes, prior to any excavation, construction, installation, expansion, repair, removal, relocation, or maintenance of the person's facilities. A construction permit is not required for routine maintenance so long as the work does not require excavation of the public rights-of-way or does not block traffic lanes or sidewalks; however, any construction standards in the detailed standards shall remain applicable regardless of whether or not a permit is required. A permit is not required when so provided by state law, but in such cases the provisions regarding required notice apply. An approved lane, sidewalk or trail closure plan is required if a traffic lane, sidewalk or trail will be closed due to right-of-way work, regardless of whether or not a permit is required. Once a permit is issued, person shall give to the city a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours' notice (which could be at the time of the issuance of the permit) prior to undertaking any of the above listed activities on its facilities in, on, or under the public rights-of-way. The failure of the person to request and obtain a permit from the city prior to performing any of the above listed activities in, on, or over any public right-of-way, except in an emergency as provided for in subsection (11) below, will subject the person to a stop-work order from the city and enforcement action pursuant to this Code. If the person fails to act upon any permit within thirty (30) calendar days of issuance, the permit shall become invalid, and the person will be required to obtain another permit, unless extended for good cause by the city. 
(5)  When a person completes construction, expansion, reconstruction, removal, excavation or other work, the person shall promptly restore the public rights-of-way in accordance with applicable city requirements. A person shall replace and properly relay and repair the surface, base, irrigation system, and landscape treatment of any public rights-of-way that may be excavated or damaged by reason of the erection, construction, maintenance, or repair of the person's facilities within ten (10) calendar days after completion of the work in accordance with existing standards of the city in effect at the time of the work, unless extended by the city for good cause. 
(6)  Upon failure of a person to perform any such repair or replacement work, and five (5) days after written notice has been given by the city to the person, and in the event repairs have not been initiated during such five-day period, the city may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way as may have been disturbed by the person, its contractors, or agents. Upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the person will reimburse the city in accordance with the detailed standards within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city invoice. 
(7)  Should the city reasonably determine, within two (2) years from the date of the completion of the repair work, that the surface, base, irrigation system, or landscape treatment requires additional restoration work to meet standards at the time of the excavation of the city, a person shall perform such additional restoration work to the satisfaction of the city, subject to all city remedies as provided herein. 
(8)  Notwithstanding the foregoing in subsection (7) above, if the city determines that the failure of a person to properly repair or restore the public rights-of-way constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the city may undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts, after emergency notice has been provided, to the extent reasonable under the circumstances and the person failed to respond within the reasonable time specified by the city. A person shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city invoice. 
(9)  A person shall furnish the city with the application for the construction permits, construction plans and maps showing the location and proposed routing of new construction or reconstruction at least ten (10) business days unless otherwise extended by the city before beginning construction or reconstruction that involves an alteration to the surface or subsurface of the public rights-of-way by the city. A person may not begin construction until the location of new facilities and proposed routing of the new construction or reconstruction and all required plans and drawings have been approved in writing by the city, which approval will not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, taking due consideration of the surrounding area and alternative locations for the facilities and routing. 
(10)  If the mayor declares an emergency with regard to the health and safety of the citizens and requests by written notice the removal or abatement of facilities, a person shall remove or abate the person's facilities by the deadline provided in the mayor's request. The person and the city shall cooperate to the extent possible to assure continuity of service. If the person, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the city may remove or abate the facility, at the sole cost and expense of the person, without paying compensation to the person and without the city incurring liability for damages. 
(11)  Except in the case of customer service interruptions and imminent harm to property or person (emergency conditions), a person may not excavate the pavement of a street or public rights-of-way without first complying with city requirements. The city manager shall be notified as promptly as possible regarding work performed under such emergency conditions, and the person shall comply with the requirements of city standards for the restoration of the public rights-of-way. 
(12)  On an annual basis, no later than January 31 of each year, the user shall provide updates to the department or personnel designated by the city manager showing any new facilities from the previous year in the format required by the city. 
(13)  The city may require reasonable bonding requirements of a person, as are required of other entities that place facilities in the public rights-of-way. The city manager may waive or reduce the bonding requirements in a nondiscriminatory, competitively neutral manner, taking into consideration both that the person has furnished the city with reasonable documentation to evidence adequate financial resources substantially greater than the bonding requirements, and has demonstrated in prior right-of-way construction activity, prompt resolution of any claims and substantial compliance with all required applicable building codes and ordinances. 
(14)  In determining whether any requirement under this section is unreasonable or unfeasible, the city manager shall consider, among other things, whether the requirement would subject the person or persons to an unreasonable increase in risk or service interruption, or to an unreasonable increase in liability for accidents, or to an unreasonable delay in construction or in availability of its services, or to any other unreasonable technical or economic burden or result in discriminatory treatment by a person. 
(15)  For installation of any proposed pole applicant shall provide engineered drawings, geotechnical drawings, geotechnical study or studies, and evidence of ADA and PROWAG compliance, sectional detail showing depth of anchor, scaled dimensional drawings of the proposed pole, as well as any other proposed equipment associated with the proposed installation, and shall indicate spacing from existing curb, driveways, sidewalk, light poles, and any other poles or appurtenances. 
(16)  If requested by city, all applications shall include a current before and a proposed after street view image. The after-image needs to include any proposed poles and all proposed attachments, and any associated or ancillary equipment, whether attached or standalone. Once work is done or the installation is complete, photographs accurately depicting the location of the installation or the work shall be submitted to the city. This requirement may be waived for underground installation. 
(17)  If the project is within the state right-of-way or railroad right-of-way, the applicant must provide evidence of a permit or permission from the state or railroad. 
(18)  If a city pole or poles or light structure or structures will be used or will be in the area of the proposed construction, the pole or poles or light structure or structures will be identified. No electric meter shall be mounted on a city pole or light structure unless the city grants written permission. 
(19)  Provider/applicant shall use a maximum two hundred forty (240) voltage when connecting to any city infrastructure and provide key to meter upon installation. 
(20)  All plans shall reflect that no facilities to be installed will obstruct an existing or planned sidewalk, trail, walkway, bicycle lane or lane of vehicular traffic. 
(21)  If requested by city, engineering plans shall be provided with a maximum scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet. 
(22)  If requested by city, all plans shall include detail of the location of all right-of-way and utility easements which applicant plans to use. 
(23)  If requested by city, all plans shall include detail of all existing city utilities in relationship to applicant's proposed route. 
(24)  All plans shall include detail of what applicant proposes to install, such as network nodes, poles, pipes, size, number of inner-ducts, valves, or other facilities. 
(25)  All plans shall include detail of plans to remove and replace asphalt or concrete in streets. 
(26)  All plans shall include drawings of any bores, trenches, handholes, manholes, switch gear, transformers, pedestals, network nodes, micro-network nodes, or other facilities, including depth located in public right-of-way. 
(27)  All plans shall include details of handhole and/or manhole applicant plans to use or access. 
(28)  All plans shall include complete legend of drawings submitted by applicant. 
(29)  If paper copies are required, two (2) sets of engineering plans shall be submitted with permit application. 
(30)  The application shall include the name, address and phone numbers of the contractor or subcontractor who will perform the actual construction, including the name and telephone number of an individual with the contractor who will be available at all times during construction. Such information shall be required prior to the commencement of any work. 
(31)  The application shall include the construction and installation methods to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the right-of-way, and the dates and times work will occur, all of which (methods, dates, times, and other applicable information) are subject to approval of the city manager. 
(32)  The application shall include a statement that the requirements of sections 20-326 "Municipal authorization required; registration; compensation and fees" and 20-348 "Insurance requirements" are met. 
(33)  The applications shall include a traffic control plan designed to the latest edition of the TMUTCD, which shall specify the traffic control measures to be provided, and shall be required any time work will require traffic lane closures, bicycle lane closures, trail closures, or sidewalk closures, regardless of whether a permit is required. Said traffic control plan must be approved by the city manager. If the traffic control plan is not approved, no lane closure is allowed. 
(34)  The application may require a SWPPP, and a trench safety plan based on the proposed scope of work regardless of whether or not a permit is required. 
(35)  The application shall show that no projecting attachments are less than eight (8) feet above the ground, if not projecting toward the street. If an attachment is projecting toward the street, the attachment shall be installed no less than sixteen (16) feet above the ground. 
(36)  Any proposed work that involves the installation of facilities that will utilize radio frequencies shall not cause harmful interference with city public safety radio system, traffic signal light system, city traffic observation video cameras, or other city communications systems or components. The right-of-way user shall provide evidence that the proposed installation will be compatible with said city systems and will not cause any harmful interference with the city public safety radio system, traffic signal light system or other city communications systems or components. No installation shall be allowed to be installed or to remain in the right-of-way that causes any such interference. 
(37)  The plans shall demonstrate that all federal and state laws and city ordinances will be obeyed, and that all sections of this chapter, including article II "Design manual" will be complied with as applicable. 
(38)  Information signs which shall be a minimum size of thirty-six (36) inches by thirty-six (36) inches stating the identity of the person doing the work, telephone number and permittee's identity and telephone number shall be placed at the location where construction is to occur twenty-four (24) hours prior to the beginning of work in the right-of-way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring. An informational sign will be posted on public right-of-way five hundred (500) feet before the construction location commences and each five hundred (500) feet thereafter, unless other posting arrangements are approved or required by the city manager. Additionally, if the work to be permitted will require restricting access to private residences, or will affect adjacent and nearby residences (single family or multi-family) because of noise, odors, dust or other activity which may affect the peaceful enjoyment of residential properties, then user shall, not later than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the commencement of construction activity, notify all affected residents by letter or door hanger. Such notice shall be in a format approved by the city manager. 
(39)  Erosion control measures (e.g. silt fence) and advance warning signs, markers, cones and barricades and existing utility locate markers must be in place before work begins. 
(40)  Permittee shall be responsible for storm water management erosion control that complies with city, state and federal guidelines. Requirements shall include, but not be limited to, silt fencing around any excavation that will be left overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until reasonable vegetation is established, barricade fencing around open holes, and high erosion areas will require wire backed silt fencing. Upon request permittee may be required to furnish documentation submitted or received from federal or state government. 
(41)  Permittee or contractor or subcontractor will notify the city manager immediately of any damage to other utilities, either city or privately owned. 
(42)  Permittees are responsible for the workmanship and any damages by contractors or subcontractors. A responsible representative of the permittee will be available to city staff at all times during construction. 
(43)  Installation of facilities must not interfere with city utilities, in particular gravity dependent facilities. 
(44)  New facilities must be installed to a depth approved by the city manager. 
(45)  All directional boring shall have locator place bore marks and depths while bore is in progress. The boring method and bore pit locations shall be identified prior to the commencement of boring operations. Locator shall place mark at each stem with paint dot and depth at least every other stem. 
(46)  Permittee will be responsible for verifying the location, both horizontal and vertical, of all facilities. When required by the city manager, permittee shall verify locations by pot holing, hand digging, or other method approved by the city manager prior to any excavation or boring. 
(47)  Placement of all manholes and/or hand holes must be approved in advance by city manager. Handholes or manholes will not be located in sidewalks, unless approved by the city manager. 
(48)  Locate flags shall not be removed from a location while facilities are being constructed. 
(49)  Construction which requires pumping of water or mud shall be contained in accordance with City of Everman ordinances and federal and state law and the directives of the city manager. 
(50)  All facilities installed in the right-of-way shall be in colors that blend with the surroundings, or if on a service pole or municipally owned pole shall match the color and finish of the pole, and must be approved by the city. 
(51)  All facilities installed in the right-of-way shall be capable of being identified through a GIS shape file or other means as acceptable to the city manager. Said identification shall be provided at the time of application and shall be visible on the facilities when installed and must follow all applicable city ordinances. 
(52)  Above ground wires shall be located on only one (1) side of the right-of-way unless approved by the city manager. 
(53)  The right-of-way user or contractor must obtain any needed permits for electrical work and provide engineered drawings for conduit size, circuit size, calculations for amperage, or any other required information. Provider shall be responsible for obtaining any required electrical power service to any installation. Any such electrical supply must be separately metered and must match city infrastructure voltage. 
(54)  Right-of-way users shall complete construction as expeditiously as possible and lane closures or work that inconveniences the traveling public shall be minimized. Lane closures shall not be outside the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. on weekdays or last longer than four (4) hours, unless a different period of time is shown on the permit and approved by the city. 
(55)  Right-of-way work shall be completed in the amount of time shown on the permit; but if no completion time is shown on the permit the work shall be complete in not more than thirty (30) calendar days. 
(56)  All right-of-way work and facilities installed shall be done in a good workman like manner; shall meet all applicable codes; shall be maintained and kept in good repair and shall be aesthetically pleasing. 
(57)  All efforts shall be made to avoid or minimize negative visual impact to the surrounding area and to enhance the safety requirement for vehicles and pedestrians, particularly in areas where children or other vulnerable members of the population may be located. 
(58)  Installations which require ancillary ground equipment with a footprint of twenty-five (25) square feet or more shall be spaced at least three hundred (300) feet apart. 
(59)  All location/route markers setting out location of utilities shall be flush with the ground. Above ground location/route markers shall not be allowed. 
(60)  The plans shall demonstrate that all federal and state laws and city ordinances will be obeyed, and that all provisions of this article VIII, including the installation, removal and design standards and any additional standards described herein as the design manual will be complied with as applicable. Construction in right-of-way adjacent to a school shall be required to follow all state law requirements, including the requirements in the educational code regarding work on school grounds, including, but not limited to, chapters 21 and 22, as applicable. 
(61)  All requirements for installation continue, as applicable, for as long as facilities remain in the right-of-way. 
(e)  All construction and installation in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit for the facilities. Permittee shall provide the city manager or his designee access to the work and to such further information as he or she may reasonably require, to ensure compliance with the permit. 
(f)  A copy of the construction permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the city manager or his designee at all times when construction or installation work is occurring. 
(g)  All construction or installation work authorized by permit must be completed in the time specified in the construction permit. If the work cannot be completed in the specified time periods, the permittee may request an extension from the city manager. The city manager will use best efforts to approve or disapprove a request for permit time extension as soon as possible. 
(h)  A copy of any permit or approval issued by federal or state authorities for work in federal or state or railroad right-of-way located in the City of Everman shall be required, if requested by the city manager. 
(i)  A request for a permit must be submitted at least ten (10) working days before the proposed commencement of work in the request, unless waived by the city manager. 
(j)  Requests for permits will be approved or disapproved by the city manager within a reasonable time upon receiving all the necessary information. The city manager will use best efforts to approve or disapprove a request for permit as soon as possible. 
(k)  The city manager or the applicant can request a pre-construction meeting with the permittee and their construction contractor. 
(l)  Permit applications are required for construction on new, replacement or upgrading of the company's facilities in the right-of-way either aerial or underground. 
(m)  The failure of a person to request and obtain a permit from the city prior to performing any of the above listed activities in, or over any right-of-way, except in an emergency, will subject the person to a stop-work order from the city and enforcement action pursuant to the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(n)  If the person receiving the permit fails to act upon the permit within thirty (30) days of issuance, the permit shall become invalid, and the person will be required to obtain another permit. 
(o)  If the applicant or user proposes any installation, maintenance, repair, replacement or any other work in the right-of-way that would result in a change as to the ADA or PROWAG requirements, the applicant or user proposing such change is responsible for all costs, labor and other actions needed to maintain ADA and PROWAG compliance. If any right-of-way work will affect ADA or PROWAG requirements, a permit shall be required, even if not otherwise required. Applicant must certify that the right-of-way will be ADA compliant when the installation, maintenance, repair, replacement or other work is complete. If any action by applicant will affect ADA or PROWAG requirements, applicant or user must show how such work will be ADA or PROWAG compliant. 
(p)  If state or federal law provides that a permit is not required for certain work to be done, then a person proposing to do such work shall be required to provide notice two (2) working days prior to performing such work. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 14, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), 9-10-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), adopted September 10, 2019 changed the title of § 20-334, as set out herein. The former title was "Excavation permit required; exceptions; fees" and pertained to similar subject matter.  
Sec. 20-335. - Permit application. 
(a)  The person requesting a permit will provide the director of public works with the following documentation in the format specified by the director: 
(1)  The proposed, approximate location and route of all facilities to be constructed or installed and the applicant's plan for right-of-way construction. 
(2)  Two (2) sets of engineering plans, on a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet unless otherwise approved by the public works department. 
(3)  Description of the location of all right-of-way and utility easements which applicant plans to use. 
(4)  Detail of what applicant proposes to install, such as pipe size, number of interducts, valves, etc. 
(5)  Detail of all existing city utilities in relationship to applicant's proposed route. 
(6)  Detail of plans to remove and replace asphalt, concrete in street, using city standards and specifications. 
(7)  Drawings of any bores, trenches, handholes, manholes, switchgear, transformers, pedestals, etc., including depth. 
(8)  Handhole and/or manhole typical of type of manholes and/or handholes applicant plans to use or access. 
(9)  Complete legend of drawings, which may be provided by reference documents previously submitted to the city. 
(10)  The name, address and telephone numbers of the contractor or subcontractor who will perform the actual construction, including the name and telephone number of a representative of the contractor who will be available at all times during construction. 
(11)  A statement that proof of insurance, bond or other required financial information as required by section 20-325 of this article is current and on file with the city. 
(12)  The construction and installation methods to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the right-of-way, and the estimated dates and times work will occur, all of which are subject to the reasonable approval of the director of public works. 
(13)  A copy of any permit or approval issued by federal or state authorities for work in federal or state right-of-way located in the city. 
(14)  Verification that the applicant has a valid right-of-way registration from the city. 
(15)  Evidence that all other utility providers in the area have been given notice of the excavation. 
(b)  An applicant shall submit an application for a permit at least ten (10) working days before the commencement of work proposed in the application, unless waived by the director of public works. 
(c)  The director may require a preconstruction meeting with the permit holder and its construction contractor. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 15, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-336. - Permit issuance; conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy; inspections; signage; graffiti abatement. 
(a)  The director of public works shall promptly process each valid and administratively complete application and shall issue or deny an excavation permit, provided that the applicant is otherwise in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The permit shall state to whom it is issued, location of work, location of facilities, dates and times of work is to take place and any other condition set out by the director of public works. 
(c)  The permit shall be completed and signed by an authorized representative of the owner of the facilities to be constructed. 
(d)  The permit holder shall: 
(1)  Maintain a copy of the permit and approved engineering plans at the construction site available for inspection by the director of public works at all times when construction or installation work is occurring; 
(2)  Complete all construction work authorized by the permit in the time specified in the permit, unless the permit holder has obtain an extension from the director of public works; and 
(3)  Provide the director of public works access to the work and to such further information he or she may reasonably require to ensure compliance with the permit. 
(e)  In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all other uses of the public rights-of-way. The city reserves the right to lay sewer, gas, water, and other pipe lines or cables and conduits, and to do underground and overhead work, and attachments, restructuring, or changes in aerial facilities in, across, along, over, or under a public street, alley, or public rights-of-way occupied by a person, and to change the curb, sidewalks, or the grade of streets or rights-of-way. 
(f)  The city shall assign the location in or over the public rights-of-way among competing users of the public rights-of-way with due consideration to the public health and safety considerations of each user type, and to the extent the city can demonstrate that there is limited space available for additional users, may limit new users, as allowed under state or federal law. 
(g)  If the city authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any public street, alley, or public rights-of-way, the grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights of the previously authorized user of the public rights-of-way. If the city closes or abandons a public right-of-way that contains a portion of a user's facilities, the city shall close or abandon such public right-of-way subject to the rights of the user, provided the user has a current registration. 
(h)  If the city gives written notice, a right-of-way user shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently, remove, relocate, change, or alter the position of user's facilities that are in the public rights-of-way within one hundred twenty (120) days, unless a different schedule is approved by the city manager. For projects expected by the city to take longer than one hundred twenty (120) days to remove, change or relocate, the city will confer with the user before determining the alterations to be required and the timing thereof. The city shall give notice whenever the city has determined that removal, relocation, change, or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, operation, repair, maintenance, or installation of a city governmental public improvement in the public rights-of-way. This section shall not be construed to prevent a right-of-way user's recovery of the cost of relocation or removal from private third parties who initiate the request for relocation or removal, nor shall it be required if improvements are solely for beautification purposes without prior joint deliberation and agreement with the person. 
(i)  If the user fails to relocate facilities in the time allowed by the city in this section, the user may be subject to liability to the city for such delay and as set forth in this Code, now or hereafter enacted. Additionally, the user may be denied any new permits until the relocation is complete. 
(j)  Notwithstanding anything in subsection (d) above, the city manager and a person may agree in writing to different time frames than those provided above if circumstances reasonably warrant such a change. 
(k)  Any right-of-way user trimming trees shall be required to remove trimmings within twenty-four (24) hours; provided, however, if any trimmings affect right-of-way use, said trimmings must be removed immediately. If said trimmings are not removed, the city may remove the trimmings or have them removed, and upon receipt of a bill from the city, the person shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred within thirty (30) calendar days. Users shall not be responsible for tree trimming or removal, except as to the work required to construct, maintain, or restore utility service. 
(l)  Users shall temporarily remove, raise, or lower its aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures, if the city gives written notice of not less than forty-eight (48) hours. The expense of these temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting and benefiting from the temporary rearrangements. The person may require prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting the temporary move. 
(m)  To the extent applicable, directions of the city shall be followed, including, but not limited to, "standard details" and "standards for right-of-way easement construction" as those requirements currently exist or as may be amended, updated or supplemented from time to time. 
(n)  To the extent applicable, all of the requirements or conditions for construction and occupancy of the right-of-way shall continue during the entire time that the installed facilities remain in the right-of-way. 
(o)  The city may perform inspections of any right-of-way work, including installations, maintenance, modifications or any other right-of-way work, whether such work is subject to permit requirements or allowed to be done without a permit. The city may perform visual inspections of any right-of-way work located in the right-of-way as the city deems appropriate without notice. If the inspection requires physical contact with right-of-way work, the city may provide the right-of-way user with notice prior to said inspection. Right-of-way user may have a representative present during such inspection. In the event of an emergency, the city may, but is not required to, notify the right-of-way user prior to the inspection. The city may take any needed action to remediate an emergency. The city shall notify the right-of-way user as soon as practical after said remediation. 
(p)  Signage. User shall post and maintain legible identification showing its name, location identifying information, and emergency telephone number in an area on a cabinet of a facility that is visible to the public. Signage required under this section shall not exceed four (4) inches by six (6) inches, unless otherwise required by law (e.g. RF ground notification signs) or the city manager. 
Except as required by law or by the utility pole owner, user shall not post any other signage or advertising on the facilities or equipment. 
(q)  Graffiti abatement. As soon as practical, but not later than ten (10) calendar days from the date user receives notice thereof, user shall remove all graffiti on any of its facilities and related ground equipment located in the right-of-way. The foregoing shall not relieve the user from complying with any city graffiti or visual blight ordinance or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 16, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), 9-10-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), adopted September 10, 2019 changed the title of § 20-336, as set out herein. The former title was "Permit issuance" and pertained to similar subject matter.  
Sec. 20-337. - Revocation of excavation permit. 
The director of public works shall revoke an excavation permit if the director determines that the permit holder has given false or inaccurate information on the application for a permit or in a hearing concerning the permit. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 17, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-338. - Appeal from denial or revocation of permit. 
If the director denies or revokes an excavation permit, the director shall give notice by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or permit holder. The applicant or registration holder may appeal the decision to deny or revoke by filing written notice with the city manager, within five (5) days after receipt of notice. The city manager shall mail or cause to be personally delivered, written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the person appealing. The notice shall be mailed to the address specified in the notice of appeal form. The city manager shall conduct a hearing and shall make a decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 18, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-339. - Notification. 
(a)  An applicant for an excavation permit or its contractor shall notify a notification center established pursuant to Texas Utility Code, Chapter 251, prior to conducting any work in the right-of-way such as excavating, drilling, underground boring, jacking, or open cutting. 
(b)  A permit holder shall provide the director of public works with the following information not less than forty-eight (48) hours before beginning work under the permit: 
(1)  The reference number received from the notification center; 
(2)  The exact dates and time work will be performed under the permit; and 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will perform the work, including a representative who will be available at all times during construction. 
(c)  The notice of work must be in writing and may be sent by facsimile transmission. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 19, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-340. - Design manual for small nodes; preferred location; placement of facilities. 
(a)  All facilities constructed within the right-of-way after the effective date of this article shall: 
(1)  Conform to the city's installation, removal and design standards and other criteria described herein as the design manual, which provide a guideline for right-of-way use and all codes and ordinances in effect at the time of submittal of the application; 
(2)  Be installed in accordance with plans and at locations within the right-of-way approved by the city; 
(3)  Be installed or constructed so as not to unreasonably interfere with: 
a.  Traffic over city streets; 
b.  The health, safety or welfare of the owners of property adjoining the right-of-way; or 
c.  The operation of other facilities or equipment situated within the right-of-way, whether owned or maintained by the city or other utility providers; or 
d.  Be situated so as to minimize the space used. 
(b)  To the extent permitted by law the director of public works may require the location of facilities underground. 
(c)  Purpose of installation, removal and design standards. The following installation, removal and design standards and any additional installation, removal and design standards or manual containing applicable requirements that has been, or may in the future be, adopted by or amended by the city that do not conflict with chapter 284, shall constitute the design manual of the city as authorized by chapter 284, and shall be used for maintenance of, citing and criteria for the installation of wireless facilities, including micro network nodes, network nodes, node support poles and related ground equipment. These standards shall apply to any and all maintenance, siting, installations, collocations, or other placement of, in, over or under the public rights-of-way of network nodes, node support poles, micro network nodes, distributed antenna system(s), microwave communications or other wireless facilities, by whatever nomenclature, whether they are installed pursuant to chapter 284 of the local government code or installed pursuant to an agreement to use the right-of-way or authorization or installed as may otherwise be allowed by state law. The city enacts these installation, removal and design requirements and guidelines in order to meet its fiduciary duty to its citizens, and to give assistance and guidance to network providers in the safe, aesthetically pleasing, efficient, and timely installation of facilities. 
(d)  Prohibited or restricted areas for wireless facilities in right-of-way; municipal park. A network provider may not install a new node support pole in the following locations: 
(1)  In a municipal park, designated for recreation and covered by this section to include all parks designated by the city council in the code of ordinances including, but not limited to, (a) Johnson Park (b) Clyde Pittman Park, unless permission is given by the city council; or 
(2)  In right-of-way that: 
a.  Contains a street that is equal to or less than fifty (50) feet wide at average width, measuring vehicular traveled portion only as set out in the definition of "street" and the measurement does not include intersection and refers only to the main traveled portion measured at mid-block or mid-point between intersections; and 
b.  Is adjacent to developed or undeveloped single-family residential lots, other multifamily residential area or land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
(e)  Prohibited or restricted areas for wireless facilities in right-of-way; restricted; historic district. 
(1)  A network provider must obtain advance written approval from the city before collocating network nodes or installing node support poles in an area of the city zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district. 
(2)  Concealment required. 
a.  As a condition for approval of network nodes or node support poles in a historic district, concealment measures are required for network nodes or node support poles or related ground equipment or any portion of the nodes, poles, or equipment. 
b.  Said concealment measures shall minimize the impact to the aesthetics in a historic district. 
(3)  Network provider shall comply with and observe all applicable city, state, and federal laws and requirements, including historic preservation laws and requirements. 
(f)  Prohibited or restricted areas for wireless facilities in right-of-way. Collocation will not be allowed on decorative traffic signal poles or decorative poles/decorative streetlight poles in any area of the city. 
(g)  Prohibited or restricted areas for wireless facilities in right-of-way; historic landmarks. Network provider is discouraged from installing a network node or node support pole within three hundred (300) feet of a historic site or structure or historic landmark recognized by the city, state or federal government ( see, for example, and not limited to, § 442.001(3) of the Texas Government Code, and 16 U.S.C. § 470), as of the date of the submission of the permit. 
(h)  Prohibited or restricted areas for wireless facilities in right-of-way; designated areas. 
(1)  The city council may designate an area as a historic district at any time. 
(2)  Historic district. 
Any area that meets the definition of historic district shall be considered to be a historic district. An area does not need to be designated by this section to be considered to be within a historic district. Such designation does not require a zoning case. Any area declared to be a historic district by city council or any area that meets the definition of historic district shall be subject to all requirements and protections for a historic district. 
(i)  Prohibited or restricted areas for wireless facilities in right-of-way; defense. 
(1)  It shall be a defense to any of the above requirements prohibiting or restricting location of facilities in a park, residential area, historic district, or collocating on a decorative pole that the network provider obtained advance written approval or waiver of restrictions from the city before collocating new network nodes or installing new node support poles or ground equipment in a prohibited or restricted location. In any prosecution for such prohibition or violation of any restrictions, it shall be an affirmative defense to have an agreement with the city that approved such location or waived the applicable restriction. 
(2)  If an agreement is granted to locate in a prohibited location, the network provider shall be required, as a condition for approval of new network nodes or new node support poles in a prohibited location, to install reasonable design or concealment measures for the new network nodes or new node support poles. Therefore, any request for installations in a prohibited location, must be accompanied with concealment measures in the permit applications. 
(3)  The city requests that a network provider explore the feasibility of using certain camouflage measures to improve the aesthetics of the network nodes, node support poles, or related ground equipment, or any portion of the nodes, poles, or equipment, to minimize the impact to the aesthetics in all locations of the city. 
(j)  Private deed restrictions and property owners association rules. A network provider installing a network node or node support pole in a public right-of-way described above shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the area that apply to those facilities. 
(k)  Each permit application shall designate if the requested area for installation is within a residential area, a municipal park, or a historic district. 
(l)  No interference with traffic. Nodes will not be allowed to be installed in the area for vehicular or pedestrian travel or in a manner that will interfere with vehicle traffic or pedestrian travel. 
(m)  Preferred location. The following locations, in the order listed, are the preferred locations for installation of poles or wireless facilities: 
(1)  Industrial areas; 
(2)  Areas designated by the city as a highway rights-of-way area, provided that such areas are not adjacent to a municipal park, residential area, historic district, or any prohibited area set out above. 
(3)  Retail and commercial areas, provided such areas are not in a prohibited location, such as a historic district. 
(n)  Order of preference regarding attachment to facilities. 
(1)  The following shall be the order of preference for the attachment of network nodes to existing facilities, beginning with most preferred location and ending with least preferred location. In addition to the preference set out by the city, existing facilities may be owned by third parties and may not be available for attachment of facilities or may require authorization from other parties. 
(2)  Order of preference from most preferable to least preferable. 
a.  Most preferable—Existing telephone or electrical lines between existing utility poles. Micro network nodes may only be lashed on existing telephone or electrical lines between existing utility poles (electric poles or telephones poles), with notice to the pole owner as required by the federal pole attachment act, and not placed on utility poles, node support poles or service poles. 
b.  Preferable—Existing utility poles (electric poles or telephones poles), or non-decorative utility owned street light poles shall be the preferred support facility for network nodes and related ground equipment. 
c.  Less preferable—New node support poles. Though adding new poles is not desirable, collocation on existing municipal poles shall generally be less preferred over new poles. New poles shall not be installed in prohibited areas and shall only be allowed in restricted areas to the extent all requirements are followed or a waiver is granted. Any new poles shall be camouflaged to the extent allowed by law as set out in this chapter. 
d.  Least preferable—Municipal service poles, which shall require an agreement with the city. Municipal service poles includes (in order of preference): 
1.  Non-decorative city street lights. Micro network nodes shall: 
i.  Be encased in a separate conduit than the street light cables; 
ii.  Have an electric power connection separate than the street lights; 
iii.  Have a separate access point than the street light structure; 
iv.  Be attached in a city approved manner; and 
v.  Follow all requirements in the agreement with the city and as required by the city. 
2.  Non-decorative traffic signal structures—Network nodes may only be attached to traffic signal structures when such installation will not interfere with the integrity of the facility and will not interfere with the safety of the public. Any installation of network node facilities on any traffic signal structures shall: 
i.  Be encased in a separate conduit than the traffic light electronics; 
ii.  Have a separate electric power connection than the traffic signal structure; 
iii.  Have a separate access point than the traffic signal structure; 
iv.  Not be placed on traffic signal mast arms; 
v.  Not be placed in an area where the view of traffic from a traffic video camera could be obstructed; 
vi.  Be placed on the side of the signal pole that does not face the direction of traffic for which the traffic signal faces; 
vii.  Be attached in a city approved manner; and 
viii.  Follow all requirements in the agreement with the city and as required by the city. 
3.  Other municipal service pole use is discouraged and the use of decorative street light poles or decorative traffic signal structures is prohibited. 
(o)  Ground equipment should be minimal and the least intrusive. Ground equipment must not block existing or future pedestrian travel ways or be within visibility angles. 
(p)  Placement requirements. A network provider shall construct and maintain network nodes and node support poles in a manner that does not: 
(1)  Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way; 
(2)  Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers; 
(3)  Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes; 
(4)  Violate or conflict with the municipality's publicly disclosed public right-of-way management ordinance or this design manual. 
(5)  Violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. Section 12101 et seq.) or the Public Rights-of-Way Accessibility Guidelines (PROWAG) 
(q)  Network node facilities shall be installed in accordance with section 20-350 all other applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(r)  Right-of-way. 
(1)  Network node installation shall follow all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment shall be placed, as much as possible, within two (2) feet of the outer edge of the right-of-way line. 
(3)  Node support poles and related ground equipment shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the right-of-way. 
(4)  No protrusion from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole shall be more than two (2) feet. 
(s)  Parks. For the safety of park patrons, particularly small children, and to allow full line of sights near park property, the network provider shall not install ground equipment in a right-of-way that is within a park or within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the boundary line of a park. 
(t)  There shall be no more than one (1) network node on any one pole. 
(u)  Design, concealment or camouflage required. 
(1)  Reasonable design, concealment, or camouflage is required by the city when wireless facilities are allowed, as set forth above, in historic districts. 
(2)  It is the city's preference that all new node support poles be concealed or camouflaged, except those located in an area zoned or predominantly industrial. 
(3)  Companies shall submit their proposal for camouflage with the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), 9-10-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), adopted September 10, 2019, repealed the former § 20-340, and enacted a new § 20-340 as set out herein. The former § 20-340 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 496, § 20, adopted July 11, 2000.  
Sec. 20-340-A. - Design manual general requirements. 
(a)  Confirmation of non-interference with city safety communication networks. 
(1)  The network provider shall provide analysis that the proposed network node shall not cause any harmful interference with city safety communications components. 
(2)  It shall be the ongoing responsibility of the network provider to evaluate, prior to making application for permit and while network nodes remain in the right-of-way, the compatibility between the existing city infrastructure and provider's proposed network node. A network node shall not be installed in a location that causes any harmful interference. 
(3)  Network nodes shall not be allowed on city's public safety radio infrastructure. 
(b)  Size limits. Network providers shall provide detailed drawings, with calculations to show strict conformity to the size limitations as set forth in LGC Chapter 284, in accordance with, but not limited to, chapter 284, section 284.002, size of a micro network node, section 284.003, size of network nodes, and section 284.103, maximum pole height, with each application and with each request for a permit for each location. 
(1)  Micro network node dimensions—Maximum length: twenty-four (24) inches; maximum width fifteen (15) inches; maximum height twelve (12) inches. 
(2)  Network node: three (3) feet in height, two (2) feet in width and one (1) foot in depth. 
(3)  Pole height: not higher than ten (10) feet above the average height of utility poles within five hundred (500) linear feet of a new pole or fifty-five (55) feet, whichever is least. 
(4)  Ground equipment, separate from the pole, may not be higher than three (3) feet six (6) inches from grade, wider than three (3) feet six (6) inches. 
(5)  When not otherwise set out in this ordinance or in a municipal authorization, the size limits shall not be greater than size limits set forth for structures or equipment in Chapter 284 of the Local Government Code, where applicable. These size limits shall not be exceeded unless specific city permission has been granted through a franchise or license or specific authorization is claimed through a different state statute. 
(6)  Size limits may be reduced when necessary for public health, safety, or welfare. 
(c)  If Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code is found to be repealed, struck down, preempted or invalid, in whole or in part, then the standards required by the city, either in the municipal authorization or an amendment to the municipal authorization or the directives of the city or this article shall apply. 
(d)  Concealment. The network node facilities shall be concealed or enclosed in an equipment box, cabinet, or other unit that may include ventilation openings. External cables and wires hanging off a pole shall be sheathed or enclosed in a conduit, so that wires are protected and not visible or visually minimized to the extent possible. 
(e)  New node support pole spacing and placement. 
(1)  New node support poles shall be at a minimum three hundred (300) feet from a utility pole or another node support pole to minimize the hazard of poles adjacent to road ways and to minimize the effect on property values and aesthetics on the area, unless a lesser distance is approved by the city manager. 
(2)  New poles shall be places a minimum of five (5) feet from a street curb or travel lane and eighteen (18) inches from a sidewalk to minimize the potential of being struck by a motor vehicle or bicycle. 
(3)  New poles shall be placed on breakaway anchor bolt supports or bases to minimize the impact severity to motor vehicles that strike the pole. 
(f)  Minimize ground equipment concentration. In order to minimize negative visual impact to the surrounding area, the city's designee may deny a request for a proposed location if the network provider installs network node ground equipment where existing ground equipment already occupies a footprint of twenty-five (25) square feet or more. 
(g)  Allowed colors. Colors shall meet the requirements set out in section 20-334(b)(50). 
(h)  If any network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment is installed in a location that is not in accordance with the plans approved by the city manager and impedes pedestrian or vehicular traffic or does not comply or otherwise renders the right-of-way non-compliant with applicable laws, including the American Disabilities Act, then network provider shall remove the network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment. 
(i)  If Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code is found to be repealed, struck down, pre-empted or invalid, in whole or in part, then the standards required by the city either in the municipal authorization or an amendment to the municipal authorization or the directives of the city or this article shall apply. 
(j)  Ground equipment. 
(1)  Ground equipment should be minimal and the least intrusive. In accordance with chapter 284.102(1), to minimize any obstruction, impediment, or hindrance to the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way the maximum line of sight required to add to safe travel of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and in order to maximize that line of sight at street corners and intersections and to minimize hazards at those locations, ground equipment may not be installed within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a street corner or a street intersection. 
(2)  Ground equipment near municipal parks. For the safety of municipal park patrons, particularly small children, and to allow the full line of sights near municipal park property, the network provider shall not install ground equipment in a right-of-way that is within a park or within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the boundary line of a park, unless approved by the city manager. 
(3)  In accordance with chapter 284, section 284.102(1) to enhance the safety requirements of line of sight of pedestrians, particularly small children, the city's designee may deny a request for a proposed location if the network provider installs network node ground equipment where existing ground equipment within 300 feet already occupies a footprint of twenty-five (25) square feet or more. 
(4)  Ground equipment shall not be installed in such a manner as to interfere with a visibility triangle. 
(5)  Ground equipment must not block existing or future pedestrian travel ways, sidewalks, or trails. 
(k)  Municipal service poles. 
(1)  An agreement shall be required for all installations on municipal service poles and all such installations shall be in accordance with the agreement. 
(2)  Installations on all service poles shall have an industry standard individual pole load analysis, including wind loads, completed by a professional engineer registered in Texas and submitted to the municipality with each permit application indicating that the service pole to which the network node is to be attached will safely support the load. All applications for permits to collocate or attach to any service pole must have included in its permit application a completed industry standard pole load analysis performed and sealed by an engineer licensed by the State of Texas that indicates that the service pole to which the network node is to be attached will safely support the load. Such analysis shall also address safety of pole and attachments in regard to wind loads, collision with motor vehicles, supporting weight of the node, interference with city communications systems, and all other pertinent information. 
(3)  Height of attachments: 
a.  All attachments on all service poles shall be at least eight (8) feet above grade; and 
b.  If an attachment is projecting toward the street, for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular traffic, the attachment shall be installed no less than sixteen (16) feet above the ground; and 
c.  Meet all applicable requirements of state law and this chapter. 
(4)  Installations on any traffic signal structure must not interfere with the integrity of the facility in any way that may compromise the safety of the public and must be in accordance with the agreement with the city. Installation of network node facilities on any traffic signal structures shall: 
a.  Be encased in a separate conduit than the traffic signal light electronics; 
b.  Be placed on the side of the signal pole that does not face the direction of traffic that the signal is controlling. 
c.  Have a separate electric power connection from the traffic signal structure; 
d.  Be placed a minimum of two (2) feet from any signal system device; 
e.  Have a separate access point than the traffic signal structure; 
f.  Be attached in a city approved manner; 
g.  Follow all requirements in the agreement with the city and all other requirements by the city; and 
h.  Meet all other requirements of state law and this chapter. 
(5)  Installations on street signage structures: Installations on all street signage structures must not interfere with the integrity of the facility in any way that may compromise the safety of the public and must be in accordance with the agreement with the city. Installation of network node facilities on any street signage structures that has electricity shall: 
a.  Be encased in a separate conduit than any city signage electronics; 
b.  Have a separate electric power connection than the signage structure; 
c.  Have a separate access point than the signage structure; 
d.  Be attached in a city approved manner; 
e.  Follow all requirements in the agreement with the city and all other requirements of the city; and 
f.  Meet all other requirements of state law and this chapter. 
(l)  Certification. 
(1)  Application: Network node provider will furnish a certification that the proposed network node will be placed into active commercial service by or for a network provider not later than the sixtieth (60 th ) day after the date the construction and final testing of the network node is completed. 
(2)  Within sixty (60) days after construction is complete, network node provider will furnish a certification that the proposed network node is in active commercial service by or for a network provider and will furnish such certification with its registration as required by section 20-326, and annually thereafter. 
(m)  Electrical supply. 
(1)  Network provider shall be responsible for obtaining any required power service to the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles and ground equipment. The city shall not be liable to the network provider for any stoppages or shortages of electrical power furnished to the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment, including without limitation, stoppages or shortages caused by any act, omission, or requirement of the public utility serving the structure or the act or omission of any other tenant or network provider of the structure, or for any other cause beyond the control of the city. 
(2)  Network provider shall not allow or install generators or back-up generators in the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), 9-10-19)  
Sec. 20-340-B. - Design manual—installation and inspections. 
(a)  Installation. 
(1)  Network provider shall, at its own cost and expense, install the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the requirements promulgated by the city manager, as such may be amended from time to time. Network provider's work shall be subject to the regulation, control, and direction of the city manager. 
(2)  All work done in connection with the installation, operation, maintenance, repair, modification, and/or replacement of the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment shall be in compliance with any agreement with the city as applicable and all applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the city, county, state, and the United States ("laws"). 
(b)  Standard pole load analysis on attachments to a service pole. All applications for permits to collocate and/or attach to any service pole must have included in its permit application a completed industry standard pole load analysis indicating the service pole to which the network node is to be attached will safely support the load. 
(c)  Inspections. the city manager may perform visual inspections of any micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment located in the right-of-way as the city manager deems appropriate without notice. If the inspection requires physical contact with the micro network node, network node, node support poles or related ground equipment, the city manager shall provide written notice to the network provider within five (5) business days of the planned inspection. Network provider may have a representative present during such inspection. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), 9-10-19)  
Sec. 20-340-C. - Design manual—requirements in regard to removal, replacement, maintenance and repair. 
(a)  Removal or relocation by network provider. 
(1)  If the network provider removed or relocates a micro network node, network node facilities, node support pole or related ground equipment at its own discretion, it shall notify the city manager in writing not less than ten (10) business days prior to removal or relocation. Network provider shall obtain all permits required for relocation or removal of its micro network node. Network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment prior to relocation or removal. 
(2)  The city shall not issue any refunds for any amounts paid by network provider for micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles or related ground equipment that have been removed. 
(3)  Any abandoned or obsolete micro network node, network node, node support pole or other related equipment shall be removed in strict accordance with this chapter and all other applicable ordinances and state law. 
(4)  Network provider shall remove micro network node, network node facilities, node support pole or related ground equipment when such facilities are abandoned regardless of whether or not notice is received from the city. Such removal must occur within ninety (90) days from the date of abandonment, unless additional time is allowed by the city. The network provider shall provide advance written notice of such removal which must be received by the city at least two (2) working days prior to the removal, except in case of emergency. Such notice shall specify the location and description of each micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment or other facilities to be removed. 
(5)  The city manager may require the network provider to complete additional remedial measures necessary for public safety and the integrity of any city facilities and the right-of-way. 
(b)  Removal or relocation required for city project. 
(1)  A network provider shall relocate or adjust micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment in a public right-of-way in a timely manner in accordance with section 20-336 "Conditions of public rights-of-way" and without cost to the municipality managing the public right-of-way. 
(2)  Pursuant to state law and as a condition for occupancy of the right-of-way, the network provider may be required by the city to remove or relocate any of its facilities, including, but not limited to, its micro network node, network node, node support pole, and related ground equipment, or any portion thereof from the right-of-way, and network provider shall, at the city manager's direction, remove or relocate the same at network provider's sole cost and expense, whenever the city manager reasonably determines that the relocation or removal is needed as set out in section 20-336 "Conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy." 
(c)  If network provider fails to remove or relocate the micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment, or portion thereof as requested by the city manager within ninety (90) days of network provider's receipt of the request, then the city shall be entitled to remove the micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment, or portion thereof at network provider's sole cost and expense, without further notice to network provider, and network provider shall, within thirty (30) days following issuance of invoice for the same, reimburse the city for its reasonable expenses incurred in the removal (including, without limitation, overhead and storage expenses) of the micro network node, network node, node support pole, or related ground equipment, or portion thereof. 
(d)  Removal required by city for safety or due to imminent danger; or for improper permitting or licensing. 
(1)  Network provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, promptly disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment within the time frame and in the manner required by the city manager if the city manager reasonably determines that the disconnection, removal, or relocation of any part of a micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or portion thereof, is adversely affecting proper operation of streetlights or city property, (b) the micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or portion thereof, is adversely affecting proper operation of streetlights or city property, or (c) network provider fails to obtain all applicable licenses, permits, and certifications required by law for its micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or use of any location under applicable law. If the city manager reasonably determines that there is imminent danger to the public, then the city may immediately disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment at the network provider's sole cost and expense. 
(2)  The city manager shall provide ninety (90) days written notice to the network provider before removing a micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment under this section, unless there is imminent danger to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(3)  Network provider shall reimburse city for the city's actual cost of removal of micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment within thirty (30) days of receiving the invoice from the city. 
(e)  Restoration. 
Network provider shall repair any damage to the right-of-way, or any facilities located within the right-of-way, and the property of any third party resulting from network provider's removal or relocation activities (or any other of network provider's activities hereunder) within ten (10) calendar days following the date of such removal or relocation, at network provider's sole cost and expense, including restoration of the right-of-way and such property to substantially the same condition as it was immediately before the date network provider was granted a permit for the applicable location or did the work at such location (even if network provider did not first obtain a permit), including restoration or replacement of any damaged trees, shrubs or other vegetation. Such repair, restoration and replacement shall be subject to the sole, reasonable approval of the city manager. 
(f)  Network provider responsible. 
Network provider shall be responsible and liable for the acts and omissions of network provider's employees, temporary employees, officers, directors, consultants, agents, affiliates, subsidiaries, sub-network providers, and subcontractors in connection with the installations of any micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, as if such acts or omissions were network provider's acts or omissions. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), 9-10-19)  
Sec. 20-340-D. - Design manual—requirements upon abandonment. 
(a)  Upon abandonment or upon being deemed abandoned, network provider has a duty to promptly remove its facilities from the right-of-way. Notice from the city is not a prerequisite to the requirement for removal. 
(b)  If the network provider does not promptly remove its facilities removal procedures as set out in section 20-345 "Abandoned facilities" may be followed. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), 9-10-19)  
Sec. 20-340-E. - Design manual—general provisions. 
(a)  All requirements of this chapter shall be met as applicable. 
(b)  No city allocation of funds for removal and storage. All costs of any removal or storage of micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, as authorized under this article, shall be the responsibility of the network provider and the city is not required to expend funds to meet the requirements of the network providers. Any funds expended by the city due to an emergency or failure of a person to abide by these requirements shall be reimbursed to the city. 
(c)  Ownership. No part of a micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment erected or placed on the right-of-way by network provider will become, or be considered by the city as being affixed to a part of, the right-of-way. All portions of the micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment constructed, modified, erected, or placed by network provider on the right-of-way will be and remain the property of the network provider and may be removed by network provider at any time, provided the network provider shall notify the city manager prior to any work in the right-of-way. 
(d)  Size limits. Network providers shall provide detailed drawings, with calculations to show strict conformity to the size limitations as set forth in Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284 with each application and request for a permit for each location; provided, however, where possible Providers are encouraged to reduce the size of installed facilities. 
(e)  If Chapter 284 of the Local Government Code is found to be repealed, struck down, pre-empted or invalid, in whole or in part, then the standards required by the city, either in the municipal authorization or an amendment to the municipal authorization or the directives of the city or this article shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), 9-10-19)  
Sec. 20-340-F. - Design manual—indemnity, bonding, and security deposits. 
Indemnity, bonding, and security deposits shall be in strict accordance with the city's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with state law. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), 9-10-19)  
Sec. 20-340-G. - Design manual—updates. 
Placement or modification of micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment shall comply with the city's design manual at the time the permit for installation or modification, and as said design manual may be approved or amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), 9-10-19)  
Sec. 20-341. - Worksite regulations. 
(a)  In performing the work covered by the permit, the permit holder shall: 
(1)  Comply with trench safety requirements adopted by federal, state, and local law; 
(2)  Follow the appropriate national safety code, as applicable, regarding design and construction procedures; 
(3)  Compact the backfillings to a density of ninety-five (95) percent as determined by a testing laboratory so as to prevent settling when a trench lies under any city street, and otherwise, to a density which meets the North Texas Council of Government specifications, as adopted by the city. 
(4)  Install new facilities at a minimum depth approved by the director of public works; 
(5)  Ensure that the portion of the right-of-way in which repair work is conducted is, at all times and to the extent practicable, kept free of accumulating water; 
(6)  Promptly remove from the right-of-way all earth, gravel, stone or other material excavated from the area of such repair work, which is not needed for fill material at that location; 
(7)  Erect and maintain three (3) by three (3) feet information signs stating the identity of the person doing the work, telephone number and the permit holder's identity and telephone number at the location where construction is to occur twenty-four (24) hours prior to the beginning of work in the right-of-way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring; 
(8)  Notify the director of public works immediately of any damage to other facilities, either city or privately owned; 
(9)  Ensure that newly installed facilities will not interfere with other facilities, in particular gravity dependent facilities; 
(10)  Comply with city, state and federal guidelines for storm water management erosion control; and 
(11)  Submit to the director of public works evidence that a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) has been submitted to the Environmental Protection Agency or Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission or submit a letter from the EPA stating that the permit holder is not required to obtain such approval. 
(b)  In performing work on facilities within the right-of-way, a permit holder shall not: 
(1)  Unreasonably interfere with the operation of other facilities or equipment situated within the right-of-way, whether owned or maintained by the city or other utility providers; 
(2)  Use dynamite or other explosives during the excavation without the prior written approval of the director of public works; or 
(3)  Remove locate flags from a location while facilities are being constructed. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the relationship between a permit holder and its contractors, a permit holder is responsible for the workmanship and any damages by a contractor or subcontractor. A responsible representative of the permit holder will be available to the public works department at all times during construction. 
(d)  Except in an emergency, the working hours in the rights-of-way are 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Work that needs to be performed after 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday must be approved in advance. Any work performed outside these times must be approved twenty-four (24) hours in advance by the public works department. Directional boring is permitted only Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., unless approved in advance. No work will be done, except for emergencies, on city holidays. 
(e)  A permit holder is responsible for: 
(1)  Physically verifying the location both horizontal and vertical of all affected facilities, whether by pot holing or hand digging prior to any excavation or boring with the exception of work involving lane closures; and 
(2)  Obtaining line locators from all affected utilities prior to any excavation. Use of the geographic information system or the plans of record does not satisfy this requirement. 
(f)  The director of public works must approve in advance the placement of all manholes and/or handholes. Handholes or manholes shall not be located in sidewalks, unless approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 21, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-342. - Traffic, detours, barricades. 
(a)  A person shall obtain prior approval of the director of public works when a street or sidewalk cut is required, and comply with all requirements of the public works department for street cuts. 
(b)  A permit holder or person shall not cut or open more than one-half (½) of the roadway at any time in order to maintain the flow of traffic at all times. However, in an emergency or with the permission of the director of public works, the total width of the roadway may be cut or opened provided barricades are placed at the first intersection each way from the cut and detour signs are erected. 
(c)  Except in an emergency, all street closures or detours that will exceed twenty-four (24) hours in duration shall be posted by a sign at least two (2) days prior to the closure or detour. If a cut or opening is left after 6:00 p.m., a barricade must be placed on both sides of the cut and flares or red or amber lights shall be placed in front of each barricade. 
(d)  In performing the work, a permit holder shall furnish and install the barricades, flares, and lights as necessary, and in compliance with the Texas Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as amended from time to time. 
(e)  During the time the work is actually being conducted, the permit holder shall provide a flagger to alert the public to the work, when required by the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices or when required by a city inspector. 
(f)  A permit holder may close a traffic lane on a major thoroughfare only between 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. unless the director of public works grants prior approval. Arrow board is required on lane closures, with all barricades, advanced warning signs and thirty-six-inch reflector cones placed in accordance with the Texas Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 22, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-343. - Restoration of right-of-way. 
(a)  After completion of any work within the right-of-way, a permit holder shall return all flowlines and grades in the right-of-way to their original condition and shall complete restoration, which shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Replacing all ground cover with equal to the type of ground cover damaged during work, or better either by sodding or seeding, as directed by the director. 
(2)  Installing of all manholes and handholes, as required. 
(3)  Backfilling, or covering with a steel plate, all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes, unless other safety requirements are approved by the director of public works. 
(4)  Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines. 
(5)  Restoring excavation site to city specifications. 
(6)  Restoring of all landscaping, ground cover, and sprinkler systems. 
(7)  Removing all locate flags during the clean up process. 
(b)  A permit holder shall complete restoration to the reasonable satisfaction of the city within thirty (30) calendar days after completion of the work, unless otherwise extended by the director of public works, in accordance with existing standards of the city in effect at the time of the work. 
(c)  Should the city reasonably determine, within two (2) years from the date of the completion of the repair work, that the surface, base, irrigation system or landscape treatment requires additional restoration work to meet existing standards of the city, the permit holder responsible for the original or any subsequent restoration shall perform such restoration work to the reasonable satisfaction of the city. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsection (c) above, if the city determines that the failure of a permit holder to properly repair or restore the right-of-way constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the city may, after providing notice to the permit holder, undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts. A permit holder shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city's invoice. 
(e)  If a permit holder falls to perform necessary restoration in accordance with the requirements of this section, all work in progress, except that related to the problem, which has been permitted but not complete may be halted and the city may place a hold on any permits not approved until all restoration is complete. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 23, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-344. - Failure to complete work. 
If the permit holder fails to diligently perform the work described in the permit, abandons the job, or for other reasons does not complete the work within a timely manner, the city, after giving notice to the registration holder, shall have the authority to take such action as is necessary to restore the right-of-way to a good and safe condition for the benefit and convenience of the public. If the failure to complete the work causes a safety hazard, the city shall commence restoration and shall notify the registration holder as promptly as possible after commencing work. Under these circumstances, the permit holder shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city in restoring the right-of-way and shall make no claim against the city for any excess costs or expenses or damage incurred by the permit holder or utility provider on account of the city's action. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 24, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-345. - Removal of utility facilities; abandoned facilities. 
(a)  The city may at any time order and require any registration holder to remove and abate any facility that the director of public works determines is necessary to address a public health or safety emergency. If the registration holder or permit holder, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the city shall have the power to cause the removal or abatement of the dangerous facilities at the expense of the registration holder without liability for damages. The registration holder shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred. 
(b)  When required by the city for reasons of public safety, street vacation, widening, relocation or regrading, or installation, repair or maintenance of streets, drainage ways, sewer mains, water pipes, power lines, signal lights, or any other type of structures or improvements installed by the city on behalf of the public, the registration holder shall, at its own expense, disconnect, remove, and relocate from the right-of-way, any lines, facilities, or other improvements within sixty (60) days of the date when ordered in writing by the mayor, and the registration holder shall have no claim for reimbursement of costs or damages against the city, unless otherwise provided by state law. The 60-day limit shall not apply if the director of public works has approved a different schedule. Facilities not moved after sixty (60) days shall be deemed abandoned after the city gives the registration holder thirty (30) days' notice. 
(c)  Duty to remove abandoned facilities. 
A person that has placed facilities in the right-of-way shall remove said facilities and related equipment when such facilities are abandoned regardless of whether or not it receives notice from the city. If removal of facilities would cause damage, particularly in regard to underground facilities, this requirement may be waived by the city. 
(d)  Time for removal. 
(1)  The city may notify the person that said facilities must be removed immediately when necessary to ensure public health, safety, and welfare. 
(2)  If immediate removal is not required, the removal must be completed within the time set forth in the written notice to remove from the city and if no time is set out, then within ninety (90) days for the facilities and related equipment being abandoned. 
(3)  If the facilities are not removed after the ninety (90) day notice to remove, the city may remove the facilities thirty (30) days after notice of a final finding of abandonment. 
(4)  When a person removes, or abandons permanent structures in the right-of-way, the person shall notify the city manager or his designee in writing of such removal or abandonment and shall file with the city manager or his designee the location and description of each facility and ground equipment removed or abandoned. 
(5)  The city manager or his designee may require the person to complete additional remedial measures necessary for public safety and the integrity of the right-of-way. 
(6)  If in the judgment of the city, removal of underground facilities would cause damage, this requirement may be waived. 
(e)  Deemed abandoned. 
Facilities may be deemed abandoned as set out in this chapter. Additionally, facilities may be deemed abandoned if: 
(1)  A person does not relocate facilities as set out in 20-336 "Conditions of public right-of-way occupancy." 
(2)  A person does not correct or abate improperly installed facilities. 
(3)  A person fails to maintain the registration requirements set forth in section 20-326 "Municipal authorization required; registration; compensation and fees." 
(4)  A person utilizing the right-of-way cannot be found or contacted. 
(5)  A person utilizing the right-of-way fails to pay the required compensation. 
(6)  A person utilizing the right-of-way fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter after being given due notice of any deficiencies. The notice requirement shall only apply to persons who have maintained the required registration as set out in 20-326 "Municipal authorization; registration; compensation and fees" and are capable of being contacted. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 25, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), 9-10-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), adopted September 10, 2019 changed the title of § 20-345, as set out herein. The former title was "Removal of utility facilities" and pertained to similar subject matter.  
Sec. 20-346. - Enforcement. 
The city may refuse to issue a permit or may revoke any permit already issued and may terminate work in progress by any utility provider which is not in compliance with this article. If a person has not complied with the provisions of this article in work performed pursuant to a permit, the city may deny a subsequent application for a permit or may impose modifications. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 26, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-347. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 27, 7-11-00)  
Sec. 20-348. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  Insurance required for small node placements. 
(1)  A person shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amounts reasonably prescribed by the city with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas reasonably acceptable to the city. As a condition of registration and prior to construction, an applicant must provide, and users must maintain, acceptable proof of liability insurance in the total amount of six million dollars ($6,000,000); one million dollars ($1,000,000) primary plus five million dollars ($5,000,000) umbrella or other provisions as acceptable to the city secretary. The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements and to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and limits when the city secretary determines that changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry or the person require adjustment of the coverage. 
(2)  The coverage must be on an "occurrence" basis and must include coverage for personal injury, contractual liability, premises liability, medical damages, underground, explosion and collapse hazards and worker's compensation as required by law. 
(3)  Each policy must include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the city in writing not fewer than thirty (30) days before canceling, failing to renew, or reducing policy limits. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, the city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the State of Texas or letters written by the person in those instances where the state does not issue such letters, which provide the same coverage as required herein. However, for the city to accept such letters, the person must demonstrate by written information that it has adequate financial resources to be a self-insured entity as reasonably determined by the city, based on financial information requested by and furnished to the city. 
a.  A person shall furnish, at no cost to the city, copies of certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage required by this section to the city, unless the city requires another form of legally binding proof of insurance. If the city requests a deletion, revision or modification, a person shall exercise reasonable efforts to pay for and to accomplish the change. 
b.  An insurance certificate shall contain the following required provisions: 
1.  Name the city and its officers, employees, board members, and elected representatives as additional named insureds for all applicable coverage; 
2.  Provide for thirty (30) days' notice to the city for cancellation, nonrenewal, or material change; and 
3.  Provide that notice of claims shall be provided to the city manager by certified mail. 
c.  All persons utilizing the right-of-way shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the city manager. An insurance certificate obtained in compliance with this section is subject to city approval. The city may require the certificate to be changed to reflect changing liability limits. A person shall immediately advise the city attorney of actual or potential litigation that may develop which may affect an existing carrier's obligation to defend and indemnify. 
d.  An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required insurance policies shall protect the person and the city. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies. 
e.  The policy clause "other insurance" shall not apply to the city if the city is an insured under the policy. 
f.  Person shall pay premiums and assessments. A company which issues an insurance policy has no recourse against the city for payment of a premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by a person must provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city in connection with damage covered by the policy. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), 9-10-19)  
Sec. 20-349. - Indemnity. 
(a)  To the extent authorized by law, each person placing facilities in the public rights-of-way shall agree to, promptly defend, indemnify, and hold the city harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses, or expenses (i) for the repair, replacement, or restoration of city's property, equipment, materials, structures and facilities which are damaged, destroyed, or found to be defective as a result of the person's acts or omissions, (ii) from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments for (a) damage to or loss of the property of any person (including, but not limited to, the person, its agents, officers, employees, and subcontractors, city's agents, officers, and employees, and third parties); and/or (b) death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any person (including, but not limited to, the agents, officers, and employees of the person, person's subcontractors and city, and third parties), arising out of, incident to, concerning, or resulting from the negligent or willful act or omissions of the person, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, in the performance of activities pursuant to this article. 
(b)  This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence or willful misconduct of the city, its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors. 
(c)  The provisions of this indemnity are solely for the benefit of the city and is not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), 9-10-19)  
Secs. 20-350—20-366. - Reserved.  
Sec. 20-367. - Administrative hearing; request for exemption. 
(a)  Should any person utilizing or proposing to utilize the right-of-way desire to request an exemption from a specific standard set forth in this chapter, and section 20-334 "Exceptions" is not applicable, the person may request an administrative hearing before a board of appeals. The zoning board of adjustment shall act as the board of appeals for a request for exemption under this chapter. 
(b)  Any person requesting an exemption from any of the requirements shall file such a request with the city manager within fifteen (15) calendar days from the time that need for an exemption arose. If an exemption is requested prior to construction, the request should be submitted prior to filing for a permit. 
(c)  An exemption shall only be granted if: 
(1)  Such exemption is not contrary to the public interest; 
(2)  Such exemption will not increase the burden on the right-of-way or other right-of-way users; 
(3)  Such exemption shall not increase the right-of-way management or administrative duties for city staff; 
(4)  The exemption shall fit within the spirit of this article; and 
(5)  The application of the ordinance in the particular circumstances would create an unnecessary hardship. 
(d)  It shall take an affirmative vote of four (4) members of the board to grant the exemption. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 2(Att. A), 9-10-19)  
Secs. 20-368—20-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - STORMWATER PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 20-401. - Purposes. 
The purposes and objectives of this article are as follows: 
(a)  To maintain and improve the quality of surface water and groundwater within the City of Everman ("city"), the North Central Texas Region, and the State of Texas. 
(b)  To prevent the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff from industrial, commercial, residential, and new development or redevelopment construction sites into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and natural waters within the city. 
(c)  To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of hazardous substances, petroleum products, household hazardous waste, industrial waste, sediment from construction sites, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, and other contaminants into the storm sewers and natural waters of the city. 
(d)  To encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other hazardous consumer products. 
(e)  To facilitate compliance with state and federal water quality standards, limitations, and permits by owners and operators of industrial and construction sites within the city. 
(f)  To enable the city to comply with all federal and state laws and regulations applicable to stormwater discharges. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-402. - Administration. 
The director of public works shall implement and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed in this article upon the director of public works may be delegated by him/her to other city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-403. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations when used in this article shall have the designated meanings: 
BMP 	Best management practices 
BODS 	Five-day biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR 	Code of Federal Regulations 
COD 	Chemical oxygen demand 
EPA 	U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
HHW 	Household hazardous waste 
mg/l 	Milligrams per liter 
MS4 	Municipal separate storm sewer system 
NOI 	Notice of intent 
NOT 	Notice of termination 
NPDES 	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
ph 	Measure of acidity or alkalinity 
POTW 	Publicly owned treatment works 
PST 	Petroleum storage tank 
PE 	Licensed professional engineer 
SWPPP 	Stormwater pollution prevention plan 
TPDES 	Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
TSS 	Total suspended solids 
USC 	United States Code 
 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-404. - Definitions. 
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
Agricultural stormwater runoff means any stormwater runoff from orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, range lands, and other nonpoint source agricultural activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as defined in 40 CFR § 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as defined in 40 CFR § 122.24. 
Article means a major subdivision of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Everman. 
Best management practices (BMP) means schedules of activities, prohibited practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. 
City means the City of Everman, Texas, or the city council of Everman. 
Coal pile runoff means the rainfall runoff from or through any coal storage pile. 
Commencement of construction means the initial disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading, excavating, landfilling, and other construction activities. 
Commercial means pertaining to any business, trade, industry, or other activity engaged in for profit. 
Common plan of development means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules under one (1) plan. 
Construction means any human activity that involves clearing, grading, excavation, landfilling, or other placement, movement, removal, or disposal of soil, rock, or other earth materials. 
Contaminated means containing a harmful quantity of any substance. 
Director means the director of public works of the City of Everman, or his/her duly authorized representative. 
Discharged means any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater, or any other substance whatsoever into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or into waters of the United States. 
Discharger means any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a construction site or industrial facility. 
Domestic sewage means human excrement, gray water (from home clothes washing, bathing, showers, dishwashing, and food preparation), other wastewater from household drains, and waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories, and institutions, that is free from industrial waste. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the regional office thereof, any federal department, agency, or commission that may succeed to the authority of the EPA, and any duly authorized official of EPA or such successor agency. 
Facility means any building, structure, installation, process, or activity from which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant. 
Fertilizer means a solid or nonsolid substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient element in a form available to plants and is used primarily for its essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or stimulating growth of a plant or improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of two (2) or more fertilizers. The term does not include the excreta of an animal, plant remains, or a mixture of those substances, for which no claim of essential plant nutrients is made. 
Final stabilization means the status when all soil disturbing activities at a site have been completed, and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of eighty-five (85) percent of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures has been established, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed. 
Fire department means the fire department of the City of Everman, or any duly authorized representative thereof. 
Fire protection water means any water, and any substances or materials contained therein, used by any person other than the fire department to control or extinguish a fire. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce and other food products. 
Harmful quantity means the amount of any substance that will cause pollution of water in the state. 
Household hazardous waste (HHW) means any material generated in a household (including single and multiple residences, hotels and motels, bunk houses, ranger stations, crew quarters, camp grounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreational areas) by a consumer which, except for the exclusion provided in 40 CFR § 261.4(b)(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. 
Hazardous substance means any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR Part 302. 
Hazardous waste means any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR Part 261. 
Hazardous waste treatment, disposal, and recovery facility means all contiguous land, structures, other appurtenances and improvements on the land used for the treatment, disposal, or recovery of hazardous waste. 
Herbicide means a substance or mixture of substances used to destroy a plant or to inhibit plant growth. 
Industrial waste means any waterborne liquid or solid substance that results from any process of industry, manufacturing, mining, production, trade, or business. 
Landfilling means the deposition of soil and other inert materials on the land to raise its grade and/or smooth its features. 
Licensed professional engineer (PE) means a person who has been duly licensed and registered by the state board of registration for professional engineers to engage in the practice of engineering in the State of Texas. 
Motor vehicle fluid means any vehicle crankcase oil, antifreeze, transmission fluid, brake fluid, differential lubricant, gasoline, diesel fuel, gasoline/alcohol blend, and any other fluid used in a motor vehicle. 
Municipal landfill means an area of land or an excavation in which municipal solid waste is placed for permanent disposal, and which is not a land treatment facility, a surface impoundment, an injection well, or a pile (as these terms are defined in regulations promulgated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality). 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means the system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage. 
Municipal solid waste means solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, commercial, institutional, or recreational activities, and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and other solid waste other than industrial waste. 
NPDES or TPDES general permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity (baseline industrial general permit) means the most recent baseline industrial general permit issued by the EPA or TCEQ. 
NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction sites (construction general permit) means the most recent construction general permit issued by the EPA or TCEQ. 
NPDES permit means a permit issued by EPA (or by the State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis (see TPDES permit). 
NPDES or TPDES stormwater multisector general permit for industrial activities (multisector general permit) means the multisector general permit for stormwater discharges associated with specified industrial activities issued by the EPA or TCEQ. 
Nonpoint source means any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a "point source." 
Notice of intent (NOI) means the notice of intent that is required by either the baseline industrial general permit, the construction general permit or the multisector general permit. 
Notice of termination (NOT) means the notice of termination that is required by either the baseline industrial general permit, the construction general permit or the multisector general permit. 
Oil means any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, or crude oil, or any fraction thereof which is liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure, or sludge, oil refuse, or oil mixed with waste. 
Operator means the person or persons who, either individually or taken together, meet either of the following two (2) criteria: 
(1)  They have operational control over the facility specifications (including the ability to make modifications in specifications); or 
(2)  They have the day-to-day operational control over those activities at the facility necessary to ensure compliance with pollution prevention requirements and any permit conditions. 
Owner means the person who owns a facility or part of a facility. 
Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
Pesticide means a substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel, or mitigate any pest, or any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant (as these terms are defined in Section 76.001 of the Texas Agriculture Code). 
Petroleum product means a product that is obtained from distilling and processing crude oil and that is capable of being used as a fuel for the propulsion of a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor gasoline, gasohol, other alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil, and #1 and #2 diesel. 
Petroleum storage tank (PST) means any one (1) or combination of aboveground or underground storage tanks that contain petroleum products and any connecting underground pipes. 
Point source means any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff. 
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. The term "pollutant" does not include tail water or runoff water from irrigation or rainwater runoff from cultivated or uncultivated range land, pasture land, and farm land. 
Pollution means the alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any waters in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose. 
Public works construction project means any construction performed or funded in whole or part, separately or collectively, by the federal, state, county, or local government, including the City of Everman. 
Qualified personnel means persons who possess the appropriate competence, skills, and ability (as demonstrated by sufficient education, training, experience, and/or, when applicable, any required certification or licensing) to perform a specific activity in a timely and complete manner consistent with the applicable regulatory requirements and generally accepted industry standards for such activity. Operator is responsible for providing qualifications to the director and the director has the authority to approve or deny the qualifications of personnel. 
Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing, directly or indirectly, into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or the waters of the United States. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes that consist of (a) combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; and (b) noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit). 
Sanitary sewer (sewer) means the system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the sewage treatment plant utilized by the city (and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted). 
Septic tank waste means any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Service station means any retail establishment engaged in the business of selling fuel for motor vehicles that is dispensed from stationary storage tanks. 
Sanitary sewage (sewage) means the domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is discharged into the city sanitary sewer system and passes through the sanitary sewer system to the sewage treatment plant utilized by the city for treatment. 
Site means the land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity. 
Solid waste means any garbage, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including, solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from community and institutional activities. 
State means the State of Texas. 
Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity means the discharge from any conveyance which is used for collecting and conveying stormwater and which is directly related to manufacturing, processing, or raw materials storage areas at an industrial plant which is within one (1) of the categories of facilities listed in 40 CFR Part 122, and which is not excluded from EPA's definition of the same term. 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) means a plan required by either the construction general permit, the baseline industrial general permit, or the multisector general permit and which describes and ensures the implementation of practices that are to be used to reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction or other industrial activity at the facility. 
Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) means the permit program administered by TCEQ, as the state agency delegated to act on behalf of the EPA with respect to the NPDES permit program pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b). 
Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES permit) means a permit issued by the state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable to an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Uncontaminated means not containing a harmful quantity of any substance. 
Used motor oil (used oil) means any oil that has been refined from crude oil or a synthetic oil that, as a result of use, storage, or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of original properties but that may be suitable for further use and is recyclable in compliance with state and federal law. 
Water in the state (water) means any groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico, inside the territorial limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or nonnavigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the State or inside the jurisdiction of the State. 
Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
Water quality standard means the designation of a body or segment of surface water in the state for desirable uses and the narrative and numerical criteria deemed by the state to be necessary to protect those uses, as specified in Chapter 307 of Title 31 of the Texas Administrative Code. 
Waters of the United States means all waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and any waters within the federal definition of "waters of the United States" at 40 CFR § 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush that results from landscaping maintenance and land-clearing operations. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-405. - General prohibition; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to any enforcement action for violation of subsection (a), above, upon presentation of evidence by the discharger, that the discharge was composed entirely of one (1) or more of the following categories of discharges: 
(1)  A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, an NPDES or TPDES permit (other than the NPDES or TPDES permit for discharges from the MS4); 
(2)  A discharge or flow resulting from fire fighting by the fire department; 
(3)  A discharge or flow of fire protection water that does not contain oil or hazardous substances or materials that the fire code in this Code of Ordinances requires to be contained and treated prior to discharge, in which case treatment adequate to remove harmful quantities of pollutants must have occurred prior to discharge; 
(4)  Agricultural stormwater runoff; 
(5)  A discharge or flow from water line flushing, but not including a discharge from water line disinfection by superchlorination or other means unless it contains no harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in line disinfection; 
(6)  A discharge or flow from lawn watering, landscape irrigation, or other irrigation water; 
(7)  A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or natural spring; 
(8)  A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped groundwater or rising groundwater; 
(9)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined in 40 CFR § 35.2005(20)) to the MS4; 
(10)  Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation drain, crawl space pump, or footing drain; 
(11)  A discharge or flow from a potable watersource not containing any harmful substance or material from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank or other container; 
(12)  A discharge or flow from individual residential car washing (external surfaces only); 
(13)  A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland; 
(14)  A discharge or flow from water used in street washing that is not contaminated with any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance, and the temperature of which has not been elevated by induced heating; 
(c)  No affirmative defense shall be available under subsection (a), above, if the discharge or flow in question has been determined by the director to be a source of a pollutant or pollutants to the waters of the United States or to the MS4, written notice of such determination has been provided to the discharger, and the discharge has occurred more than fifteen (15) calendar days beyond such notice. The correctness of the director's determination that a discharge is a source of a pollutant or pollutants may be reviewed in any administrative or judicial enforcement proceeding. 
(d)  The burden of proof that a discharge was composed entirely of one (1) or more of the categories in subsection (a), above, and that it was not a source of a pollutant or pollutants to the waters of the United States or to the MS4 is upon the person or entity responsible for the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-406. - Specific prohibitions and requirements. 
(a)  The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not inclusive of all the discharges prohibited by the general prohibition in section 20-405. 
(b)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city's NPDES permit or TPDES discharge permit for discharges from its MS4. 
(c)  No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose, or otherwise introduce or cause, allow, or permit to be introduced any of the following substances into the MS4: 
(1)  Any used motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid; 
(2)  Any industrial waste; 
(3)  Any hazardous waste, including household hazardous waste; 
(4)  Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit trap waste; 
(5)  Any garbage, rubbish, yard waste, or other floatable material; 
(6)  Any wastewater from a commercial carwash facility; from any vehicle washing, cleaning, or maintenance at any new or used automobile or other vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop, or maintenance facility; or from any washing, cleaning, or maintenance of any business or commercial or public service vehicle, including a truck, bus, or heavy equipment; 
(7)  Any wastewater from the washing, cleaning, deicing, or other maintenance of aircraft; 
(8)  Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the washing or other cleaning of a building exterior that contains any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, or any other harmful cleaning substance, or that is at a temperature that has been elevated by induced heating unless performed in compliance with the best management practices adopted by the Everman Public Works Department; 
(9)  Any wastewater from commercial floor, rug, or carpet cleaning; 
(10)  Any wastewater from the washdown or other cleaning of pavement that contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance, or that is at a temperature that has been elevated by induced heating; or any wastewater from the washdown or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill, leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of such released material have been previously removed; 
(11)  Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or the blowdown from a boiler; 
(12)  Any ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt base material or hydromulch material, or any wastewater or substance from the cleaning of any vehicle or equipment containing, or used in transporting or applying, such material; 
(13)  Any runoff or washdown water from any animal pen, kennel, or fowl or livestock containment area; 
(14)  Any filter backwash from a swimming pool; 
(15)  Any discharge from water line disinfection by superchlorination or other means if it contains any harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in line disinfection; 
(16)  Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous substances or materials that the fire code in this Code of Ordinances requires to be contained and treated prior to discharge, unless treatment adequate to remove pollutants occurs prior to discharge. This prohibition does not apply to discharges or flow from fire fighting by the fire department; 
(17)  Any wastewater from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment; 
(18)  Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle salvage yard or any other facility classified as Standard Industrial Classification 5015 or 5093; 
(19)  Any substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the MS4; 
(20)  Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST), or any leachate or runoff from soil contaminated by a leaking PST, or any discharge of pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from the remediation of any such PST release. 
(d)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil, or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation, landfilling, or other construction activities (including any placement, movement, removal, or disposal of soil, rock, or other earth materials) in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control measures to the maximum extent practicable. 
(e)  No person shall connect an interior floor drain or any other source of wastewater, domestic or industrial, to the MS4, or allow such a connection to continue. 
(f)  Regulation of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers: 
(1)  No person shall use or cause to be used any pesticide or herbicide contrary to any directions for use on any labeling required by state or federal statute or regulation. 
(2)  No person shall use or cause to be used any pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer in any manner that the person knows, or reasonably should know, is likely to cause, or does cause, a harmful quantity of the pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer to enter the MS4 or waters of the United States. 
(3)  No person shall dispose of, discard, store, or transport a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer, or a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer container, in a manner that the person knows, or reasonably should know, is likely to cause, or does cause, a harmful quantity of the pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer to enter the MS4 or waters of the United States. 
(4)  If provided with a display notice containing the provisions of this subsection (f), pertaining to the regulation of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers (or a reasonable description thereof), and the information that any user of the product may obtain further information from the director, any person selling pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers at retail or wholesale shall post the notice prominently where it may be read by purchasers of the product. 
(g)  Used oil regulation: 
(1)  No person shall: 
a.  Discharge used oil into the MS4 or a sewer, drainage system, septic tank, surface water, groundwater, or watercourse; 
b.  Knowingly mix or commingle used oil with solid waste that is to be disposed of in a landfill or knowingly directly dispose of used oil on land or in a landfill; 
c.  Apply used oil to a road or land for dust suppression, weed abatement, or other similar use that introduces used oil into the environment. 
(2)  All businesses that change motor oil for the public, municipal waste landfills, and fire stations are encouraged to serve as public used oil collection centers as provided by state statute in Section 371.024 of the Texas Health and Safety Code. 
(3)  A retail dealer who annually sells directly to the public more than five hundred (500) gallons of oil in containers for use off-premises shall post in a prominent place a sign provided by the city or by the state informing the public that improper disposal of used oil is prohibited by law. The sign shall prominently display the toll-free telephone number of the state used oil information center. If a sign is provided by the city, it shall also prominently display the city telephone number where information concerning the proper disposal of used oil may be obtained. 
(h)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the sanitary sewer system any discharge of stormwater, polluted or unpolluted, or any discharge that causes or contributes to causing the City of Everman to violate a water quality standard, its agreements associated with the regional sewage treatment plants or any state issued permit. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-407. - Goal for erosion and sediment control at construction sites. 
Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth in the most recent version of the city's building and building regulations ordinance and shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the city. Unless otherwise specified by the building and building regulations code, the goal for erosion and sediment control at sites over one (1) acre disturbed by construction is achievement of at least the minimum site rating of 0.70 using the site rating system as presented in Section 3 of the Stormwater Quality Best Management Practices for Construction Activities—North Central Texas, Second Edition, North Central Texas Council of Governments, Arlington, Texas, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-408. - General requirements for stormwater discharges from construction activities. 
(a)  All operators of construction sites shall use best management practices to control and reduce the discharge, to the MS4 and to waters of the United States, of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation, landfilling, and other construction activities to the maximum extent practicable. Any best management practices capable of installation and/or implementation prior to commencement of construction (for example, structural measures) shall be installed and/or implemented prior to commencement of construction at the site or in compliance with a schedule for installation and/or implementation in an applicable SWPPP. The best management practices used at construction sites may include, but not be limited to, the following measures: 
(1)  Ensuring that existing vegetation is preserved where feasible and that disturbed portions of the site are stabilized as soon as practicable in portions of the site where construction activities have temporarily or permanently ceased; 
(2)  Use of structural practices to divert flows from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the site to the extent feasible; 
(3)  Minimization of the tracking of sediments off-site by vehicles, the generation of dust, and the escape of other windblown waste from the site; 
(4)  Prevention of the discharge of building materials, including cement, lime, concrete, asphalt and mortar, to the MS4 or waters of the United States; 
(5)  Measures to prevent and contain spills of paints, solvents, fuels, septic waste, and other hazardous chemicals and pollutants associated with construction, and to assure proper cleanup and disposal of any such spills in compliance with state, federal, and local requirements; 
(6)  Implementation of proper waste disposal and waste management techniques, including covering waste materials, minimizing ground contact with hazardous chemicals and trash, and installing and maintaining covered receptacles for rubbish and garbage to assure that such waste materials are not blown or carried by rainfall runoff from the site; 
(7)  Timely maintenance of vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures, and other best management practices to maintain them in good and effective operating condition; and 
(8)  Installation of structural measures during the construction process to control pollutants in stormwater discharges that will occur after construction operations have been completed. Structural measures should be placed on upland soils to the degree attainable. Such installed structural measures may include, but not be limited to, the following: stormwater detention structures (including wet ponds); stormwater retention structures; flow attenuation by use of open vegetative swales and natural depressions; other velocity dissipation devices; infiltration of runoff on site; and sequential systems which combine several practices. Operators of construction sites are only responsible for the installation and maintenance of stormwater management measures prior to final stabilization of the site, and are not responsible for maintenance after stormwater discharges associated with construction activity have terminated. 
(b)  Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction site) shall inspect disturbed areas of any construction site that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation, structural control measures, and locations where vehicles enter or exit the site, at least once every seven (7) calendar days and within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of a storm that is 0.5 inches or greater. All erosion and sediment control measures and other identified best management practices shall be observed in order to ensure that they are operating correctly and are effective in preventing significant impacts to receiving waters and the MS4. Based on the results of the inspection, best management practices shall be modified as appropriate, and as soon as is practicable. 
(c)  Any owner of a site of construction activity, whether or not he/she is an operator, is jointly and individually responsible for compliance with the requirements in this section. 
(d)  Any contractor or subcontractor on a site of construction activity, who is not an owner or operator, but who is responsible under his/her contract or subcontract, for implementing a best management practices control measure, is jointly and individually responsible for any willful or negligent failure on his/her part to adequately implement that control measure. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-409. - Management plan submittal and review for stormwater discharges from construction activity. 
(a)  Unless within one (1) or more of the exceptions specified in subsection (f), below, all operators of sites of construction activity, including clearing, grading, excavation, and landfilling activities, shall prepare and submit the following documents to the building department at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the commencement of construction activities (unless, pursuant to subsection (b), below, the director expressly allows construction to be commenced within a shorter period of time following the document submittal). 
(1)  An identifying notice containing the following information: 
a.  The name, address, and telephone number of each operator of the construction activity; 
b.  The name, address, and telephone number of each owner of the construction site; 
c.  The location of the construction site, by street address and legal description; and 
d.  A description of the nature of the construction project. 
(2)  Plans and specifications illustrating and describing the best management practices required by section 20-408(a), above, that will be implemented at the construction site. Such plans and specifications shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a licensed professional engineer, except in instances of land clearing or landfilling disturbing less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet of land without any existing plans or present intention of erecting a building or other structure on the site. 
(b)  The director may allow construction to be commenced within fewer than fifteen (15) calendar days following submittal of the documents required by subsection (a), above, if he/she expressly determines that: 
(1)  The required identifying notice and management plans and specifications are complete and satisfactory; 
(2)  The director has been afforded adequate time and opportunity to review the management plans and specifications; and 
(3)  The management practices described in the plans and observed upon any site inspection conducted are adequate to control and reduce the discharge of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other materials associated with construction activities to the maximum extent practicable. 
(c)  If, upon the director's review of the management plans and specifications required by subsection (a), (or any modified plans required by subsection (e)) and any site inspection that the director may conduct, the director determines that the management practices described in the plans or observed upon the site inspection are not adequate to control and reduce the discharge of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other materials associated with construction activities to the maximum extent practicable, the director may issue an order prohibiting the commencement, or the continuation, of any construction activity at the site. Any order issued by the director under the authority of this section may be in the form of a compliance order under section 20-418, an emergency cease and desist order under section 20-420, or a stop work order under section 20-421. 
(d)  The city may deny approval of any building permit, grading permit, or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction, or to assume occupancy, on the grounds that the management practices described in the plans or observed upon a site inspection by the director are determined not to control and reduce the discharge of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other materials associated with construction activities to the maximum extent practicable. 
(e)  Whenever the management practices at a construction site are modified (as a result of change in the construction project, in order to implement more effective management practices, in response to an order or request from the city, or for any other reason), a written description of such modifications of the management practices, signed and sealed by a professional engineer, shall be submitted to the director as soon as possible, but in no case later than seven (7) calendar days following the change in the management practices. 
(f)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to any of the following activities: 
(1)  Any construction activity that results in the disturbance of one (1) or more acres of total land area, or that is part of a common plan of development or sale within which one (1) or more acres of total land area are disturbed, and any other construction activity for which an NPDES or TPDES permit is required for stormwater discharges associated with that construction activity. (In such circumstances, the requirements of section 20-410 apply in lieu of this section.) 
(2)  Any public works construction project that is administered, performed, contracted, or funded (in whole or in part) by the city. 
(3)  Any construction activity, not a part of a larger plan of development of one (1) acre or more, related to the construction, alteration, or addition to a single-family, duplex or four-plex residential structure, or an accessory use to any such structure, where one (1) primary structure is constructed per legal block and the construction activity does not result in the disturbance of more than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet of total land area. 
(4)  Any construction incident to repair or maintenance of a utility line (such as for telecommunications, electricity, water, sewer, and natural gas). (Construction incident to the laying of new utility lines or replacement of existing lines pursuant to this section is not exempted from section 20-409.) 
(5)  Interior alteration of an existing building when the alteration does not increase the square footage, area, or height of the building. 
(6)  Construction of a fence, but no exemption is granted by this subparagraph for construction of a retaining wall or a fence that may significantly obstruct or change the direction of flow of water. 
(7)  Any construction activity that the director expressly finds not to cause, or threaten to cause, any discharge of any harmful quantity of any material associated with construction activity into the MS4 or to any other waters of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-410. - Five-acre disturbances from construction activity. 
All operators of sites of construction activity, including clearing, grading, excavation, and landfilling activities, that result in the disturbance of five (5) or more acres of total land area, or that are part of a common plan of development or sale within which five (5) or more acres of total land area are disturbed, or who are required to obtain an NPDES or TPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity, shall comply with the following requirements (in addition to those in section 20-408). 
(a)  Any operator who intends to obtain coverage for stormwater discharges from a construction site under the NPDES or TPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction sites (the "construction general permit") shall submit a signed copy of its notice of intent (NOI) to the director of public works, and to the building department, at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the commencement of construction activities. If the construction activity is already underway upon the effective date of this article, the NOI shall be submitted within thirty (30) calendar days after the effective date of this article. For stormwater discharges from construction sites where the operator changes, an NOI shall be submitted at least two (2) calendar days prior to when the new operator commences work at the site. 
(b)  A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be prepared and implemented prior to the beginning of construction activities in accordance with the requirements of the construction general permit or any individual NPDES or TPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the construction site, and with any additional requirement imposed by this article and any other city ordinance. 
(c)  The SWPPP shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a licensed professional engineer. The signature and seal of the licensed professional engineer shall constitute his/her attestation that the SWPPP fully complies with the requirements of the construction general permit, or with any applicable individual NPDES or TPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the construction site, and with any additional requirement imposed by or under this article. The SWPPP shall contain the name, title, and business address of the licensed professional engineer signing it, and the date that he/she did so. 
(d)  The SWPPP shall be updated and modified as appropriate and as required by the construction general permit and this article. Any update or modification to the SWPPP shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a licensed professional engineer. 
(e)  The SWPPP shall be prepared and submitted to the building department at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the commencement of construction activities. If the construction activity is already underway upon the effective date of this article, the SWPPP shall be submitted within thirty (30) calendar days after the effective date of this article. 
(f)  A copy of any SWPPP that is required by subsection (b) shall be submitted to the city in conjunction with any application for a building permit, grading permit, site development plan approval, and any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction at the site. 
(g)  If, upon the director's review of the SWPPP (or any modification to the SWPPP) and any site inspection that the director may conduct, the director determines that the SWPPP does not comply with the requirements of the construction general permit, any individual NPDES or TPDES permit issued for stormwater discharge from the construction site, or any additional requirement imposed by or under this article, the director may issue an order prohibiting the commencement, or the continuation, of any construction activity at the site. Also, if at any time the director determines that the SWPPP is not being fully implemented, the director may similarly issue an order prohibiting the continuation of any construction activity at the site. Any order issued by the director under the authority of this paragraph may be in the form of a compliance order under section 20-418, an emergency cease and desist order under section 20-420, or a stop work order under section 20-421. 
(h)  Upon review of the SWPPP and any site inspection that is conducted, the city may deny approval of any building permit, grading permit, or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction, or to assume occupancy, on the grounds that the SWPPP does not comply with the requirements of the construction general permit, any individual or group NPDES or TPDES permit issued for stormwater discharge from the construction site, or any additional requirement imposed by or under this article. Also, if at any time the city determines that the SWPPP is not being fully implemented, the city may similarly deny approval of any building permit, grading permit, or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction, or to assume occupancy, at the site. 
(i)  All contractors and subcontractors identified in an SWPPP shall sign a copy of the following certification statement before conducting any professional service identified in the SWPPP: 
I certify under penalty of law that I understand the terms and conditions of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit and/or the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit that authorizes the stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity from the construction site identified as part of this certification. 
The certification must include the name and title of the person providing the signature; the name, address, and telephone number of the contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of the site; and the date the certification is made. 
(j)  The SWPPP, with the licensed professional engineer's signature, seal, and date affixed, and the certifications of contractors and subcontractors required by subsection (i), and with any modifications attached, shall be retained at the construction site from the date of commencement of construction through the date of final stabilization. 
(k)  The operator shall make a copy of the SWPPP and any modification thereto available to the director and any other authorized city inspector at the construction site upon request (as well as to EPA and state inspectors). 
(l)  The director may notify the operator at any time that the SWPPP does not meet the requirements of the construction general permit, any applicable individual NPDES or TPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the construction site, or any additional requirement imposed by or under this article. Such notification shall identify those provisions of the permit or ordinance which are not being met by the SWPPP, and identify which provisions of the SWPPP require modifications in order to meet such requirements. Within seven (7) calendar days of such notification from the Director (or as otherwise provided by the director), the operator shall make the required changes to the SWPPP and shall submit to the director a written certification that the requested modifications have been made. 
(m)  The operator shall modify the SWPPP whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance, which has a significant effect on the potential for the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or to the waters of the United States, and which has not otherwise been addressed in the SWPPP, or if the SWPPP proves to be ineffective in eliminating or significantly minimizing pollutants, or in otherwise achieving the general objective of controlling pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction activity. In addition, the SWPPP shall be modified to identify any new contractor and/or subcontractor that will implement a measure in the SWPPP. All modifications to the SWPPP signed and sealed by a professional engineer shall be submitted to the director within seven (7) calendar days of a change, determination of ineffectiveness (self or city inspection), or effective date of changes in contractor and/or subcontractor. 
(n)  Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction site) shall inspect disturbed areas of the construction site that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation, structural control measures, and locations where vehicles enter or exit the site, at least once every seven (7) calendar days and within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of the storm that is 0.5 inches or greater. Disturbed areas and areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation shall be inspected for evidence of, or the potential for, pollutants entering the drainage system. Erosion and sediment control measures identified in the SWPPP shall be observed to ensure that they are operating correctly. Where discharge locations or points are accessible, they shall be inspected to ascertain whether erosion control measures are effective in preventing significant impacts to receiving waters or the MS4. Locations where vehicles enter or exit the site shall be inspected for evidence of off-site sediment tracking. 
(o)  Based on the results of the inspections required by section 20-410(n), above, the site description and/or the pollution prevention measures identified in the SWPPP shall be modified as appropriate, but in no case later than seven (7) calendar days following the inspection. Such modifications shall provide for timely implementation of any changes to the SWPPP within seven (7) calendar days following the inspection. All modifications to the SWPPP shall be submitted to the director within seven (7) calendar days of the date of inspection. 
(p)  A report summarizing the scope of any inspection required by subsection (n), above, and the name(s) and qualifications of personnel making the inspection, the date(s) of the inspection, major observations relating to the implementation of the SWPPP, and actions taken in accordance with section 20-410(o), above, shall be made and retained as part of the SWPPP for at least three (3) years from the date that the site is finally stabilized. Such report shall identify any incidence of noncompliance. Where a report does not identify any incidence of noncompliance, the report shall contain a certification that the facility is in compliance with the SWPPP, the facility's NPDES or TPDES permit, and this article. The report shall be certified and signed by the person responsible for making it. 
(q)  The operator shall retain copies of any SWPPP and all reports required by this article or by the NPDES or TPDES permit for the site, and records of all data used to complete the NOI, for a period of at least three (3) years from the date that the site is finally stabilized. 
(r)  Where a site has been finally stabilized and all stormwater discharges from construction activities that are authorized by this article and by the NPDES or TPDES permit for those construction activities are eliminated, or where the operator of all stormwater discharges at a facility changes, the operator of the construction site shall submit to the director of public works, and to any other responsible personnel, a notice of termination (NOT) that includes the information required for notices of termination by the construction general permit. 
(s)  Upon final stabilization of the construction site, the owner (or the duly authorized representative thereof) shall submit to the responsible personnel written certification by a licensed professional engineer that the site has been finally stabilized. (See definition of final stabilization in this article.) The city may withhold an occupancy or use permit for any premises constructed on the site until such certification of final stabilization has been filed and the responsible personnel has determined, following any appropriate inspection, that final stabilization has, in fact, occurred and that any required permanent structural controls have been completed. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-411. - Stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity. 
(a)  All operators of (1) municipal landfills; (2) hazardous waste treatment, disposal, and recovery facilities; (3) industrial facilities that are subject to Section 313 of Title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA) 42, USC § 11023; and (4) industrial facilities that the director determines are contributing a substantial pollutant loading to the MS4, which are sources of stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Any operator who intends to obtain coverage for stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity under the NPDES or TPDES general permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity ("the baseline industrial general permit") or the NPDES or TPDES stormwater multisector general permit for industrial activities ("the multisector general permit) shall submit a signed copy of its notice of intent (NOI) to the director at least two (2) calendar days prior to the commencement of the industrial activity at the facility. If industrial activity requiring an NPDES or TPDES stormwater permit is already underway upon the effective date of this article, a copy of the permit assignment notice or the NOI shall be submitted within thirty (30) calendar days. Where the operator of a facility with a stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity which is covered by an NPDES or TPDES general permit changes, the new operator of the facility shall submit an NOI at least two (2) calendar days prior to the change. (Note: Reference within this section to an NPDES or TPDES general permit or to the appropriate NPDES or TPDES general permit shall be deemed to refer to either the baseline industrial general permit or the multisector general permit.) 
(2)  A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be prepared and implemented in accordance with the requirements of the appropriate NPDES or TPDES general permit or any individual NPDES or TPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the industrial facility, and with any additional requirement imposed by or under this article, and any other city ordinance. 
(3)  The SWPPP shall be completed prior to the submittal of the NOI to the director and, for a new industrial operation, prior to the commencement of the industrial activity at the facility. The SWPPP shall be updated and modified as appropriate and as required by the appropriate NPDES or TPDES general permit and this article. 
(4)  A copy of any NOI that is required by subsection (a)(1) shall be submitted to the city in conjunction with any application for a permit or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue operation of the industrial facility. 
(5)  The director may require any operator who is required by subsection (a)(2) to prepare a SWPPP to submit the SWPPP, and any modifications thereto, to the director for review. Such submittal and review of the SWPPP may be required by the director prior to commencement of or during industrial activity at the facility. 
(6)  Upon the director's review of the SWPPP and any site inspection that he/she may conduct, the city may deny approval of any application for a permit or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue operation of the facility, on the grounds that the SWPPP does not comply with the requirements of the appropriate NPDES or TPDES general permit or any individual NPDES or TPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the industrial facility, or any additional requirement imposed by or under this article or other city ordinances. Also, if at any time the director determines that the SWPPP is not being fully implemented, the city may similarly deny approval of any application for a permit or other city approval necessary to commence or continue operation of the industrial facility. 
(7)  The SWPPP, with any modifications attached, shall be retained at the industrial facility from the date of commencement of operations until all stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity at the facility are eliminated and the required notice of termination (NOT) has been submitted in accordance with the appropriate NPDES or TPDES general permit. 
(8)  The operator shall make the SWPPP and any modification thereto available to the director upon request (as well as to EPA and state inspectors). 
(9)  The director may notify the operator at any time that the SWPPP does not meet the requirements of the appropriate NPDES or TPDES general permit, any applicable individual NPDES or TPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the industrial facility, or any additional requirement imposed by or under this article or other city ordinances. Such notification shall identify those provisions of the permit or ordinance which are not being met by the SWPPP, and identify which provisions of the SWPPP require modifications in order to meet such requirements. Within thirty (30) calendar days of such notification from the director (or as otherwise provided by the director), the operator shall make the required changes to the SWPPP and shall submit to the director a written certification that the requested changes have been made. 
(10)  The operator shall amend the SWPPP whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance, which has a significant effect on the potential for the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or to the waters of the United States, or if the SWPPP proves to be ineffective in eliminating or significantly minimizing pollutants, or in otherwise achieving the general objective of controlling pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity. 
(11)  Qualified personnel (provided by the operator) shall inspect equipment and areas of the facility specified in the SWPPP at appropriate intervals. A set of tracking or follow-up procedures shall be used to ensure that appropriate actions are taken in response to the inspections. Records of inspection shall be maintained and made available to the director upon request. 
(12)  Qualified personnel (provided by the operator) shall conduct comprehensive site compliance evaluations as required by the appropriate NPDES or TPDES general permit at intervals of no less than once per year. Based on the results of the compliance evaluation, the description of potential pollutant sources and the pollution prevention measures and controls that are identified in the SWPPP shall be revised as appropriate within two (2) weeks of such evaluation and shall provide for implementation of any changes to the SWPPP in a timely manner, but in no case more than twelve (12) weeks after the compliance evaluation. 
(13)  A report summarizing the scope of the comprehensive site compliance evaluation required by the appropriate NPDES or TPDES general permit, personnel making the compliance inspection, the date(s) of the inspection, major observations relating to the implementation of the SWPPP, and actions taken in accordance with necessary and appropriate plan revisions shall be made and retained as part of the SWPPP for at least one (1) year after all stormwater discharges from the facility are eliminated and the required NOT has been submitted. The report shall identify any incidence of noncompliance; or, if the report does not identify any incidence of noncompliance, the report shall contain a certification that the facility is in compliance with the SWPPP, the applicable NPDES or TPDES permit, and this article. The report shall be signed by the individual responsible for the comprehensive site compliance evaluation, and it shall be submitted to the director within ten (10) calendar days of its completion. 
(14)  If the industrial facility is required by the appropriate NPDES or TPDES general permit to conduct monitoring, records of the monitoring results shall be retained at the facility and made available to the director upon request. 
(15)  By written notice, the director may require any industrial facility identified in accordance with this section 20-411 to implement a monitoring program at its expense that includes the submission of quantitative data on the following constituents: 
a.  Any pollutants limited in effluent guidelines subcategories; 
b.  Any pollutant listed in an existing NPDES or TPDES permit for the facility; 
c.  Oil and grease, COD, pH, 30D5, TSS, total phosphorus, total Kjeldahl nitrogen, nitrate plus nitrite nitrogen; and 
d.  Information on discharges required under 40 CFR § 122.21(g)(7)(iii) and (iv). 
The director may require written reports of any such monitoring to be submitted to him/her. 
(16)  By written notice, the director may require any industrial facility identified in this section to conduct semi-annual or annual monitoring of stormwater discharges, or the director may specify an alternative monitoring frequency and/or specify additional parameters to be analyzed. The director may require written reports of any such additional monitoring to be submitted to him/her. 
(17)  The operator shall retain the SWPPP until at least one (1) year after stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity at the facility are eliminated, or that operator is no longer operating the facility, and a notice of termination (NOT) in compliance with the appropriate NPDES or TPDES general permit has been submitted. The operator shall retain all records of all monitoring information, copies of all required reports, and records of all data used to complete the NOI, until at least one (1) year after all stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity at the facility are eliminated, or the operator ceases to operate that facility, and the required notice of termination (NOT) has been submitted. 
(18)  For discharges subject to monitoring requirements of the appropriate NPDES or TPDES general permit, in addition to the records-retention requirements of the paragraph above, operators shall retain records of all monitoring information collected for the period of time required by the appropriate NPDES or TPDES general permit. Operators must submit such monitoring results, and/or a summary thereof, to the director upon his/her request. 
(19)  Upon the effective date of this article, any discharge composed of coal pile runoff shall comply with the following limitations: 
a.  No discharge shall exceed a maximum concentration for any time of fifty (50) mg/l total suspended solids, nor shall such runoff be diluted with stormwater or other flows in order to meet this limitation; 
b.  The pH of such discharges shall be within the range of 6.0—9.0. 
Any untreated overflow from facilities designed, constructed, and operated to treat the volume of coal pile runoff which is associated with a ten-year, twenty-four-hour rainfall event shall not be subject to the fifty (50) mg/l limitation for total suspended solids. 
(20)  Upon the effective date of this article, no discharge shall contain any of the following hazardous metals in a concentration exceeding the maximum concentrations (in mg/l) of each of the hazardous metals listed below: 
Metal 	Averaqe 	Daily 
Composite 	Grab 
Sample 
Arsenic 	0.1 	0.2 	0.3 
Barium 	1.0 	2.0 	4.0 
Cadmium 	0.05 	0.1 	0.2 
Chromium 	0.5 	1.0 	5.0 
Copper 	0.5 	1.0 	2.0 
Lead 	0.5 	1.0 	1.5 
Manganese 	1.0 	2.0 	3.0 
Mercury 	0.005 	0.005 	0.01 
Nickel 	1.0 	2.0 	3.0 
Selenium 	0.05 	0.1 	0.2 
Silver 	0.05 	0.1 	0.2 
Zinc 	1.0 	2.0 	6.0 
 
(21)  Where all stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity that are authorized by this article, and by the NPDES or TPDES permit for those discharges from industrial activities, are eliminated, or where the operator of stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity at a facility changes, the operator of the facility shall submit to the director a notice of termination (NOT) that includes the information required for notices of termination by the appropriate NPDES or TPDES general permit. 
(b)  Any owner of a facility with a stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity to which subsection (a) applies, whether or not he/she is an operator of the facility, is jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the best management practices (BMP) measures required in the SWPPP for the facility. 
(c)  Upon request by the director, all owners and operators of any facility that experience a problem complying with the requirements of this article, the industrial general permit, or any applicable individual or group NPDES or TPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the industrial facility, shall consult with the director, any other representative of the city, and any third party designated by the city in an attempt to achieve compliance as soon as practicable. If compliance is not achieved to the city's satisfaction, the city may, in its discretion, report the noncompliance to EPA and/or the state, and/or the city may itself undertake any enforcement action authorized by sections 20-415 through 20-421, and 20-424 through 20-430 of this article. Exercise of the city's option for consultation under this subsection shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other enforcement action against any owner or operator of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-412. - Right of entry; inspection and sampling. 
The director, or his/her authorized representative, shall have the right to enter the premises of any person discharging stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or to waters of the United States to determine if the discharger is complying with all requirements of this article, and with any state or federal discharge permit, limitation, or requirement. Dischargers shall allow the director ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and for the performance of any additional duties. Dischargers shall make available to the Director, upon request, any SWPPPs, modifications thereto, self-inspection reports, monitoring records, compliance evaluations, notices of intent, and any other records, reports, and other documents related to compliance with this article and with any state or federal discharge permit. 
(a)  Where a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director or his authorized representative(s) will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing his/her responsibilities. 
(b)  The director shall have the right to set up on the discharger's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the discharger's operations. 
(c)  The director may require any discharger to the MS4 or waters of the United States to conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis, and other monitoring of its stormwater discharges, and may specify the frequency and parameters of any such required monitoring. 
(d)  The director may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary at the discharger's expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(e)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the discharger at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the discharger. 
(f)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director access to the discharger's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-413. - Search warrants. 
If the director, or his/her authorized representative, has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article or any state or federal discharge permit, limitation, or requirement, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the Director may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. For purposes of this section, the city manager, director of public works, the city engineer, and the duly authorized representatives of these city departmental directors are declared to be "health officers," as that term is used in the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, Article 18.05. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-414. - Reports of violations. 
(a)  All citizens are encouraged to report any spills, releases, illicit connections, other instances of anyone discharging pollutants into the MS4 or waters of the United States, and any other violation of this article of which they become aware, to the director, his/her delegate, or any person designated by the city manager to receive such citizen reports. 
(b)  Such citizen reports may be made by telephone, in writing, or in person. A written record of each citizen report to the city will be prepared and kept on file for a period of three (3) years, and a copy of the city's record of the report will be furnished to the reporting citizen upon request. Also upon request, the city engineer or other responsible city official will inform the reporting citizen of any action undertaken by the city in response to the citizen's report. 
(c)  The operator and the owner of any commercial or industrial activity shall report any spills, releases, illicit connections, or other instances where pollutants are discharged into the MS4 or waters of the United States and any other violation of this article for which they are responsible to the director, his/her delegate, or any person designated by the city manager to receive such reports. 
(d)  The operator and the owner of any commercial or industrial activity shall report all incidents enumerated in subsection (c), in accordance with the following: 
(1)  A hazardous and/or toxic material spill or release shall be immediately reported to the Everman Fire Department. 
(2)  Other instances where pollutants are discharged into the MS4 or waters of the United States by spill, release, illicit connections or other means shall be reported to the environmental specialist within the department of public works. 
(e)  Both the operator and the owner of any commercial or industrial activity which has resulted in a spill or release of hazardous/toxic materials or a substance of a polluting nature is responsible for proper notification of the incident to the appropriate county, state, and federal agency. The reporting of a spill/release to the City of Everman does not release the owner or operator from reporting to appropriate county, state and federal officials. 
Thus, dependent on the type of release and the nature of the emergency caused thereby (i.e., life threatening or not), the following agencies, in addition to the environmental specialist within the department of public works, are specified to be notified: 
(1)  City of Everman Fire Department; 
(2)  City of Everman Police Department; 
(3)  Public works department; 
(4)  Texas Commission on Environmental Quality; and 
(5)  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-415. - Warning notice. 
When the director finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the director may serve upon that person a written warning notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting the discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the warning notice. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a warning notice. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-416. - Notification of violation. 
When the director finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the director may serve upon that person a written notice of violation. Within ten (10) calendar days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of reoccurrence thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the alleged violator to the director. If the alleged violator denies that any violation occurred and/or contends that no corrective action is necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall be submitted to the director within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the notice. Submission of an explanation and/or plan in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. The director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any person responsible for noncompliance with any provision in this article or any order issued hereunder. Such documents may include specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 20-418, 20-419, and 20-420 of this article and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-417. - Show cause hearing. 
The director may order any person who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, to appear before the director and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the alleged violator specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the alleged violator show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the alleged violator. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the rights and procedures specified in section 20-422(g). A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the alleged violator. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-418. - Compliance orders. 
When the director finds that any person has violated, continues to violate, or threatens to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the director may issue an order to the violator directing that the violator come into compliance within a specified time limit, prior to commencement or continuance of operation, or immediately. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the MS4 and waters of the United States. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established by a state or federal standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the person of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-419. - Remediation, abatement, and restoration orders. 
When the director finds that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, and that such violation has adversely affected the MS4, or the waters of the United States, the director may issue an order to the violator directing him/her to undertake and implement any appropriate action to remediate and/or abate any adverse effects of the violation upon the MS4, or the waters of the United States, and/or to restore any part of the MS4, or the waters of the United States. Such remedial, abatement, and restoration action may include, but not be limited to: monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of the adverse effects and determination of the appropriate remedial, abatement, and/or restoration action; confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment, and disposal of any discharged or released pollution or contamination; prevention, minimization, and/or mitigation of any damage to the public health, welfare, or the environment that may result from the violation; restoration or replacement of city property or natural resources damaged by the violation. The order may direct that the remediation, abatement, and/or restoration be accomplished on a specified compliance schedule and/or be completed within a specified period of time. An order issued under this section does not relieve the violator of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of an order under this section shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against any responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-420. - Emergency cease and desist orders. 
When the director finds that any person has violated, continues to violate, or threatens to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations are likely to recur, and that the person's violation(s), or threatened violation(s), have caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, the director may issue an order to the violator directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements of this article; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under this section shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or waters of the United States, including immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility services. The director may allow the person to commence or recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this article. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the director within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the emergency cease and desist order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-421. - Stop work orders. 
Whenever the director finds that any operator of a construction site has violated, threatens to violate, or continues to violate, any provision of sections 20-407 through 20-420 of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the director may issue a stop work order to the operator, and require that a copy of the stop work order be posted at the construction site and distributed to all city departments and divisions whose decisions affect any activity at the site. Unless express written exception is made by the director, the stop work order shall prohibit any further construction activity, or any commencement of construction activity, at the site and shall bar any further inspection or approval by the city associated with a building permit, grading permit, or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the site. Issuance of a stop work order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-422. - Reconsideration and hearing. 
(a)  Any person subject to a compliance order under section 20-418, a remediation, abatement, or restoration order under section 20-419, an emergency cease and desist order under section 20-420, or a stop work order under section 20-421 of this article may petition the director to reconsider the basis for his/her order within fifteen (15) calendar days of the affected person's notice of issuance of such an order. 
(b)  Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of any further right to administrative reconsideration or review of the order. 
(c)  In its petition, the petitioning party must indicate the provisions of the order objected to, the reasons for the objection(s), any facts that are contested, the evidence that supports the petitioner's view of the facts, any alternative terms of an order that the petitioner would accept, and whether the petitioning party requests a hearing on its petition. 
(d)  The effect of any compliance order under section 20-418, remediation, abatement, or restoration order under section 20-419, and any stop work order under section 20-421 shall be stayed pending the director's reconsideration of the petition, and any hearing thereon, unless the director expressly makes a written determination to the contrary. The effectiveness of any emergency cease and desist order under section 20-420 shall not be stayed pending the director's reconsideration, or any hearing thereon, unless the director expressly and in writing stays his/her emergency order. 
(e)  Within thirty (30) calendar days of the submittal of a petition for reconsideration, the director shall either: 
(1)  Grant the petition and withdraw or modify the order accordingly; 
(2)  Deny the petition without a hearing, if no material issue of fact is raised; or 
(3)  If a hearing has been requested and a material issue of fact has been raised, set a hearing on the petition. 
(f)  Written notice of any hearing set by the director pursuant to subsection (e) shall be served on the petitioning party personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the petitioning party. 
(g)  The director may himself/herself conduct the hearing and take evidence, or he/she may designate any employee of the city or any specially designated attorney or engineer to: 
(1)  Issue in the name of the city notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing; 
(2)  Take evidence; 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the director for action thereon. 
At any hearing held pursuant to this section, testimony taken shall be under oath and recorded. Any party is entitled to present his/her case or defense by oral or documentary evidence and to conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. A transcript will be made available to any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
(h)  After the director has reviewed the evidence, he/she shall either: 
(1)  Grant the petition; 
(2)  Deny the petition; or 
(3)  Grant the petition in part and deny it in part. 
The director may modify his/her order as is appropriate based upon the evidence and arguments presented at the hearing and his/her action on the petition. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-423. - Appeal. 
Any person who remains adversely affected by the director's order after petitioning for reconsideration pursuant to section 20-422, or who is subject to an order of the director issued following a show cause hearing under section 20-417, may challenge the final action of the director in an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-424. - Civil remedies. 
(a)  Whenever it appears that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article that relates to: 
(1)  The preservation of public safety relating to the materials or methods used in construction of any structure or improvement of real property; 
(2)  The preservation of public health or to the fire safety of a building or other structure or improvement; 
(3)  The establishment of criteria for land subdivision or construction of buildings, including street design; 
(4)  Dangerously damaged or deteriorated structures or improvements; 
(5)  Conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation, or other matter that creates breeding and living places for insects and rodents; or 
(6)  Point source effluent limitations or the discharge of a pollutant, other than from a nonpoint source, into the MS4, the City may invoke Sections 54.012—54.017 of the Texas Local Government Code and petition the state district court or the county court at law of Tarrant County, through the city attorney, for either the injunctive relief specified in subsection (b) or the civil penalties specified in subsection (c), or both the specified injunctive relief and civil penalties. 
(b)  Pursuant to Section 54.016 of the Texas Local Government Code, the city may obtain against the owner or the operator of a facility a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, that: 
(1)  Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this article that relates to any matter specified in subsection (a)(1)—(6), above; or 
(2)  Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary for compliance with any provision of this article that relates to any matter specified in subsection (a)(1)—(6), above. 
(c)  Pursuant to Section 54.017 of the Texas Local Government Code, the city may recover a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each violation of any provision of this article that relates to any matter specified in section 20-424(a){1)—(5) above, and a civil penalty of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day for each violation of any provision of this article that relates to any matter specified in subsection (a)(6), if the city proves that: 
(1)  The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the article; and 
(2)  After the defendant received notice of the article provisions, the defendant committed acts in violation of the article or failed to take action necessary for compliance with the article. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-425. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  Any person who has violated any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, shall be strictly liable for such violation, regardless of the presence or absence of a culpable mental state, and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation, per day. 
(b)  Any person who has knowingly made any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, or any order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation, per day. 
(c)  In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, the knowledge, intent, negligence, or other state of mind of the violator, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-426. - Civil suit under the Texas Water Code. 
Whenever it appears that a violation or threat of violation of any provision of Section 26.121 of the Texas Water Code, or any rule, permit, or order of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, has occurred or is occurring within the jurisdiction of the City of Everman, exclusive of its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the city, in the same manner as the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, may have a suit instituted in a state district court through its city attorney for the injunctive relief or civil penalties or both authorized in Sections 7.031 and 7.032 of the Texas Water Code, against the person who committed or is committing or threatening to commit the violation. This power is exercised pursuant to Section 7.351 of the Texas Water Code. In any suit brought by the city under this section, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality is a necessary and indispensable party. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-427. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies that the city may have under state or federal law or other city ordinances. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a violator. The city is empowered to take more than one (1) enforcement action against any violator. These actions may be taken concurrently. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-428. - Performance and maintenance bonds. 
The director may, by written notice, order any owner or operator of a source of stormwater discharge associated with construction or industrial activity to file a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance with this article, any order issued hereunder, any required best management practice, and/or any SWPPP provision, and/or to achieve final stabilization of the site. The city may deny approval of any building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat, site development plan, or any other city permit or approval necessary to commence or continue construction or any industrial activity at the site, or to assume occupancy, until such a performance or maintenance bond has been filed. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-429. - Liability insurance. 
The director may, by written notice, order any owner or operator of a source of stormwater discharge associated with construction or industrial activity to submit proof that it has obtained liability insurance, or other financial assurance, in an amount greater than or equal to a value determined by the director, that is sufficient to remediate, restore, and abate any damage to the MS4, the waters of the United States, or any other aspect of the environment that is caused by the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Sec. 20-430. - Nuisance. 
A violation of any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the nuisance chapter of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 7-13-10)  
Secs. 20-431—20-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY/EMERGENCY WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN 
 
Sec. 20-501. - Generally. 
The drought contingency and emergency water management plan ("plan") outlines the city's water emergency water demand management efforts. The city will revise the plan as needed to meet objectives requested by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, regional water planning groups, the City of Fort Worth and to meet the goals stated in the plan. The plan established in this article shall be administered by the director of public works of the city or his/her duly appointed representative ("director"). 
(Ord. No. 681, § 2, 2-10-15)  
Sec. 20-502. - Drought contingency and emergency water management plan. 
(a)  Adopted. The city has adopted the plan which is on file and available for inspection at the city secretary's office. The plan may be amended from time to time by adopting an ordinance amending the plan. 
(b)  Purpose and scope. The purpose of this section is to establish the city's policy in the event of shortages or delivery limitations in the city's water supply and to establish water restrictions to be enforced in case of drought or emergency conditions. This section applies to: 
(1)  All persons and premises within the city using water from the water system; 
(2)  All retail customers who live in unincorporated areas within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction and are served by the water system; and 
(3)  All wholesale service customers outside the city to the extent provided in subsection (h). 
(c)  Authority. The director is authorized to implement measures prescribed when required by this section and by the plan approved by the city council. The director is authorized to enforce the measures implemented and to promulgate regulations, not in conflict with this section, the plan or state and federal laws, in aid of enforcement. 
(d)  Initiation of plan stages. The director may order that the appropriate stage of the plan be initiated upon determination that drought conditions or a water emergency exists. To be effective, the order must be made by some or all of the following methods: 
(1)  Publication in the local newspaper; 
(2)  Publication on the city's website; or 
(3)  Publication on utility bill inserts, the city's newsletter, or public access channel. 
(e)  Duration of stage; change. A stage will remain in effect until the conditions that triggered initiation of the stage have been eliminated. If the stage is initiated because of excessive demands, all initiated actions will remain in effect through September 30 of the year in which they were triggered unless the director determines that conditions exist that will allow termination of the stage before September 30. When conditions change, the director may terminate, upgrade or downgrade the stage. Any such change must be made in the same manner prescribed in subsection (d). 
(f)  Violation of section. A person commits an offense if he knowingly makes, causes or permits a use of water contrary to the measures implemented by the director as prescribed in the plan. For purposes of this subsection, it is presumed that a person has knowingly made, caused or permitted a use of water contrary to the measures implemented if the mandatory measures have been formally ordered consistent with the terms of subsection (d) and: 
(1)  The manner of use has been prohibited by the plan; 
(2)  The amount of water used exceeds that allowed by the plan; or 
(3)  The manner or amount used violates the terms and conditions of a compliance agreement made pursuant to a variance granted by the director. 
(g)  Penalties/enforcement of violations. Any person who is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with a measure implemented in accordance with this section and the plan will be given a written warning that he has violated a mandatory water use restriction as a first offense. Any person who is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with a measure implemented in accordance with this section and the plan may be fined not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each subsequent offense. In addition, the following penalties shall apply: 
(1)  A person who is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with a measure implemented in accordance with this section and Stage 1 of the plan as a second offense, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(2)  A person who is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with a measure implemented in accordance with this section and Stage 2 of the plan as a second offense, shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(3)  A person who is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with a measure implemented in accordance with this section and Stage 3 of the plan as a second offense, shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(4)  If a person is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with a measure implemented in accordance with this section and the plan as a third offense, the director may either: 
a.  Install a flow restrictor in the water line to the premises where the violations occurred to limit the amount of water that may pass through the meter in a twenty-four-hour period or a lock-out device to a backflow assembly; or 
b.  Discontinue water service to the premises where the violation occurred. 
(h)  Wholesale service to customers outside the city. The director shall advise customers receiving wholesale water service from the city of actions taken under the plan. The director may restrict service to customers outside the city as permitted under the contract and state law. 
(i)  Authority under other laws. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the mayor, the city council or the city manager to seek emergency relief under the provisions of any state or federal disaster relief act. 
(j)  Variances. During the times the emergency order is operative, the director may grant variances only under the following circumstances and conditions: 
(1)  The applicant signs a compliance agreement on a form provided and approved by the director, agreeing to use the water only in the amount and manner permitted by the variance; 
(2)  Granting of the variance would not cause an immediate significant reduction in the city's water supply; 
(3)  Failure to approve the variance would result in an extreme hardship or need relating to the health, safety or welfare of the applicant; and 
(4)  Granting the variance would not adversely affect the premises at which the violation occurred. 
(k)  Revocation of variances. The director may revoke a variance when he or she determines that: 
(1)  The conditions of subsection (j) are not being met or are no longer applicable; 
(2)  The terms of the compliance agreement are being violated; or 
(3)  Revocation is advisable to protect the health, safety or welfare of other persons. 
(l)  Appeal. Denial or revocation of a variance by the director may be appealed to the city manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager within ten (10) days after issuance of the director's decision. The city manager's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 681, § 2, 2-10-15)  
Secs. 20-503—20-530. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - LAWN AND LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION 
 
Sec. 20-531. - Lawn and landscape irrigation restrictions. 
(a)  Lawns and landscaping may be watered on any day, at any time, by handheld hose, drip irrigation, a soaker hose or tree bubbler. (The intent of this measure is to allow for the protection of structural foundations, trees, and other high value landscape materials.) Except for hand watering, drip irrigation and the use of soaker hoses, a person may only irrigate, water, or cause or permit the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape, inclusive of structural foundations, trees, and other high value landscape materials, located on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person (i) on a day designated as an outdoor water use day for the property's address as shown below; and (ii) between the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to 11:59 p.m. on such day. 
(1)  Residential addresses ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6 or 8) may water on Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
(2)  Residential addresses ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9) may water on Thursdays and Sundays. 
(3)  All non-residential locations (apartment complexes, businesses, industries, parks, street and/or roadway medians, etc.) may water on Tuesdays and Fridays. 
(b)  Except for hand watering, drip irrigation and the use of soaker hoses, a person commits an offense if that person irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape located on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(c)  Except for hand watering, drip irrigation and the use of soaker hoses, a person commits an offense if that person irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape located on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person on a day that is not designated as an outdoor water use for that property address as shown in subsection (a) above. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if a person knowingly or recklessly irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of a lawn or landscape located on premises owned, leased or managed by the person in a manner that causes: 
(1)  A substantial amount of water to fall upon impervious areas instead of a lawn or landscape, such that a constant stream of water overflows from the lawn or landscape onto a street or other drainage area; or 
(2)  An irrigation system or other lawn or landscape watering device to operate during any form of precipitation. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if, on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person, a person operates a lawn or landscape irrigation system or device that: 
(1)  Has any broken or missing sprinkler head; or 
(2)  Has not been properly maintained in a manner that prevents the waste of water. 
(f)  Affirmative defenses. 
(1)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution of an offense in section 20-531(a) that at the time such person irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape, such activity was for the purpose of: 
a.  Dust control of a sports field; or 
b.  The maintenance, repair, or testing of an irrigation system. 
(2)  The activity described in subsection (f)(1)a. and b. may only occur within a period of two (2) days no more than once every thirty (30) days. Any such activity requiring a longer period or greater frequency shall require a variance as provided by subsection (g). 
(g)  Variances. 
(1)  The city manager or his official designee ("director") may grant variances to the twice per week watering and irrigation restrictions and schedule, if one (1) or more of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Failure to grant such a variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting health, sanitation, or fire safety for the public or the person requesting the variance; 
b.  Compliance with the watering and irrigation restrictions and/or schedule cannot be accomplished due to technical or other limitations; or 
c.  Alternative methods that achieve the same level of reduction in water use can be implemented. 
(2)  The director may grant variances to allow for establishment of hydromulch, grass sod, or grass seed for new lawns. 
(3)  Variances shall be granted or denied at the discretion of the director. All petitions for variances shall be in writing and shall include the following: 
a.  Name and address of the petitioner(s); 
b.  Purpose of the water use; 
c.  Specific provisions from which relief is requested; 
d.  Detailed statement of the adverse effect of the provision from which relief is requested; 
e.  Description of the relief requested; 
f.  Period of time for which the variance is sought; 
g.  Alternative measures that will be taken to reduce water use; and 
h.  Other pertinent information requested. 
(h)  A person who irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering by use of an alternative water source such as a well, reclaimed or reused water, or water from the Trinity River is exempt from prosecution if that person has: 
(1)  Registered such alternative water source with the city; 
(2)  Provided sufficient proof to the director that the alternative water source is from a well, reclaimed or reused water or from the Trinity River and has allowed inspection by the director if deemed necessary; and 
(3)  Complied with the city's backflow and cross-connection control regulations. 
(Ord. No. 681, § 3, 2-10-15)  
Sec. 20-532. - Rain sensing devices and freeze gauges. 
(a)  Any commercial or industrial customer class irrigation system installed within the city after the adoption of the article must be equipped with rain and freeze sensors. 
(b)  Any installed commercial or industrial customer class system installed after the adoption of this article may not be operated without being equipped with rain and freeze sensors. 
(c)  The potable water supply to a lawn irrigation system shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the city's backflow and cross-connection control regulations. All rain and freeze sensors for commercial class lawn irrigation systems shall undergo annual inspection and testing. 
(d)  Any residential customer class irrigation system installed within the city after adoption of this article must be equipped with rain and freeze sensors. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly install, operate, or cause or permit the installation of or the operation of, an irrigation system in violation of subsections 20-532(a) through (d) on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person. 
(Ord. No. 681, § 3, 2-10-15)  
Sec. 20-533. - Essential services. 
The governmental use of water for essential services such as police, fire and emergency services which are necessary to preserve or protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city are exempt from any and all restrictions or mandates set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 681, § 3, 2-10-15)  
APPENDIX A - FEE SCHEDULE[1] 
The schedule of fees, charges and expenses is adopted for the purpose of defraying administrative costs connected with the processing, advertising, and reviewing of applications, appeals, and permits issued by the City of Everman. Appendix A shall supplement the fees listed in the 1997 Uniform Administrative Code; except, however, where there is a conflict between a fee listed in the 1997 Uniform Administrative Code and a fee listed in Appendix A. In such instance, the fee listed in Appendix A shall be the fee charged. 
FEES FOR LICENSES, INSPECTIONS, PERMITS, PLATTING, ZONING, ETC. 
All persons, firms or corporations applying for licenses, permits, platting, zoning or other city services, activities or uses that by their nature require the applicant to pay a fee incident to such application, shall be required to pay the following fees: 
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES 
Certificate of Occupancy—Residential 	$15.00 
Certificate of Occupancy—Commercial 	$45.00 
Returned Check 	$34.00 
Fence New (first time) 	$45.00 
Fence Repair/replace (No change to height, material and placement) 	No Charge 
Replace Fence (different height and/or material) 	$45.00 
Copies (per page) 	State Fee Chart 
Mowing and/or Cleaning Property (City Crew): 	
Administrative Fees (plus legal and/or filing fees) 	$100.00 
Tractor/Mower with Operator 	$65.00/hr-Each 
Loader with Operator 	$90.00/hr-Each 
Dump Truck with Operator 	$65.00/hr-Each 
Hand Mower/Weed Eater with Operator 	$45.00/hr-Each 
Extra Personnel/Laborer 	$20.00/hr-Each 
Contractor Cleaning/Mowing 	Actual Cost plus $100.00 Administrative Fee 
Water Deposit (Residential Owner) 	$75.00 
Water Deposit (Residential Renter) 	$150.00 
Water Deposit (Commercial) additional $15.00 for electrical inspection for C/O 	$90.00 
Water Late Charges 	$50.00 
Use of Hydrant Meter (deposit) 	$1500.00 
	+ $50.00 (service fee) and usage 
Water Reconnection (After Shut-Off) 	$50.00 
Move of City Utility or Add Vault 	Actual Cost 
Water Transfer Fee 	$15.00 
Rental Equipment 	Actual Cost + $50.00/hr per Operator 
Preliminary Plat 	$310.00 + $2.50 per Acre 
Final Plat 	$465.00 + $2.50 per Lot + Filing Fee 
Replat 	$225.00 + $5.50 per Lot + Filing Fee 
Short Plat, Vacated Plat, Amended Plat 	$225.00 + Filing Fee 
 
BUILDING CODES, PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 
All building code permits and inspection fees will be in accordance with the 1997 Administrative Code with the following exception: 
Re-inspection fees may be assessed for inspections requested when work is not ready, when the work is not accessible for inspection, when previously identified code violation is not correct, when repeated violation is made by the same contractor on repeated jobs and/or as may be deemed appropriate by the building official. The re-inspection fee shall be assessed at forty-five dollars ($45.00). The second re-inspection fee, for items not corrected from the first re-inspection, shall be assessed at seventy-five ($75.00). The third and each subsequent re-inspection fee, for items not corrected from previous re-inspections shall be assessed at one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00). 
Base Permit 	$45.00 
Alterations and Repairs to Existing Structures 	$40.00 
New Construction and Additions permits refer to Table 3-A of the 1997 Administrative Code 	
Building Contractor Registration Fee 	$110.00 
For use of outside consultant for Plan Reviews 	Actual Engineering Cost $350.00 to $450.00 (minimum) or $160.00/hr 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Base Permit Fee 	$45.00 
Detached Garages and/or Accessory Building 	$120.00 (not including permits, etc.) 
Carports 	$90.00 
Porch/Patio Covers 	$45.00 
Swimming Pool, hot tubs, spas (above ground) 	$85.00 
Swimming Pool, hot tubs, spas (in ground) 	$21.00 
Fireplace 	$85.00 
Demolition 	$100.00 
Re-roof 	$45.00 
Parking Lots 	$45.00 
Underground Storage Tanks Including Lines 	$100.00 
Tent (Commercial) 	$40.00 
Carnival/Temporary Amusement 	$40.00 
Drive Approach 	$45.00 
Moving Building Into/Out of the City of Everman 	$300.00 
Building Code Appeal 	$210.00 
Signs—Base Mount Only (non-electrical) 	$100.00 
Wall Sign 	$42.00 
 
MECHANICAL CODE PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 
Base Permit 	$45.00 
Contractor Registration Fee 	$110.00 
Single Family, Duplex, Townhouse and etc. 	
Air Handling Unit 	$100.00 
Apartments, Condominiums, Triplex and Larger 	
Each Dwelling 	$100.00 
Commercial Cooling System or Cooling/Heating System 	$100.00 
Less Than 100 Tons 	+ $6.10/ton 
101 Tons or Greater 	$310.00 + $1.10/ton 
Ducts (New) 	$45.00 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Base Permit Fee 	$45.00 
Replacement of Furnaces, Condensing Unit or Cooling/Heating System 	$45.00 
Vent-A-Hood for Commercial Cooking 	$45.00 
Dry Chemical Fire Extinguishing System 	$45.00 
Re-Inspection 	1 st —$45.00 
	2 nd (same items)—$75.00 
	3 rd (same items)—$120.00 
Mechanical Code Appeal 	$250.00 
Grease Interceptor 	$100.00 
 
PLUMBING CODES, PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Re-Inspection 	1 st 	$45.00 
	2 nd (same items) 	$75.00 
	3 rd (same items) 	$120.00 
Base Permit 	$45.00 	$200.00 
Single Family, Duplex, townhouse, etc. (new construction) 	$.09/sq. ft. 	
Apartments, Condominiums, Triplex, etc. (new construction) 	$.10/sq. ft. 	
Commercial (use unit fee schedule 1997 Administrative Code) 	$45.00 	
Unit Fee Schedule for: 		
Each Plumbing Fixture, Trap, Set Fixture, Water Heater, etc. 	$45.00 	
Each Building Water Line 	$45.00 	
Each Building Sewer Line 	$45.00 	
Installation/Repair of Water Piping &/or Water Treatment Equipment 	$45.00 	
Repair or Alterations to Drainage/Sewer Equipment 	$45.00 	
Lawn Sprinkler System Including Backflow Device 	Residential $110.00 	
	Commercial $130.00 	
Gas Line Pressure Check 	$42.00 	
Gas Fired Appliances w/Special Vent 	$42.00 	
Each Gas Pipe System Inspection 	$42.00 	
  Plumbing Code Appeal 		
 
ELECTRICAL CODES, PERMITS & INSPECTIONS 
Base Permit Fee 	$45.00 
Single Family, Duplex, townhouse, etc. 	$.09/sq. ft. 
Apartments, Condominiums, Triplex, etc. 	$.07/sq. ft. 
Commercial (use unit fee schedule 1997 Administrative Code+ base fee) 	
Residential additions or conversions (use unit fee schedule 1997 Administrative Code + base Fee) 	
Electrical Generators 	$45.00 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Signs 	$45.00 
Temporary Power to Any Structure 	$45.00 
Re-Inspection 	1 st $45.00 
	2 nd (same items) $75.00 
	3 rd (same items) $120.00 
Electrical Code Appeal 	$250.00 
 
APPLICATION AND APPEALS REGARDING THE CITY'S PLANNING AND ZONING AND SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE 
TYPE OF APPLICATION, APPEAL OR PERMIT 	REVIEWING BODY 	AMOUNT 
1. Amendment to Zoning District Maps (Conventional Zoning Change Plats, etc.) 	P & Z Commission 	$350.00 
2. Amendment to Zoning District Maps and Text (PUD-Planned Unit Development) 	P & Z Commission 	$500.00 
3. Application for Special Exception (Special Use Permit) 	B.O.A. 	$350.00 
4. Appeal of Zoning Administrative Decision 	B.O.A. 	$350.00 
5. Application for Variance 	B.O.A. 	$350.00 
6. Appeal of Subdivision Regulations And/or Design Criteria Commission 	P & Z Commission 	$350.00 
7. Annexation 	P & Z Commission 	$250.00 
 
BUILDING VALUATION DATA 
FIRE CODES, PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 
Inspections: 	
5,000 sq. ft or less 	$40.00 
5,001—10,000 sq ft 	$45.00 
10,001—25,000 sq ft 	$55.00 
25,001—50,000 sq ft 	$70.00 
50,001—75,000 sq ft 	$100.00 
75,001—100,000 sq ft 	$140.00 
Operational Permit Fees: 	
Aerosol Products 	$50.00 
Amusement Buildings 	$100.00 
Aviation Facilities 	$50.00 
Battery Systems 	$50.00 
Combustible Dust-Producing Operations 	$50.00 
Combustible Fibers 	$50.00 
Compressed Gases 	$50.00 
Covered Mall Buildings 	$50.00 
Cryogenic Fluids 	$50.00 
Cutting and Welding 	$50.00 
Flammable and Combustible Liquids 	$50.00 
Hazardous Materials 	$350.00 
HPM Facilities 	$270.00 
High Piled Storage 	$50.00 
Industrial Ovens 	$50.00 
Lumber yards and woodworking Plants 	$50.00 
Liquid or Gas-Fueled Vehicles/Equipment in assembly buildings 	$50.00 
LP-Gas 	$50.00 
Magnesium 	$50.00 
Open Flames 	$50.00 
Organic Coatings 	$50.00 
Place of Assembly (Occupant Load of 1-299) 	$40.00 
Place of Assembly (Occupant Load of 300-999) 	$150.00 
Place of Assembly (Occupant Load of 1,000—9,999) 	$200.00 
Place of Assembly (Occupant Load of 10,000—19,999) 	$300.00 
Place of Assembly (Occupant Load of 20,000—29,999) 	$400.00 
Place of Assembly (Occupant Load of 30,000—39,999) 	$500.00 
Place of Assembly (Occupant Load of 40,000—49,999) 	$600.00 
Place of Assembly (Occupant Load of 
50,000 +) 	$1,000.00 
Repair Garages and Motor Fuel-Dispensing Facilities 	$50.00 
Spraying or Dipping 	$50.00 
Storage of Scrap Tires and Tire byproducts 	$250.00 
Temporary Membrane Structures, Tents, and Canopies 	$50.00 
Tire Rebuilding Plants 	$50.00 
Waste Handling 	$100.00 
 
POLICE DEPARTMENT FEES 
Permits: 	
Residential Alarm Permit 	$30.00 
Commercial Alarm Permit 	$50.00 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Police Security (per Officer) 	$45.00/hour 
Impounded Vehicle Release Fee 	$15.00 
Fingerprint Services 	$10.00/card 
Fingerprint Cards 	$1.00/card 
False Alarm 	$50.00 
Offense/Incident Reports 	$0.10 per page 
Accident Reports 	$6.00 per report 
Video 	$5.00 per drive 
Labor charges for certain items in compliance with TX Admin Code 	$15.00/hour 
 
(Ord. No. 752, § 2(Exh. A), 10-1-19) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 752, § 2(Exh. A), adopted October 1, 2019, repealed the former Appendix A, and enacted a new Appendix A as set out herein. The former Appendix A pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 630, § 2(Exh. A), adopted May 11, 2010; Ord. No. 638, adopted July 12, 2011; Ord. No. 639, adopted July 12, 2011. 

City of Everman 1
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance
City of Everman, Texas
Ordinance No. 679
Adopted November 11, 2014
Repealing Ordinance No. 443
City of Everman 2
Table of Contents
ARTICLE 1. – AUTHORITY .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4
SECTION 1.1 – TITLE AND PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................................................. 4
SECTION 1.2 - COMPLIANCE REQUIRED AND APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS ...................................................................................... 4
SECTION 1.3 - SEVERABILITY ......................................................................................................................................................................... 4
SECTION 1.4 - CONFLICTING ORDINANCES .................................................................................................................................................. 4
SECTION 1.5 - PENALTY FOR VIOLATION ...................................................................................................................................................... 4
SECTION 1.6 - EFFECTIVE DATE..................................................................................................................................................................... 5
ARTICLE 2 – GENERAL REGULATIONS ............................................................................................................................................................. 6
SECTION 2.1 – PRIOR APPROVALS ................................................................................................................................................................ 6
SECTION 2.2 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT .............................................................................................................................. 6
SECTION 2.3 – ZONING DISTRICT MAP .......................................................................................................................................................... 6
SECTION 2.4 – ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES .......................................................................................................................................... 6
SECTION 2.5 - CLASSIFICATION OF NEW/UNLISTED USES ......................................................................................................................... 7
SECTION 2.6 – ERECTION OF MORE THAN ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING ON A LOT .................................................................................... 8
ARTICLE 3 –ADMINISTRATION ............................................................................................................................................................................ 9
SECTION 3.1 - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION ................................................................................................................................. 9
SECTION 3.2 - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ..................................................................................................................................................... 11
ARTICLE 4. – ZONING DISTRICTS ..................................................................................................................................................................... 16
SECTION 4.1 – ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED ..................................................................................................................................... 16
SECTION 4.2 - AG - AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT ............................................................................................................................................ 17
SECTION 4.3 - A-1 - SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT .................................................................................................................... 18
SECTION 4.4 - A-2 - SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT .................................................................................................................... 19
SECTION 4.5 - M-1 - TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT ........................................................................................................................ 20
SECTION 4.6 - M-2 - MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT ..................................................................................................................... 21
SECTION 4.7 - MH - MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION AND PARK DISTRICT .................................................................................. 23
SECTION 4.8 - C-1 - NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT ................................................................................................................ 28
SECTION 4.9 - C-2 - GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT ............................................................................................................................ 29
SECTION 4.10 - D - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT ....................................................................................................................................... 30
SECTION 4.11 - E - HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT ...................................................................................................................................... 31
SECTION 4.12 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) DISTRICTS ...................................................................................................................... 32
SECTION 4.13 – PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USE TABLE ................................................................................................................................. 36
ARTICLE 5 –APPLICATIONS AND AMENDMENTS ........................................................................................................................................... 44
SECTION 5.1 - AMENDMENTS TO ZONING ORDINANCE AND DISTRICTS, ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES, AND ENFORCEMENT 44
SECTION 5.2 - SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCESS ............................................................................................................................................. 47
SECTION 5.3 - SPECIFIC USE PERMITS ....................................................................................................................................................... 50
SECTION 5.4 - NONCONFORMING USES, LOTS AND STRUCTURES ........................................................................................................ 54
ARTICLE. 6. – OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS ..................................................................................................... 58
SECTION 6.1 – PURPOSE AND INTENT ........................................................................................................................................................ 58
SECTION 6.2 – LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES ....................................................................................................................................... 58
SECTION 6.3 – COMPUTATION OF PARKING SPACE SIZES AND PARKING AREAS ................................................................................ 58
SECTION 6.4 – RULES FOR THE COMPUTATION OF THE NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES .................................................................... 58
SECTION 6.5 – NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES REQUIRED ............................................................................................... 59
SECTION 6.6 – SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS ......................................................................................................................................... 63
SECTION 6.7 – NONCONFORMING STATUS OF PARKING AREAS ............................................................................................................ 65
SECTION 6.8 – VISIBILITY TRIANGLE REQUIRED ........................................................................................................................................ 65
SECTION 6.9 – LOCATION OF LOADING SPACES ....................................................................................................................................... 65
SECTION 6.10 – COMPUTATION OF OFF-STREET AND LOADING AREAS ................................................................................................ 65
City of Everman 3
SECTION 6.11 – RULES FOR THE COMPUTATION OF OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES ......................................................................... 66
SECTION 6.12 – NUMBER OF OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES REQUIRED ............................................................................................. 66
ARTICLE 7. – DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS .................................................................................................................................................... 68
SECTION 7.1 – DEVELOPMENT AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS ........................................................................................................ 68
SECTION 7.2 – SCREENING AND FENCING ................................................................................................................................................... 75
SECTION 7.3 – LANDSCAPING ...................................................................................................................................................................... 79
ARTICLE 8 – SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS ............................................................................................................................................... 89
SECTION 8.1 – ACCESSORY STRUCTURES ................................................................................................................................................ 89
SECTION 8.2 - HOME OCCUPATIONS ........................................................................................................................................................... 90
SECTION 8.3 – SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND ADULT CABERETS ......................................................................................... 92
SECTION 8.4 – TEMPORARY BUILDINGS ..................................................................................................................................................... 97
SECTION 8.5 – TELECOMMUNCATIONS TOWERS ...................................................................................................................................... 97
SECTION 8.6 – PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: NOISE, AIR AND WATER POLLUTION, GLARE, EXPLOSIVE OR HAZARDOUS GASES, LIQUIDS AND MATTER, RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS, VIBRATION, ELECTRO MAGNETIC INTERFERENCE ........................................... 99
ARTICLE 9. – SIGN REGULATIONS ................................................................................................................................................................. 100
SECTION 9.1 – PURPOSE AND INTENT ...................................................................................................................................................... 100
SECTION 9.2 – ADMINISTRATION ............................................................................................................................................................... 100
SECTION 9.3 – APPLICATION AND PERMITS ............................................................................................................................................. 100
SECTION 9.4 – DEFINITIONS AND REGULATIONS .................................................................................................................................... 101
SECTION 9.5 – MANNER OF MEASUREMENT ............................................................................................................................................ 113
SECTION 9.6 – NONCONFORMING SIGNS ................................................................................................................................................. 114
ARTICLE 10. – DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................................................................................................ 115
City of Everman 4
ARTICLE
ARTICLE 11. . –– AUTHORITYAUTHORITY
SECTION 1.1 – TITLE AND PURPOSE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the City of Everman "Zoning Ordinance." As authorized by Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, the zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, general welfare within the City. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to ensure adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land and thus avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, wastewater treatment, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of each zoning district and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City. The purpose of these regulations is to aid the City's interest in preserving the quality of urban life by promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare of its population, and to protect and preserve places and areas of historical, cultural or of other importance and significance to the community.
SECTION 1.2 - COMPLIANCE REQUIRED AND APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
All land, buildings, structures or appurtenances thereon located within the City of Everman, Texas, which are hereafter occupied, used, constructed, erected, removed, placed, demolished, and/or converted shall be occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished and/or converted in conformance with the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such land or building is located, as hereinafter provided, or such shall be subject to penalties as per Section 1.5 of this Ordinance. All of the standards and regulations prescribed herein shall be considered as the minimum requirement unless explicitly stated otherwise.
SECTION 1.3 - SEVERABILITY
Should any article, section or any provision of this ordinance be decided by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so held to be unconstitutional or invalid.
SECTION 1.4 - CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
Whenever any provision of this ordinance imposes a greater requirement or a higher standard than is required in any State or Federal statute or any other City ordinance or regulation, the provision of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever any provision of any State or Federal statute or other City ordinance or regulation imposes a greater requirement or a higher standard than is required by this ordinance, the provision of such State or Federal statute or other City ordinance or regulation shall govern.
SECTION 1.5 - PENALTY FOR VIOLATION
A. Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable for a fine of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per offense. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense.
City of Everman 5
B. In addition to pursuing the penalties and fines provided above, the City Manager or his/her designee may bring additional legal action to insure compliance with this ordinance, including injunction, abatement or other appropriate action or proceeding.
SECTION 1.6 - EFFECTIVE DATE
This Zoning Ordinance was adopted on November 11th, 2020 and became effective as the Everman Municipal Zoning Ordinance on November 11th, 2020. The adoption of this Ordinance effectively repealed the prior Zoning Ordinance No. 443, which had been adopted on May 6, 1992.
City of Everman 6
A
ARTICLE 2 RTICLE 2 –– GENERAL REGULATIONSGENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 2.1 – PRIOR APPROVALS
Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require any change to the plans, plats, lots or buildings previously approved prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
SECTION 2.2 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the City Manager or his/her designee. The City Manager or his/her designee and such staff members or committees as may be assigned to or appointed shall have all necessary authority on behalf of the City to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance, including the remedying of any condition found in violation of this ordinance, the bringing of legal action to ensure compliance with this ordinance or other appropriate action or proceeding.
SECTION 2.3 – ZONING DISTRICT MAP
A. The City is hereby divided into zones, or districts, and the boundaries of zoning districts set out herein are delineated upon the Zoning District Map of the City, which may also be cited as the "Zoning Map," said map being adopted as a part of this Ordinance as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail.
B. One (1) original Zoning District Map shall be filed in the office of the City Secretary and labeled as "Official Zoning Map of the City of Everman, Texas—Ordinance No. 679." This copy shall be kept as a record of history. The second (2nd) Official Zoning map shall be kept and maintained by the City Manager or his/her designee and may be amended from time to time to reflect properly adopted changes. This copy shall be the official Zoning District Map and shall bear the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Secretary, and shall bear the seal of the City under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 2.3 of the Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance No. 679 of the City of Everman, Texas.”
C. A copy of the official Zoning District Map shall be placed in the office of the City Manager or his/her designee. The map copy shall be used for reference and shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all subsequent amendments. Reproductions for informational purposes may only be made of the official Zoning District Map or this copy.
SECTION 2.4 – ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
A. The zoning district boundary lines shown on the Zoning District Map are usually along streets, alleys, property lines, or extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Zoning District Map, the following rules shall apply:
1. Boundaries shown as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
2. Boundaries shown as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
City of Everman 7
3. Boundaries shown as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following such City limits.
4. Boundaries shown as following railroad lines shall be construed to be located along the centerline of the railroad right-of-way lines.
5. Boundaries shown as parallel to, or extensions of, features described in Subsections (1) through (5) above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning District Map shall be determined by the scale of the Map.
6. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City Council, or whenever such area is used for building purposes, the zoning district line adjoining each side of such street, alley or other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley or public way and all areas so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts.
7. The zoning classification applied to a tract of land adjacent to a street shall extend to the centerline of the street unless, as a condition of zoning approval, it is stated that the zoning classification shall not apply to the street.
8. Where physical features on the ground are at variance with information shown on the Zoning District Map, or if there arises a question as to how or whether a parcel of property is zoned and such question cannot be resolved by the application of Subsections (1) through (8) above, then the Planning and Zoning Commission shall interpret and recommend to the City Council the appropriate zoning district boundaries.
SECTION 2.5 - CLASSIFICATION OF NEW/UNLISTED USES
It is recognized that new types of land use will arise in the future, and forms of land use not presently anticipated may seek to locate in the City of Everman. In order to provide for such changes and contingencies, a determination as to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use in the Principal Permitted Uses Table shall be made as follows:
A. Standards for new and unlisted uses may be interpreted by the City Manager or his/her designee as those of a similar use. When a determination of the appropriate zoning district cannot be readily ascertained, the City Manager or his/her designee shall refer the question concerning any new or unlisted use to the Planning and Zoning Commission requesting a recommendation as to the zoning classification into which such use should be placed.
1. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the nature and described performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts and determine the zoning district or districts within which such use is most similar and should be permitted, by right or by SUP.
2. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit its findings and recommendations to the City Council as to the classification proposed for any new or unlisted use. The City Council shall approve
City of Everman 8
or disapprove the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission or make such determination concerning the classification of such use as is determined appropriate based upon its findings. If approved, the new or unlisted use shall be amended in the use charts of the Zoning Ordinance according to Section 4.13 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 2.6 – ERECTION OF MORE THAN ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING ON A LOT
In any multi-family residential or nonresidential district, more than one (1) building housing a permitted or permissible principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard, access and other requirements of this ordinance shall be met for each building as though it were on an individual lot. For single family residential and Two-family residential zoning districts, only one (1) building housing a permitted principal use shall be allowed.
City of Everman 9
A
ARTICLERTICLE 33 ––ADMINISTRATIONADMINISTRATION
SECTION 3.1 - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION 3.1.1 - FUNCTION
The Planning and Zoning Commission (also referred to as the "Commission") shall function according to the following criteria which establish membership and operating procedures. The powers and duties of the Planning and Zoning Commission are further defined in Section 3.1.4
SECTION 3.1.2 - CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; OFFICERS; RULES AND BYLAWS
A. There is created, in accordance with Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code the "Planning and Zoning Commission," hereinafter sometimes referred to as the "Commission," which shall consist of at least seven (7) registered voters of the City of Everman.
B. Members shall be nominated for appointment by the City Council of the City of Everman, and each person so nominated shall be approved by a simple majority vote of the full City Council before becoming a member of the Commission.
C. All appointments to the Commission shall serve as a member of the Commission for a term of two (2) years or until removed from the Commission by the City Council. The City Council may remove or replace any Commission member at any time by a simple majority vote of the full Council.
D. Any vacancy(ies) on the Commission shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term via appointment by a simple majority vote of the full City Council.
E. Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by a simple majority vote of the full City Council either upon its own motion or upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission. Failure to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall be cause for removal from office, unless such absences were due to unusual circumstances beyond the member's control such as sickness of the member or someone within the member's immediate family.
F. The members of the Commission shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the Commission, shall serve without compensation, and shall not hold any other office or position with the City while serving on the Commission.
G. The Commission shall elect from its members a Chairman and Vice Chairman to serve for one (1) year. The City of Everman shall keep minutes of all meetings held by the Planning and Zoning Commission as well as the full record of all recommendations made by the Commission to the City Council.
H. The Commission shall have the power to make rules, regulations and bylaws for its own governance, which shall conform to those set forth by the City Council, and such rules, regulations and bylaws shall be subject to approval by the City Council. Such rules, regulations and bylaws shall include, among other items, provisions for:
City of Everman 10
1. All regular and special meetings to be open to the public, as required by the Texas Open Meetings Act, Chapter 551 of the Texas Government Code, as amended;
2. A record to be kept of all proceedings, to be open for inspection by the public, as required by the Texas Open Meetings Act, Chapter 551 of the Texas Government Code, as amended;
3. Reporting to the governing body and the public, from time to time and annually as requested; and
4. Rules of order and the holding of public hearings on its recommendations.
SECTION 3.1.3 - MEETINGS; PUBLIC RECORD
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet in the City Hall building or in some other specified location as may be designated by the presiding Chairperson and at such intervals as may be necessary to orderly and properly transact the business of the Commission.
SECTION 3.1.4 - POWERS AND DUTIES
A. The Commission shall have all the rights, powers, privileges and authority as authorized and granted by and through the statutes of the State of Texas authorizing and granting cities the power of zoning and subdivision regulation as found in Chapters 211 and 212 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
B. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be an advisory body and adjunct to the City Council, and shall make recommendations regarding amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, changes of zoning for real property, Specific Use Permits (SUP), Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance amendments, approval of plats of subdivisions, and other planning-related matters. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct a regular review of the City's Comprehensive Plan and shall be prepared to make recommendations to the City Council, as deemed necessary, to keep the City's Comprehensive Plan current with changing conditions and trends and with the planning needs of the City. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall also serve in an advisory capacity on any other planning-related matter(s) in the City.
SECTION 3.1.5 - PROCEDURE ON ZONING HEARINGS
The procedure and process for zoning changes and Zoning Ordinance amendments shall be in accordance with Section 5.1.
SECTION 3.1.6 - JOINT MEETINGS WITH THE CITY COUNCIL
Whenever the City Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission are required by the laws of the State of Texas to conduct public hearings in matters pertaining to planning, zoning or subdividing property, and at other times when it is determined to be in the best interest of the City to do so, the City Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission are hereby authorized, after published notice as required by law, to hold joint meetings and to conduct joint public hearings.
City of Everman 11
SECTION 3.2 - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION 3.2.1 - CREATED
There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment, hereafter referred to as the "Board" for the purpose, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, to grant variances from and to hear appeals regarding the terms of this Ordinance that are consistent with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance.
SECTION 3.2.2 - MEMBERS; TERMS OF OFFICE
A. The Board shall consist of five (5) members, and shall operate in accordance with Sections 211.008 through 211.011 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
B. The Board shall have the power to make the rules, regulations and bylaws for its own governance, which shall conform as nearly as possible to those rules, regulations and bylaws governing the City Council, and the Commission rules, regulations and bylaws.
SECTION 3.2.3 - MEETINGS
Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public, and minutes shall be kept of all proceedings at Board meetings. Four (4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. All cases to be heard by the Board shall always be heard by at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the members, which constitutes four (4) members.
SECTION 3.2.4 - AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
A. The Board shall have the authority, subject to the standards established in Sections 211.008 through 211.011 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, and those established herein, to exercise powers and to perform duties including the following:
1. Hear and decide an appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this Ordinance;
2. Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this Ordinance when the Ordinance requires the Board to do so;
3. Authorize, in specific cases, a variance from the terms of this Ordinance if the variance is not contrary to the public interest and if, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this Ordinance is observed and substantial justice is done; and
4. Hear and decide other matters authorized by ordinance.
B. In exercising its authority under Section 3.2.4(A)(1) above, the Board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision or determination, and for that purpose the Board has the same authority as the administrative official.
City of Everman 12
C. The concurring vote of at least seventy-five percent (75%), or four (4) members, of the full Board is necessary to:
1. Reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official;
2. Decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the Board is required to review under this Zoning Ordinance;
3. Authorize a variance from a provision of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 3.2.5 - LIMITATIONS ON AUTHORITY
A. The Board may not grant a variance authorizing a use other than those permitted in the district for which the variance is sought.
B. The Board shall have no power to grant or modify Special Exceptions authorized under this Ordinance, unless provisions for Special Exceptions have been adopted herein, identifying specific criteria for the Special Exception.
SECTION 3.2.6 - VARIANCES
A. The Board may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance with the terms of this Ordinance. For example, if the subject property substantially differs from other similarly zoned land parcels by being of such restricted area, shape or slope so that it cannot reasonably be developed in the same manner as other similarly zoned land parcels, then a variance of the building setback, lot width or depth, or parking requirements may be granted. In granting a variance, the Board shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary for, or desirable to, the public interest. In making the findings herein below required, the Board shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work within the proposed use, and the probable effect such variance will have upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare of the community.
B. Conditions Required for Variance. No variance shall be granted without providing public notice and holding a public hearing on the variance request in accordance with Section 3.2.8 of this Ordinance and the Board shall make findings:
1. That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his/her land;
2. The circumstances or conditions are not economic hardships created by the property owner;
3. That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant;
City of Everman 13
4. That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property within the area; and
5. That the granting of the variance will not have an adverse effect on surrounding properties, preventing the use and enjoyment of other land within the area in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Such findings of the Board, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the Board meeting at which such variance is granted. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and that substantial justice may be done.
C. Findings of Undue Hardship. In order to grant a variance, the Board must make findings that an undue hardship exists, using the following criteria:
1. That literal enforcement of the controls will create an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty in the development of the affected property;
2. That the situation causing the hardship or difficulty is neither self-imposed nor generally affecting all or most properties in the same zoning district;
3. That the relief sought will not injure the permitted use of adjacent conforming property; and
4. That the granting of a variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purpose of the Ordinance.
D. A variance shall not be granted to relieve a self-created, nor shall it be based solely upon economic gain or loss, nor shall it permit any person the privilege of developing a parcel of land not permitted by this Ordinance on other parcels of land in the particular zoning district. No variance may be granted which results in undue hardship upon another parcel of land.
E. The Board shall have no authority to change any provisions of this Ordinance and its jurisdiction is limited to hardship and borderline cases which may arise from time to time. The Board may not change the district designation of any land either to a more restrictive or less restrictive zone.
SECTION 3.2.7 - APPEALS TO THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
A. Authority. In addition to the authorization of variances from the terms of this Ordinance, the Board shall have the authority to hear and decide an appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this Ordinance, or other provision of the Code of Ordinance where authorized. The Board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision or determination, and for that purpose, the Board has the same authority as the administrative official.
B. Who May Appeal. Any of the following persons may appeal to the Board a decision made by an administrative official:
1. A person directly aggrieved by the decision; or
City of Everman 14
2. Any officer, department, board or office of the City affected by the decision.
C. Procedure for Appeal. The appellant must file with the Board and the official from whom the appeal is taken a written Notice of Appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The Notice of Appeal shall be filed within fifteen (15) calendar days after the decision has been rendered. Upon receiving the Notice, the official from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record of action that is appealed. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action that is appealed. The Board may hold an expedited hearing in the event the official, from whom the appeal is taken, certifies in writing to the Board facts supporting the official's opinion that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. The appellant party may appear at the appeal hearing in person, by agent or through an attorney. The Board shall decide the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days after the written appeal request was received. The Board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision or determination from which an appeal is taken, and may make the correct order, requirement, decision or determination.
SECTION 3.2.8 - PROCEDURES
A. Application and Fee. An application for a variance, special exception or appeal by the Board shall be made in writing using forms prescribed by the City, and shall be accompanied by an application fee, as set forth in the currently adopted City Fee Schedule, a site plan, and any other additional information as may be requested in order to properly review the application. Such information may include, but is not limited to, plat plans, site building plans, photographs, topographic contour maps, and other similar documents. All drawings must be to scale.
B. Review and Report by the City. The City Manager or his/her designee shall visit the site where the application for the proposed variance or special exception would apply and the surrounding area, and shall report his/her findings to the Board.
C. Notice and Public Hearing. The Board shall hold a public hearing for consideration of the variance within a reasonable time after the date the application for action, or an appeal, is filed. Written notice of the public hearing for a variance shall be provided to all property owners, to be delivered to the last property owner of record on the latest approved municipal tax roll via U.S. mail, within two hundred feet (200') of the affected property at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the public hearing. Notice shall also be published in the official local newspaper before the fifteenth (15th) calendar day prior to the public hearing.
D. Action by the Board of Adjustment. The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds, based upon compelling evidence provided by the applicant, that each of the conditions in Section 3.2.6 has been satisfied. The Board may impose such conditions, limitations and safeguards as it deems appropriate upon the granting of any variance or special exception as are necessary to protect the public health, safety, convenience and welfare. Violation of any such condition, limitation or safeguard shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance.
E. Burden of Proof. The applicant bears the burden of proof in establishing the facts that may justify a variance, a special exception, an appeal, or any other action in his/her favor by the Board.
City of Everman 15
F. Waiting Period. No appeal to the Board for the same or a related variance or special exception on the same piece of property shall be allowed for a period of six (6) months following an unfavorable ruling by the Board unless other property in the immediate vicinity has, within the six-month waiting period, been changed or acted upon by the Board or the City Council so as to alter the facts and conditions upon which the previous unfavorable Board action was based. Such changes of circumstances shall permit the re-hearing of a variance or special exception request by the Board, but such circumstances shall in no way have any force in law to compel the Board, after a hearing on the matter, to grant a subsequent variance or special exception request. Any subsequent variance or special exception request shall be considered entirely on its own merits and on the specific circumstances related to the subject property.
SECTION 3.2.9 - FINALITY OF DECISIONS; JUDICIAL REVIEW
All decisions of the Board are final and binding. However, any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board may present a verified petition to a court of record which states that the decision of the Board is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition must be presented within ten (10) calendar days after the date the Board's decision is filed in the City Secretary's office. The Board's decision shall be deemed filed in the office of the Board on the first (1st) business day following the date on which action was taken by the Board.
City of Everman 16
ARTICLE
ARTICLE 44. . –– ZONING DISTRICTSZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION 4.1 – ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
The City of Everman, Texas is hereby divided into the following zoning districts. The use, height, area regulations, and other development and performance standards, as set out herein apply to each district. The districts established herein shall be known as:
Table 4-1 Zoning Districts Zoning Designation Residential Zoning Districts
AG
Agricultural
A-1
Single-Family Residential
A-2
Single Family Residential
M-1
Two-Family Residential
M-2
Multi-Family Residential
MH
Manufactured Housing Zoning Designation Non-Residential Districts
C-1
Neighborhood Commercial
C-2
General Commercial
D
Light Industrial
E
Heavy Industrial
PD
Planned Development
City of Everman 17
SECTION 4.2 - AG - AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION 4.2.1 – TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
The regulations set forth in this Section, or as set forth elsewhere in this ordinance when referred to in this Section, are the regulations of the AG - Agricultural District. The purpose of the AG - Agricultural District is to provide for compatible land, structures and uses primarily oriented to agricultural farming and ranching and extremely low density residential purposes.
SECTION 4.2.2 – LOT DIMENSION REGULATIONS
Density
Dwelling units/acre max
.01 Lot Dimensions
Single family
Lot area, min. 
4 Acres
Lot width, min (FT)
Single family
200

Lot depth, min. (FT)
Single family
300

Front Yard, min. (FT)
30
Side Yard, min (FT)
Single family interior
10

Adjacent to Street
15
Rear Yard, min (FT)
30 Building Standards
Building height, max (FT)
35
Lot coverage, max %
Single Family
5
Non-residential
30
Non-residential
20,000
Gross living area min (SF)
Single family
2,000
Non-residential
100
Non-residential interior
10
Non-residential
200 Setbacks
See Article 7 for additional development standards
SECTION 4.2.3 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 6 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.2.4 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for non-residential construction shall be accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
City of Everman 18
SECTION 4.3 - A-1 - SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 4.3.1 – TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
The regulations set forth in this section, or as set forth elsewhere in this ordinance when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the A-1 Single Family Residential District. The purpose and intent of the A-1 Single Family Residential District is to provide for compatible land, structures and uses primarily oriented to low density residential purposes, open space uses, and select community facility uses. The location characteristics of this district are generally confined to the inner frame of the more intensely urbanized and developed areas, and/or along protected flood prone areas. Land uses in this district are normally part of a developed subdivision, rather than individual single family residential dwellings
SECTION 4.3.2 – LOT DIMENSION REGULATIONS
Density
Dwelling units/acre max
5 Lot Dimensions
Single family
Lot area, min. (SF)
6,000

Lot width, min (FT)
Single family
60
Lot depth, min. (FT)
Single family
115

Front Yard, min. (FT)
25
Side Yard, min (FT)
Single family interior
5
Adjacent to Street
15
Rear Yard, min (FT)
30 Building Standards
Building height, max (FT)
35
Lot coverage, max %
Single Family
60
Gross living area min (SF)
Single family
1,200
Non-residential
60
Non-residential
30
Non-residential
10,000
Non-residential interior
10
Non-residential
115 Setbacks
See Article 7 for additional development standards
SECTION 4.3.3 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
.
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 6- Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.3.4 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for non-residential construction shall be accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
City of Everman 19
SECTION 4.4 - A-2 - SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 4.4.1 – TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
The regulations set forth in this section, or as set forth elsewhere in this ordinance when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the A-2 Single Family Residential District. The purpose and intent of the A-2 Single Family Residential District is to provide for compatible land, structures and uses primarily oriented to moderately low density residential purposes, open space uses, and select community facility uses. The location characteristics of this district are generally found in the inner urbanized developed core of the City, and/or along protected flood prone areas thereof. Moderately low density detached single family residential dwellings and development, along with the fore-described uses, comprise the principal elements of the district.
SECTION 4.4.2 – LOT DIMENSION REGULATIONS
Density
Dwelling units/acre max
5 Lot Dimensions
Single family
Lot area, min. (SF)
6,000
Lot width, min (FT)
Single family
50

Lot depth, min. (FT)
Single family
120

Front Yard, min. (FT)
25
Side Yard, min (FT)
Single family interior
5

Adjacent to Street
15
Rear Yard, min (FT)
25 Building Standards
Building height, max (FT)
35
Lot coverage, max %
Single Family
60

Non-residential
10,000
Gross living area min (SF)
Single family
1,200
Non-residential
50
Non-residential
30
Non residential interior
10
Non-residential
120 Setbacks
See Article 7 for additional development standards
SECTION 4.4.3 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 6- Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.4.4 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for non-residential construction shall be accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
City of Everman 20
SECTION 4.5 - M-1 - TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 4.5.1 - PURPOSE AND INTENT
The regulations set forth in this section, or as set forth elsewhere in this ordinance when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the M-1 Two Family Residential District. The purpose and intent of the M-1 Two Family Residential District is to provide for compatible land, structures and uses primarily oriented to medium-low density two family residential purposes, open space uses, and select community facility uses. The location and characteristics of this district are generally but not always, found in the inner urbanized developed core of the City, around shopping centers and neighborhood serving facilities, plus as a transitional element between low density single family districts and higher density multi-family districts. Dwellings containing two family dwelling units, comprise the principal elements of the district.
SECTION 4.5.2 – LOT DIMENSION REGULATIONS
Density
Dwelling units/acre max
8.5 Lot Dimensions
Two family
Lot area, min. (SF)
6,000
Lot width, min (FT)
Two family
50

Lot depth, min. (FT)
Two family
120

Front Yard, min. (FT)
25
Side Yard, min (FT)
Two Family interior
5

Adjacent to Street
15
Rear Yard, min (FT)
25 Building Standards
Building height, max (FT)
35
Lot coverage, max %
Two Family
60
Non-residential
30
Non-residential
8,000
Gross living area min (SF)
Two family
800
Non-residential
50
Non residential interior
10
Non-residential
120 Setbacks
See Article 7 for additional development standards
SECTION 4.5.3 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 6- Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.5.4 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for non-residential construction shall be accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
City of Everman 21
SECTION 4.6 - M-2 - MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 4.6.1 – TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
The regulations set forth in this section, or as set forth elsewhere in this ordinance when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the M-2 Multi-Family Residential District. The purpose and intent of the M-2 Multi-Family Residential District is to provide for compatible land, structures and uses primarily oriented to medium density multi-family residential purposes, open space uses, and select community facility uses. The location and characteristics of this district are generally by not always, found in the inner urbanized developed core of the City, around shopping centers and neighborhood service facilities, near employment centers, at the intersections of major and secondary thoroughfare streets, and as a transitional element between lower density and more intense non-residential land uses. Multi-family development including single family attached dwellings, and apartment buildings, comprise the principal elements of the district.
SECTION 4.6.2 – LOT DIMENSION REGULATIONS
Density
Dwelling units/acre max
16 Lot Dimensions
Single family attached Multi-family
Lot area, min. (SF)
3,000
8,000
Lot width, min (FT)
Single family attached
30
Multi family
60

Lot depth, min. (FT)
Single family attached
100
Multi family
120

Front Yard, min. (FT)
25
Side Yard, min (FT)
Single family attached interior
0
Multi family interior
10
Adjacent to Street
15
Rear Yard, min (FT)
25 Building Standards
Building height, max (FT)
35
Lot coverage, max %
Single family attached
35
Multi family
35
Gross living area min (SF)
Single family attached
800
Multi family 1 bedroom
750
Multi family 2 bedroom
900
Non-residential
30
Non-residential
8,400
Non-residential
50
Non residential interior
10
Non-residential
100 Setbacks
See Article 7 for additional development standards
City of Everman 22
SECTION 4.6.3 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 6- Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.6.4 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for multi-family or non-residential construction shall be accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
City of Everman 23
SECTION 4.7 - MH - MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION AND PARK DISTRICT
SECTION 4.7.2 – TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
The regulations set forth in this section, or as set forth elsewhere in this ordinance when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the MH Manufactured Home Subdivision and Park District. The MH, Manufactured Home Subdivision and Park, district is a detached residential district establishing standards for the location of HUD-code manufactured housing and mobile home units ("manufactured housing") in developments specifically designated for manufactured housing parks and subdivisions. Manufactured housing subdivisions include individually platted lots for sale within the subdivision, for the placement of manufactured housing units. A manufactured housing park offers spaces for the placement of manufactured housing units on a lease or rental basis. The Manufactured Housing district establishes area and design requirements for parks and subdivisions, as well as yard requirements for individual lots. Both parks and subdivisions provide open space and recreational areas appropriate for the acreage and number of units contained. Areas zoned for the MH district shall have, or shall make provision for, municipal water and sewer services. They shall be designed to adequately accommodate storm drainage; they shall have paved concrete streets with logical and efficient vehicular circulation patterns which discourage non-local traffic; they shall be properly buffered from non-residential uses; and they shall be protected from pollution and undesirable environmental and noise impacts.
SECTION 4.7.2 – LOT DIMENSION REGULATIONS
Density
Dwelling units/acre max
8.0 Lot Dimensions
Lot area, min. (SF)
Manufactured Home
3,000
Manufactured Home Park
5 Acres
Gross living area min (SF)
Manufactured Home
700
Lot width, min (FT)
Manufactured Home
40
Lot depth, min. (FT)
Manufactured Home
90 Setbacks
Front Yard, min. (FT)
25
Side Yard, min (FT)
Adjacent to non-similar district
20
Adjacent to manufactured home
5
Adjacent to Street
15
Rear Yard, min (FT)
20 Building Standards
Building height, max (FT)
25
Lot coverage, max %
Manufactured home
40
See Article 7 for additional development standards
SECTION 4.7.3 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
.
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 6- Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
City of Everman 24
SECTION 4.7.4 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for non-residential construction shall be accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
SECTION 4.7.5 - SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS
A. Definitions
1. Manufactured housing park means a parcel of land not less than five (5) acres nor greater than thirty-five (35) acres which is designed, improved, or intended to be used for short-term or long-term occupancy by manufactured or mobile homes, trailers and/or recreational vehicles (including travel trailers) in designated spaces. The facility may include a residence for the owner/manager of the premises, utility hookups, accessory structures, playgrounds and open space areas, fenced yard areas for pets, and other similar amenities.
2. Manufactured housing space means a plot of ground within a manufactured housing park, or manufactured housing subdivision which is designed for the accommodation of one manufactured or mobile home, trailer or RV unit.
3. Manufactured housing subdivision means a parcel of land which is designed, platted, improved and intended for the long-term placement of individually owned mobile home units or HUD-Code manufactured homes on platted lots which can be purchased outright by the owners of the mobile home units. The facility may include a residence for the owner/manager of the premises, utility hookups, accessory structures, playgrounds and open space areas, fenced yard areas for pets, and other similar amenities.
B. Tenant Parking. Each parking space shall be constructed of asphalt or concrete in accordance with City standards, and shall be located to eliminate interference with access to parking areas provided for other manufactured housing and for public parking in the park.
C. Visitor and Supplemental Parking. In addition to parking spaces required for each manufactured housing unit, there shall be paved parking provided for the manufactured housing community in general (see Article 4 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements):
1. Two (2) visitor parking spaces for every three (3) manufactured housing lots.
2. One (1) supplemental parking or vehicle storage space for the parking or storage of boats, campers and similar vehicles or equipment for every four (4) manufactured housing lots.
3. Supplemental spaces may be located anywhere within the manufactured housing community provided that no manufactured housing space shall be situated further than one hundred fifty feet (150') from a visitor space.
4. Each parking space will be not less than nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18'), which is not to be included in the lot size.
City of Everman 25
D. Access. Each manufactured housing community shall have direct access from an improved public street or an internal street. Where an internal private street provides access, the same shall be paved in accordance with City standards for a public street, and it shall be dedicated to the public as an emergency access/fire lane easement to allow for the rapid and safe movement of vehicles used in providing emergency health or public safety services. Each emergency access/fire lane easement shall have a clear unobstructed width of twenty-four feet (24'), shall connect to a dedicated public street, and shall have a turning area and radii of a minimum of fifty feet (50') to permit free movement of emergency vehicles. Dead end streets are not allowed. Cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed four hundred feet (400') in length. Fire lane easements shall be maintained by the manufactured housing park.
E. Walkways. Designated concrete walkways four feet (4') in width will be provided on both sides of roadways or streets.
F. Street Names and Signs. Within each manufactured housing park, all streets shall be named, and manufactured housing numbered in a logical and orderly fashion. Street signs shall be of a color and size contrasting with those on public streets and roadways so that there is no confusion regarding which are private and which are public streets. These signs and numbers shall be of standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles. Street names shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee along with the construction plat application, reviewed by the appropriate City staff with respect to street naming procedures set forth within the Subdivision Ordinance and/or the City's Code of Ordinances, and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission on the plat for the subdivision. All dwelling unit address numbering shall be assigned by the City Manager or his/her designee.
G. Other Signs. Along all sections of emergency access easements, the owner or agent shall erect metal signs prohibiting parking. The sign type, size, height and location shall be in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and approved by the City.
H. Intersections. Internal streets shall intersect adjoining public streets at approximately ninety degrees (90°) and at locations which will eliminate or minimize interference with traffic on those public streets.
I. Street Lighting. Street lighting within the manufactured housing park shall be provided and maintained by the owners of the manufactured housing park.
J. Utilities. All electrical distribution lines and all telephone/cable and other utility lines shall be underground.
K. Drainage and Soil Protection. The ground surface in all parts of the park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner. Each manufactured housing space shall provide adequate drainage for the placement of a manufactured housing unit. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured housing park shall be paved and/or covered with stone, brick paving, or other similar solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth (such as grass) capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating dust.
L. Fire Fighting.
1. Approaches to all manufactured housing shall be kept clear for firefighting.
City of Everman 26
2. The owner or agent of a manufactured housing park shall be responsible for the instruction of any staff in the use of the park fire protection equipment and in their specific duties in the event of a fire. Owner shall supply standard City fire hydrants located within three hundred feet (300') of all manufactured housing spaces, measured along the drive or street.
3. The owner or agent of a manufactured housing park shall be responsible for maintaining the entire area of the park free of dry brush, leaves and weeds in excess of ten inches (10") in height.
M. Refuse Facilities. Every manufactured housing dwelling unit shall be located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a refuse facility, measured along the designated pedestrian travel way. A refuse facility shall be a dumpster or other similar container designed for receiving garbage in bulk for more than one dwelling, and all refuse containers shall be maintained in accordance with local public health and sanitary regulations. Refuse containers shall be located no closer than thirty feet (30') to any adjacent single-family property, shall be located so as to provide safe and convenient pickup by refuse collection agencies, and shall be screened in accordance with Article 5 Development Standards.
N. Anchorage of Manufactured Housing. To insure against natural hazards such as tornados, high winds and electrical storms, anchorage for each manufactured housing shall be provided according to the Building Code and State law.
O. Skirting.
1. All manufactured housing units shall provide skirting from the top of the unit's frame to grade. Skirting shall totally enclose and secure from view the unit's axles and all required anchors, footings, and piers.
2. All required skirting shall be masonry or metal, and shall be of a color similar to the materials used in the construction of the manufactured housing unit such that it blends with the overall appearance of the unit.
P. Maintenance Requirements for Common Areas. A property owners association is required for continued maintenance of any common land and facilities provided within the manufactured housing park/subdivision.
SECTION 4.7.6 - SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Open storage is prohibited.
B. Usable Open Space Requirements. Except as provided below, any manufactured home development shall provide usable open space which equals or exceeds fifteen percent (15%) of the total land area within the development.
C. A swimming pool shall be provided in manufactured housing developments of fifty (50) or more units.
D. One playground area containing at least five (5) pieces of play equipment shall be provided for every one hundred (100) dwelling units, or fraction thereof. The playground equipment shall be of heavy duty construction, such as is normally used in public parks or on public school playgrounds.
City of Everman 27
E. Site plan approval shall be required for any manufactured housing park or authorized non-residential use allowed in the MH district.
SECTION 4.7.7 - REPLACEMENT OF HUD-CODE MANUFACTURED HOMES
In the event that a HUD-Code manufactured home occupies a lot in the City, the owner of the HUD-Code manufactured home may remove the HUD-Code manufactured home from its location and place another HUD-Code manufactured home on the same property, provided that the replacement is a newer HUD-Code manufactured home, and is at least as large in living space as the prior HUD-Code manufactured home.
City of Everman 28
SECTION 4.8 - C-1 - NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 4.8.1 – TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
The regulations set forth in this section, or as set forth elsewhere in this ordinance when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District. The purpose and intent of the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District is to provide for compatible land, structures and uses primarily oriented to varying density residential uses; retail goods and services which supply a more diversified neighborhood/community need, including neighborhood shopping centers, office uses, and community facility uses. The location and characteristics of this district are generally confined to intersection locations of major thoroughfare streets; within residential/commercial Planned Development projects; and as a transition district between residential districts and higher intensity commercial/industrial districts.
SECTION 4.8.2 – LOT DIMENSION REGULATIONS
Density
Dwelling units/acre max
N/A Lot Dimensions
Lot area, min (SF)
5,000
Lot width, min (FT)
50
Lot depth, min. (FT)
120 Setbacks
Front Yard, min. (FT)
25
Side Yard, min (FT)
10
Adjacent to Street
15
Rear Yard, min (FT)
25 Building Standards
Building height, max (FT)
35
Lot coverage, max %
40
See Article 7 for additional development standards
SECTION 4.8.3 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 6- Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.8.4 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for non-residential construction shall be accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
City of Everman 29
SECTION 4.9 - C-2 - GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 4.9.1 – TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
The regulations set forth in this section, or as set forth elsewhere in this ordinance when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the C-2 General Commercial District. The purpose and intent of the C-2 General Commercial District is to provide for compatible land, structures and uses primarily oriented to a variety of indoor and outdoor general business activities of a mixed and diversified nature which supply the needs of the community, and to some degree that of the immediate regional area, including regional and community shopping centers. The general character of this district comprises a broad range of retail and service uses, entertainment uses, community facilities, general office uses and high density residential uses, centers, office uses, and community facility uses. The location and characteristics of this district are generally confined to the urban business/commercial center of the City, major thoroughfare and highway intersections, and as a transitional district between industrial districts and more restrictive commercial and medium density residential districts.
SECTION 4.9.2 – LOT DIMENSION REGULATIONS
Density
Dwelling units/acre max
N/A Lot Dimensions
Lot area, min (SF)
5,000
Lot width, min (FT)
60
Lot depth, min. (FT)
120 Setbacks
Front Yard, min. (FT)
25
Side Yard, min (FT)
10
Rear Yard, min (FT)
20 Building Standards
Building height, max (FT)
35
Lot coverage, max %
35
See Article 7 for additional development standards
SECTION 4.9.3 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 6- Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.9.4 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for non-residential construction shall be accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
City of Everman 30
SECTION 4.10 - D - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 4.10.1 – TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
The regulations set forth in this section, or as set forth elsewhere in this ordinance when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the D Light Industrial District. The purpose and intent of the D Light Industrial District is to provide for compatible land, structures and uses encompassing a variety of mixed wholesale and warehousing activities, light manufacturing, processing and assembly plants, general offices, research and development laboratories, select commercial uses, and agricultural activities. The location and characteristics of this district rely on access to major thoroughfares and highways, and in some cases adjacent to railroad access. The intensity of uses permitted in this district are further restricted in the maximum horsepower output of electrical machinery.
SECTION 4.10.2 – LOT DIMENSION REGULATIONS
Density
Dwelling units/acre max
N/A Lot Dimensions
Lot area, min (SF)
21,780
Lot width, min (FT)
50
Lot depth, min. (FT)
100 Setbacks
Front Yard, min. (FT)
25
Side Yard, min (FT) interior
10
Adjacent to Street
15
Rear Yard, min (FT)
20 Building Standards
Building height, max (FT), Stories
N/A
Lot coverage, max %
50
See Article 7 for additional development standards
SECTION 4.10.3 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 6- Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.10.4 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for non-residential construction shall be accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
City of Everman 31
SECTION 4.11 - E - HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 4.11.1 – TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
The regulations set forth in this section, or as set forth elsewhere in this ordinance when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the E Heavy Industrial District. The purpose and intent of the E Heavy Industrial District is to provide for industrial manufacturing, processing and assembly activities of a more intense nature than allowed in the Light Industrial District. The district is characterized by activities and facilities which are generally incompatible with residential areas by virtue of materials, storage yards, truck traffic generation, noises, odors, flammable materials, etc., and rely on direct access to major thoroughfares and highways, and in many cases railroad facilities for the movement of raw supplies and finished products.
SECTION 4.11.2 – LOT DIMENSION REGULATIONS
Density
Dwelling units/acre max
N/A Lot Dimensions
Lot area, min (SF)
21,780
Lot width, min (FT)
50
Lot depth, min. (FT)
100 Setbacks
Front Yard, min. (FT)
25
Side Yard, min (FT) interior
10
Adjacent to Street
15
Rear Yard, min (FT)
20 Building Standards
Building height, max (FT), Stories
N/A
Lot coverage, max %
60
See Article 7 for additional development standards
SECTION 4.11.3 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-Street parking and loading requirements pertaining to uses allowed in this district shall conform with the provisions of Article 6 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
SECTION 4.11.4 - SITE PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
Any application for a Specific Use Permit to be issued in this district, or for non-residential construction shall be accompanied by a site plan and supporting document in conformance with the provisions of Section 5.2.
City of Everman 32
SECTION 4.12 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) DISTRICTS
SECTION 4.12.1 - PURPOSE AND INTENT
The Planned Development District (PD) is intended to provide for flexibility and encourage a more creative, efficient and aesthetically desirable design and placement of buildings, open spaces, and circulation patterns and to best utilize special site features such as topography, size and shape. It is intended that the flexibility permitted by this zoning category extends to discretionary approval, through site plan review of items such as parking space requirements, building line setbacks, square footages of buildings and structures, protective screening, or sign placement and specifications in order to achieve the purposes and objectives stated in conformance with good planning practices and land utilization.
A. While great flexibility is given to provide special restrictions which will allow development not otherwise permitted, procedures are established herein to prevent against misuse of the increased flexibility.
SECTION 4.12.2 - DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Development requirements for each separate PD district shall be set forth in the ordinance granting the PD district and shall include but not be limited to uses, density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths, building size, building height, building elevations, coverage, floor area ratio, parking, access, screening, landscaping, accessory buildings, signs, lighting, management associations, and other requirements as the City Council and Planning and Zoning Commission may deem appropriate.
A. The PD district shall conform to all other sections of the ordinance unless specifically excluded in the granting ordinance.
B. The minimum acreage for a PD district request shall be five (5) acres for non-residential development and ten (10) acres for residential development.
C. For multi-family uses a common open space shall be designated for the leisure and recreational use of the occupants. The open space shall be a minimum of ten (10%) percent of the total land area devoted to the multi-family use. This requirement may be varied downward by the City Council when a lesser amount of open space would be more appropriate based on the density of the development, the installation of private recreational amenities, or where the availability and nature of adjacent public open space is such that a lesser amount would adequately accommodate the development.
SECTION 4.12.3 - APPROVAL PROCESS
In establishing a PD district in accordance with this section, the City Council shall approve as part of the amending ordinance, appropriate plans and standards for each PD district. During the review and public hearing process, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall require a conceptual plan and/or a detailed plan.
A. Conceptual Plan, This plan shall be submitted by the applicant. The plan shall show the applicant's intent for the use of the land within the proposed PD district in a graphic manner and as may be required, supported by written documentation of proposals and standards for development.
City of Everman 33
B. A conceptual plan for residential land use shall show general use, thoroughfares, and preliminary lot arrangements. In addition, for residential development which does not propose more than one (1) platted lot, the conceptual plan shall set forth the size, type and location of buildings and building sites, access, density, building height, fire lanes, screening, parking areas, landscaped areas, and other pertinent development data.
C. A conceptual plan for uses other than residential uses shall set forth the land use proposals in a manner to adequately illustrate the type and nature of the proposed development. Data which shall be submitted by the applicant, or required by the Planning Commission or City Council, shall include but is not limited to the types of use(s), topography and boundary of PD area, physical features of the site, existing streets, alleys, and easements, location of future public facilities, building height and location, parking ratios, and other information to adequately describe the proposed development and to provide data for approval which is to be used in drafting the final detailed plan.
D. Detailed Plan This plan shall set forth the final plans for development of the PD District and shall conform to the data presented and approved on the conceptual plan. A detailed plan may be submitted in lieu of a conceptual plan only if it includes the entire area being proposed as a PD District. Approval of the detailed plan shall be the basis for issuance of a building permit. The detailed plan may be submitted for the total area of the PD or for any section or part as approved on the conceptual plan. The detailed plan must be approved by the City Council upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
1. The detailed plan shall include:
a) A site inventory analysis including a scale drawing showing existing vegetation, natural watercourses, creeks or bodies of water, and an analysis of planned changes in such natural features as a result of the development; a vicinity map with a north arrow and scale graphic. This site inventory analysis shall include a delineation of any flood-prone areas.
b) The plan shall also contain the name of the development, legal description, name and address of property owner, name and address of developer, and name and address of the preparer of the document.
c) A land use plan delineating the specific areas to be devoted to various uses shall be required where multiple types of land uses are proposed.
d) A scale drawing showing any proposed public or private streets and alleys, building sites or lots, and areas reserved as parks, parkways, playgrounds, utility easements, school sites, street widening and street changes, the points of ingress and egress from existing streets, general location and description of existing and proposed utility services including size of water and sewer mains, the location and width for all curb cuts, and the land area of all abutting sites and the zoning classification thereof on an accurate survey of the tract.
e) A site plan for proposed building complexes showing the location of buildings and the minimum distance between buildings, and between buildings and property lines, street lines and alley lines. Also to be included on the site plan is a plan showing the arrangement and provision of off-street parking.
City of Everman 34
f) A table shall be shown on the plan indicating the total amount of acreage; square footage for each building; maximum height of each building or structure; required and provided parking; maximum impervious surface coverage; maximum building coverage; and total open space required and provided.
g) A landscape plan showing screening walls, open space, buffer yards and all proposed landscaping. Said plan shall contain a table indicating required and proposed landscaping requirements such as number of trees, shrubs, open space, required and proposed buffer yard, and percentage of landscaping required and provided.
h) An architectural plan showing elevations and signage style to be used throughout the development for all uses except single-family and two-family may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council, if deemed appropriate. All pedestrian walks, malls, and open areas for use by tenants or the public; types of surfacing such as paving, or turf to be used at all locations on the site.
i) The location of all outside facilities for waste disposal; location and orientation for all external illumination facilities; and location, size, height and orientation of all signs.
j) Any or all of the required information may be incorporated on a single drawing if one (1) drawing is clear and can be evaluated by the City Manager or his/her designee; however, topographical information shall be shown on a separate drawing.
E. Supplemental data. All concept or detailed plans may have supplemental data describing standards, schedules, or other data pertinent to the development of the PD District which is to be included in the text of the amending ordinance. Additional information needed to adequately analyze the development may be required by planning staff, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council.
SECTION 4.12.4 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT
Procedure for establishing a PD District shall follow the procedure for zoning amendments as set forth in the code of ordinances. This procedure is further expanded as follows for approval of conceptual and detailed plans.
A. Separate public hearings shall be held by the Planning Commission and City Council for the approval of the conceptual plan and the detailed plan or any section of the detailed plan unless such requirement is waived by the City Council when it is determined a single public hearing is adequate. A single public hearing is adequate when:
1. The applicant submits adequate data with the request for the PD district to fulfill the requirements for both plans.
2. Information on the concept plan is sufficient to determine the appropriate use of the land and the detail site plan will not deviate substantially from this plan.
3. The requirement is waived at the time the amending ordinance is approved. If the requirement is waived, the conditions shall be specifically stated in the amending ordinance.
City of Everman 35
4. The ordinance establishing the PD District shall not be approved until the conceptual plan is approved unless the conceptual plan step is bypassed.
5. If the detailed plan is approved in phases a conceptual plan for the entire site shall be approved by the City Council upon recommendation of the Planning Commission. When a detailed plan is approved in phases, then separate approvals by the Planning Commission and City Council for the initial and subsequent phases will be required.
SECTION 4.12.5 - STAFF REPORT
When a PD District is being considered, a written staff report shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council discussing the impact on planning, engineering, water utilities, electric, sanitation, building inspection, tax, police, fire, drainage, and transportation.
SECTION 4.12.6 - ZONING MAP
All PD districts, approved in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance in its original form, or by subsequent amendments thereto, shall be referenced on the zoning district map and a list of said PD districts shall be maintained in the appendix of this Ordinance.
SECTION 4.12.7 - MINOR AMENDMENTS TO A DETAILED PLAN
Upon request of the applicant, the City Manager or his/her designee may authorize minor amendments to a detailed plan so long as such minor amendments do not change the land use or substantially change the character, development standards, or design of the development as shown on the approved detailed plan. For purposes of this provision, a “substantial change” shall mean a change which will increase the number of proposed dwelling units, increase the floor to area ratio, size of structure, height, lot coverage, or number of stories or buildings, reduce lot, or yard size, decrease the amount of required off-street parking spaces, change types of buildings, setbacks, street access points, or lots, increase density, change traffic patterns, or alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent properties. The City Manager or his/her designee shall make such authorization only in writing and such document shall be placed in the ordinance file governing the specific plan.
SECTION 4.12.8 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCES CONTINUED
Prior to adoption of this ordinance, the City Council had established various PD districts, some of which are to be continued in full force and effect. The ordinances or parts of ordinances approved prior to this ordinance shall be carried forth in full force and effect and are the conditions, restrictions, regulations, and requirements which apply to the respective PD districts shown on the zoning map at the date of adoption of this ordinance.
City of Everman 36
SECTION 4.13 – PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USE TABLE
A. Use of Land and Buildings. Structures, land or premises shall be used only in accordance with the use permitted in the following use table subject to compliance with the dimensional and development standards for the applicable zoning district and all other applicable requirements of this Ordinance.
B. Permitted Principal Uses. No principal use shall be permitted in any district unless it appears in the following permitted use table.
C. Legend for the Permitted Use Table:
P
Permitted Use
S
Permitted by Specific Use Permit (SUP)
Not Permitted
TABLE 4.2 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES PERMITTED USES
ZONING DISTRICTS
AG
A-1
A-2
M-1
M-2
MH
C-1
C-2
D
E
AGRICULTURAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
MULTI_FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
MANUFACTURED HOME
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL
GENERAL COMMERCIAL
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL RESIDENTIAL USES SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS
P
P
P
SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING (TOWNHOUSE)
P
TWO FAMILY DWELLINGS (DUPLEX)
P
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING
P
BOARDINGHOUSE OR ROOMINGHOUSE
S
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY
S
P
P
INDEPENDENT SENIOR LIVING FACILITY
P
P
P
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
P
CARETAKERS’ OR GUARDS’ RESIDENCE
P
S
S
S
S
City of Everman 37
TABLE 4.2 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES PERMITTED USES
ZONING DISTRICTS
AG
A-1
A-2
M-1
M-2
MH
C-1
C-2
D
E
AGRICULTURAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
MULTI_FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
MANUFACTURED HOME
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL
GENERAL COMMERCIAL
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL AGRICULTURAL / FARMING AGRICULTURAL FARMING AND LIVESTOCK
P
ROADSIDE FRUIT, VEGETABLE AND PRODUCE STANDS (TEMPORARY)
S
S
S
FEED LOTS
S
S
PRIVATE STABLES (DOMESTIC)
P
RELIGIOUS RELIGIOUS INSITUTION
P
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
P TEMPORARY REVIVAL, GOSPEL, OR EVANGELICSTIC TENTS AND SHELTERS WHEN NOT ON SAME PROPERTY AS MAIN CHURCH BUILDING
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S EDUCATIONAL / SCHOOLS PRIVATE SCHOOLS - PRIMARY, SECONDARY, KINDERGARTEN
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S PUBLIC SCHOOLS
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P VOCATIONAL, TECHNICAL, TRADE SCHOOLS
S
S
S
S CHILD CARE CENTER OR DAY CARE CENTER
P
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
PRIVATE BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS
P
P
P
P COMMUNITY FACILITIES GOVERNMENT & MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P PARKS, LOTS, PLAYGROUNDS
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P OPEN SPACE, GREENBELT, PARKWAY
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P GOLF COURSE, CLUB HOUSE & FACILITIES
P
S
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P SWIMMING POOLS - PUBLIC
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P ANIMAL SHELTERS - PUBLIC
P
P
P MAINTENANCE BUILDINGS
P
P
P UTILITY FACILITIES - GARAGES, STORAGE BUILDINGS, & YARDS
P
P UTILITY FACILITIES - ENERGY PLANTS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
City of Everman 38
TABLE 4.2 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES PERMITTED USES
ZONING DISTRICTS
AG
A-1
A-2
M-1
M-2
MH
C-1
C-2
D
E
AGRICULTURAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
MULTI_FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
MANUFACTURED HOME
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL
GENERAL COMMERCIAL
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ART GALLERY OR MUSEUM
P
P
ATHLETIC FIELDS, STADIUMS, AUDITORIUMS & GYMS
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
CEMETERIES
P
S
S
P
P TRANSPORTATION / CIRCULATION MASS TRANSIT COMMUTER PICK-UP STATION
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P PARKING LOT (COMMERCIAL LOTS)
P
P
P
P
P PARKING LOT OR STRUCTURE (MULTI-STORY)
P
P
P
P
P MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINALS
P
P BUS, TRUCK & TAXI STORAGE YARDS MAINTENANCE AND GARAGES
P RETAIL SALES / TRADE CONVENIENCE, GROCERY STORES & SUPERMARKETS WITH/WITHOUT GASOLINE SALES
P
P
P
P BAKERY & CONFECTIONERY SHOPS - NON-INDUSTRIAL
P
P
P
P RESTAURANTS, CAFES, CAFETERIAS, DRIVE THROUGH SERVICE
P
P
P
P PACKAGE LIQOUR STORES, COCKTAIL LOUNGES AND TAVERNS (SEE SECTION 8.7).
P
P
P
P DRUG, APOTHECARIES, PHARMACIES & SUNDRY
P
P
BOOK, STATIONARY, NEWSSTANDS, GIFT TOBACCO, SOUVENIR & NOVELTY SHOP
P
P
HARDWARE & APPLIANCE STORES
P
P
GARDEN SHOP
P
P
LANDSCAPE SERVICES, PLANT & GARDEN NURSERIES (RETAIL)
P
P
S
ARTS, CRAFTS, HOBBY & FABRIC SHOPS
P
P
HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS & FIXTURES STORES
P
P
HOME IMPROVEMENT STORE
P
P
P
RETAIL SHOPS
P
P
P
P ANTIQUE SHOP
P
P
City of Everman 39
TABLE 4.2 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES PERMITTED USES
ZONING DISTRICTS
AG
A-1
A-2
M-1
M-2
MH
C-1
C-2
D
E
AGRICULTURAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
MULTI_FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
MANUFACTURED HOME
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL
GENERAL COMMERCIAL
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL BICYCLE SHOP & REPAIR SERVICE
P
P
FEED & SEED STORES
P
P
P STONE MONUMENTS (EXCLUDING CUTTING SLABS)
P
P
P BUILDING MATERIALS & LUMBER YARDS (OUTDOOR STORAGE)
S
P
P BUILDING MATERIALS & LUMBER YARDS (INDOOR STORAGE)
P
P
P
P AUTO PARTS AND ACCESSORY SALES
P
P
TEMPORARY SALES OF CHRISTMAS TREES, ETC
P
P
P
P USED MERCHANDISE
S
S
S PAWN SHOPS
P
P
P VIDEO SALES & RENTAL
P
P
RETAIL SALES / TRADE - AUTOMOTIVE, MARINE AND FARM IMPLEMENTS MOTORCYCLE & SCOOTER SALES AND SERVICE
P
P
P BOATS, & MARINE CRAFT SALES AND SERIVCE
P
P
P FARM MACHINERY & IMPLEMENTS SALES, SERVICE & RENTALS
S
P
P
P AUTO RENTAL AND SALES
P
P
MOTOR HOME, CAMPERS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES SALES & SERVICE
P
P
AUTOMOTIVE GLASS, TRIM & UPHOLSTERY
P
P
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE, MINOR
S
P
P
P AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE, MAJOR
P
P CAR WASH AUTOMATED OR ATTENDED
P
P
P CAR WASH SELF SERVICE
S
P
P SERVICES - PERSONAL SERVICES HOTEL
P
P
S
S MOTEL
S
S
S
S BARBER , BEAUTY SHOPS , SALONS
P
P
City of Everman 40
TABLE 4.2 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES PERMITTED USES
ZONING DISTRICTS
AG
A-1
A-2
M-1
M-2
MH
C-1
C-2
D
E
AGRICULTURAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
MULTI_FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
MANUFACTURED HOME
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL
GENERAL COMMERCIAL
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL LAUNDROMAT OR SELF SERVE WASHATERIA
P
P
LAUNDRY - DRY CLEANING & DYEING
P
P
P INSTRUCTED MUSIC, DANCE, ART & DRAMA STUDIOS
P
P
FITNESS CENTER
P
P
FUNERAL HOMES & MORTUARIES
S
P
PRIVATE AMBULANCE SERVICE
P
P
TAXIDERMIST SHOPS / STUDIOS
P
P PET GROOMING - NOT BOARDING
P
P
KENNELS
P
P SIGN SHOPS (PAINTED AND SILK SCREEN)
P
P
FOOD CATERING SERVICES
P
P
SERVICES - MEDICAL AND VETERINARY SERVICES MEDICAL, DENTAL, CHIROPRACTIC, OPTPMETRY, PODIATRY & VETERINARIAN OFFICES & CLINICS
P
P
HOSPITAL, MEDICAL CLINICS, (PROVIDING ACUTE / EXTENDED PATIENT CARE)
S
P
ANIMAL HOSPITALS & CLINICS FOR THE CARE AND TEMPORARY BOARDING OF DOMESTIC HOUSEHOLD PETS
P
P
P
P MEDICAL LABORATORIES & SERVICES
P
P
P
P NURSING HOME
P
P
SERVICES - BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL SERVICES OFFICE CENTER, PROFESSIONAL AND GENERAL BUSINESS
P
P
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION
P
P
OFFICE SHOWROOM
S
P
P UTILITY OFFICES & BILL PAYING STATIONS
P
P
PRINTING & MAILING SERVICES & OFFICE SUPPLIES
P
P
BUILDING & RELATED CONTRACTORS CONSTRUCTION YARDS & STORAGE BUILDINGS
S
P
P
P
City of Everman 41
TABLE 4.2 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES PERMITTED USES
ZONING DISTRICTS
AG
A-1
A-2
M-1
M-2
MH
C-1
C-2
D
E
AGRICULTURAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
MULTI_FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
MANUFACTURED HOME
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL
GENERAL COMMERCIAL
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL PEST CONTOL SERVICES
S
P
P WATER WELL DRILLING SERVICES
P
P SERVICES - GENERAL SERVICES - SHOPS
P
P
P
P APPAREL ALTERATIONS & REPAIR
P
P
CAMERA, JEWELRY, INSTRUMENT & WATCH REPAIR
P
P
GENERAL FIX-IT REPAIR (SAW, FILING, KNIFE & SCISSORS SHARPENING & LAWN MOWER REPAIR)
P
P
P
P PLUMBING, HVAC, ELECTRICAL
P
P
PIANO & MUSICAL INSTRUMENT REPAIR
P
P
P
P UPHOLSTERY
S
P
P
P AUTO & LIVESTOCK AUCTION BARNS & FACILITIES
P
P SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITIES
P
P CUSTOM WELDING (EXCLUDING STRUCTURAL)
P
P ENTERTAINMENT - AMUSEMENTS MOTION PICTURE THEATERS
P
P
ICE & ROLLER SKATING RINKS & ARENAS
P
P
BOWLING ALLEYS
P
P
DANCE HALLS & BALL ROOMS
P
P
COMMERCIAL & PRIVATE CLUBS, LODGES & FRATERNAL ORGANIZATIONS
P
P
S
S AMUSEMENT, ARCADE, (ALSO VIDEO ARCADE)
S
S
S AMUSEMENT, COMMERCIAL INDOOR
P
P AMUSEMENT, COMMERCIAL (OUTDOOR)
P
P
S
S AMUSEMENT, COMMERCIAL (OUTDOOR), CIRCUS, CARNIVAL & FAIRGROUNDS
P
P COMMERCIAL OPERATED SWIM AND/OR TENNIS CENTERS
P
P
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES (SEE SECTION 8.3)
S
S
City of Everman 42
TABLE 4.2 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES PERMITTED USES
ZONING DISTRICTS
AG
A-1
A-2
M-1
M-2
MH
C-1
C-2
D
E
AGRICULTURAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
MULTI_FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
MANUFACTURED HOME
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL
GENERAL COMMERCIAL
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL INDUSTRIAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS (SEE SECTION 8.5)
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P BAKERIES (WHOLESALE)
P
P TELEPHONE, INTERNET, WIRELESS, SERVER FARM AND EXCHANGE, SWITCH OR TRANSMITTING STATION
P
P FOOD PROCESSING
P
P
P MOVING, TRANSFER AND STORAGE COMPANIES
P
P AUTO STORAGE OR AUTO AUCTION
P RAW FARM PRODUCT MATERIALS, (COTTON, GRAIN, LIVESTOCK, HIDES AND TOBACCO)
S UTILITY COMPANY STORAGE YARDS AND WAREHOUSES
P
P COLD STORAGE LOCKER PLANTS
P
P CLEANING PLANT (COMMERCIAL/WHOLESALE)
P
P GAS, PETROLEUM AND LIQUID FERTILIZER BULK STATIONS,TERMINALS AND STORAGE DEPOTS
S
S OTHER GENERAL STORAGE WAREHOUSE AND DISTRIBUTION CENTERS
P
P CABINET SHOPS & FURNITURE MANUFACTURING
P
P
P INDUSTRIAL MANUFACTURING AND ASSEMBLY
S
P PULP GOODS MANUFACTURING
P PLANING & MILLWORK
P
P SAND, LIME, GRAVEL, COAL, OR EARTH EXCAVATION, PROCESSING & STORAGE
S OIL AND GAS EXTRACTION ONLY
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S SMALL APPLIANCE, TELEVISION & ELECTRICAL & GAS COMPONENTS MANUFACTURING
P
P TOOL, DIE, GAUGE & MACHINE SHOP
P
P ADVERTISING SIGNS MANUFACTURING (METAL OR PLASTIC)
P
P ORNAMENTAL IRON FABRICATION & ASSEMBLY
P
P SHEET METAL PRODUCTS ASSEMBLY & FABRICATION
P
P AUTOMOBILE, TRUCK, BUS, FARM IMPLEMENTS, MOBILE HOME, BOATS ETC MANUFACTURING & ASSEMBLY
S
P
City of Everman 43
TABLE 4.2 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES PERMITTED USES
ZONING DISTRICTS
AG
A-1
A-2
M-1
M-2
MH
C-1
C-2
D
E
AGRICULTURAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
MULTI_FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
MANUFACTURED HOME
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL
GENERAL COMMERCIAL
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ASSEMBLY OF GOODS & PRODUCTS FROM ALUMINUM, BRASS, BRONZE, COPPER, STEEL, TIN
P
P
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 44
A
ARTICLE RTICLE 55 ––APPLICATIONS AND AMENDMENTSAPPLICATIONS AND AMENDMENTS
SECTION 5.1 - AMENDMENTS TO ZONING ORDINANCE AND DISTRICTS, ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES, AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 5.1.1 - AUTHORITY TO AMEND ORDINANCE
A. The City Council may from time to time, after receiving a recommendation thereon by the Planning and Zoning Commission and after public hearings required by law, amend, supplement, or change the regulations herein provided or the boundaries of the zoning districts specified on the Zoning Map. Any amendment to the Zoning Ordinance text or to zoning district boundaries may be ordered for consideration by the City Council, may be initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or may be requested by the owner of real property, or his/her authorized representative.
B. Consideration for a change in any zoning district boundary line or special zoning regulation may be initiated only by the property owner or his/her authorized agent (proof of such authorization must be submitted with the zoning application, per Section 5.1.2 below), or by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council on its own motion when it finds that public benefit will be derived from consideration of such matter. In the event the ownership stated on an application and that shown in City records are different, the applicant shall submit proof of ownership and verification that he/she is acting as an authorized agent for the property owner.
SECTION 5.1.2 - APPLICATION
A. Each application for zoning, rezoning, a Specific Use Permit (SUP), or for a text amendment to a provision(s) of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be made in writing on an application form available in the City Manager’s or his/her designee's office. The application shall be delivered to the City and shall be accompanied by payment of the appropriate fee as established in the currently adopted City Fee Schedule, An accurate metes and bounds description of the subject property, or other suitable legal description, a survey, and other appropriate exhibits such as site plans, maps, architectural elevations, information about proposed uses, and any other information that is determined necessary by the City Manager or his/her designee shall also be submitted with the zoning application in order to ensure that the request is understood.
B. All zoning change requests involving real property shall be accompanied by a notarized statement verifying land ownership and, if applicable, authorization of land owner's agent to file the zoning change request.
SECTION 5.1.3 - NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
A. For zoning and rezoning requests involving real property, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on each zoning application, as required in Texas Local Government Code Chapter 211, as amended. For proposed changes to zoning district boundaries, notice of the public hearing to occur before the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be accomplished by providing written notice of the public hearing to be sent to all owners of property, as indicated by the most recently approved City tax roll, that is located within the area of application and within two
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 45
hundred feet (200') of any property affected thereby, said written notice to be sent before the tenth (10th) calendar day prior to the date such hearing is held. Such notice may be served by using the last known address as listed on the most recently approved tax roll and depositing the notice, postage paid, in the United States mail. Changes in the Ordinance text which do not change zoning district boundaries do not require written notification to individual property owners.
B. The City may, at its option, establish additional rules and procedures for public notification of proposed zoning changes and development proposals which may include, but not be limited to, the posting of a sign(s) on any property that is proposed for a zoning change or development by the applicant or its agent(s). Knowledge of and adherence to such rules and procedures, if so established by the City, shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall be required as part of a zoning change or development application. The City shall make available one (1) copy of all rules and procedures in the City Manager's office.
SECTION 5.1.4 - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION CONSIDERATION AND RECOMMENDATION
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall perform its duties in accordance with Section 3.1 and with applicable provisions in the City's Code of Ordinances.
B. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on a zoning or rezoning request. After all public input has been received and the public hearing closed, the Commission shall make its recommendations on the proposed zoning request, stating its findings, and its assessment regarding how the request relates to the City's Comprehensive Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission may, on its own motion or at the applicant's request, defer its decision/recommendation from the time the public hearing was first opened, or until it has had an opportunity to consider other information or proposed modifications to the request which may have a direct bearing thereon. If the Commission elects to defer the request, such deferment shall specifically state the time period of the deferment by citing the meeting date whereon the request will reappear on the Commission's agenda, and further notice in the newspaper and to surrounding property owners shall not be required.
C. When the Commission acts upon a zoning request, it may recommend approval of the request as it was submitted by the applicant, approval of the request subject to certain conditions or disapproval of the request. The Planning and Zoning Commission, after the public hearing is closed, shall vote on its recommendations on the proposed change to be sent in a report to the City Council. Such report may recommend for or against such proposed change and may, but need not, include reasons for such decision. The zoning request will be automatically forwarded to the City Council for a public hearing thereon, as provided in Section 5.1.5 below. In the event of a tie, due to absence of members, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall send a report of its vote to the City Council and that report shall constitute its recommendation.
D. Withdrawal. Any proposal or application may be withdrawn by the proponent after the Planning and Zoning Commission makes its final report, and such proposal or application shall not be subject to the provision hereof that a period of time must pass before a new application is considered. If such proposal is withdrawn, the City Council will not consider it. Withdrawal of an application from a public hearing or meeting agenda is at the review or decision-making authority’s discretion.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 46
SECTION 5.1.5 - CITY COUNCIL CONSIDERATION
A. Applications Forwarded from the Planning and Zoning Commission to the City Council.
1. Every zoning application which is recommended for approval or approval with conditions by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be automatically forwarded to the City Council for a public hearing to be held following appropriate public hearing notification by publishing the purpose, time and place of the public hearing in the official newspaper of the City before the fifteenth (15th) calendar day prior to the date of the public hearing. The City Council may then approve the request, approve it with conditions, or disapprove it by a majority vote of the Council members present and voting.
B. City Council Action on Zoning, Rezoning or Text Amendment Requests. After a public hearing is held before the City Council regarding the zoning application, the City Council may approve the request in whole or in part, deny the request in whole or in part, defer the application to a future meeting, specifically citing the City Council meeting to which it is deferred, or it may refer the application back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further study.
1. If the City Council approves the request, then Section 5.1.5 (D) will apply.
2. If the City Council denies the request, an identical application cannot be submitted for one (1) year. Where the request was initiated by the City and involved a proposed amendment to the text of the Zoning Ordinance, a waiting period is not required before the request can be reconsidered.
C. Protests. For zoning and rezoning requests involving real property, a favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the City Council shall be required to approve any change in zoning when written objections are received from twenty percent (20%) or more of the land area covered by the proposed change, or of the land area within two hundred feet (200') of the subject property, in accordance with the provisions of Section 211.006 of the Texas Local Government Code. If a protest against such proposed zoning change has been filed with the City Secretary, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more, either of the area of the land included in such a proposed change or those owners of property immediately adjacent to the subject property and extending two hundred feet (200'), such zoning change shall not become effective except by a three-fourths vote of the full City Council.
D. Final Approval and Ordinance Adoption. In order to approve and adopt a zoning amendment ordinance, the applicant shall submit a correct description and all required exhibits submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. The amending ordinance shall not be formally adopted until it is approved by the City Council, signed by the Mayor, and attested by the City Secretary.
SECTION 5.1.6 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
A. The City Manager or his/her authorized representative, shall administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. If the City Manager or his/her authorized representative finds upon his/her own personal observation, or upon receipt of a complaint, that the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he/she shall immediately investigate and, when necessary, give written notice to the
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 47
person(s) responsible to cease or correct such violation(s) immediately. Notice shall be delivered in person or by certified mail to the violator(s) or to any person owning or leasing a property where the violation is occurring. The City Manager or his/her authorized representative shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time in conformance with local and state laws, for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises that may be necessary to carry out the duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance.
B. Stop Work Orders. Whenever any building or construction work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance, the City Manager or his/her authorized representative shall have the authority to order the work stopped by notice in writing served on the property owner or the contractor doing the work or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized in writing by the City to proceed with such work. Failure to immediately stop work as provided herein shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance, in accordance with Section 1.5 and may incur penalties for such violation.
SECTION 5.1.7 - SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES
A. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any zoning or development application or on any appeal.
SECTION 5.2 - SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCESS
SECTION 5.2.1 - PURPOSE OF SITE PLANS
This Section establishes a site plan review process for proposed nonresidential, mixed use and multi-family residential developments. The purpose of the review is to ensure efficient and safe land development, harmonious use of land, compliance with appropriate design standards, safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, adequate parking and loading, and adequate water supply, drainage and storm water management, sanitary facilities, coverage, and other utilities and services.
SECTION 5.2.2 - APPLICABILITY
A. Site plan review and approval shall be required for all nonresidential, mixed-use, townhouse, single-family attached, and multi-family residential projects and structures, and for any Planned Development district or Specific Use Permit. Authorized nonresidential structures within a residential zoning district are subject to the site plan review and approval requirements of this Section.
B. No building permit shall be issued for any of the above developments until a site plan and all other required engineering/construction plans are first approved by the City. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all construction and development conforms to the site plan and engineering/construction plans, as approved by the City.
SECTION 5.2.3 - EXEMPTIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
Site plan review shall not be required for single-family detached residential developments.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 48
SECTION 5.2.4 - SITE PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
A. All required items and/or information for an application for a site plan must be received by the City Manager or his/her designee in order for the application to be considered complete, pursuant to Section 5.2.5, and incomplete submissions will not be reviewed until all deficient items and information have been received. The City will provide to the applicant not later than the 10th business day after the date the application is filed written notice of the failure that specifies the necessary documents or other information and the date the application will expire if the documents or other information is not provided. The site plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer (P.E.), land planner, architect or surveyor, at a scale no smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), and it shall clearly show in detail how the site will be constructed. The site plan shall include, but not be limited to the following:
1. An application form, provided by the City, with notarized signatures of the owner or his/her designated representative if the applicant is not the owner of the subject property.
2. Appropriate filing fee, as set forth in the currently adopted City Fee Schedule.
3. Verification that all taxes and assessments on the subject property have been paid.
4. Plans submitted shall be on sheets twenty four inches by thirty-six inches (24" x 36")
5. A title block within the lower right hand corner of the site plan with the proposed name of the project/subdivision, the name and address of the owner/developer and the land planner, engineer architect or surveyor responsible for the plan, the scale of the drawing (both written and graphic scale), the date the drawing was prepared, total site acreage, and the location of the property according to the abstract and survey records of Tarrant County, Texas;
6. A vicinity or location map that shows the location of the proposed development within the City, and in relationship to existing roadways;
7. The boundary survey limits of the tract and each proposed lot and scale distances with north clearly indicated;
8. The names of adjacent additions or subdivisions or the name of the owners of record and recording information for adjacent parcels of unplatted land, including parcels on the other sides of roads, creeks, etc.;
9. The existing zoning and existing/proposed uses on adjacent land; the location, width and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or adjacent to the tract; any existing easements, with recording information; existing buildings; railroad rights-of-way; topography (contours at two-foot intervals) with existing drainage channels or creeks, including the 100-year flood plain, if applicable; any other important natural features, such as rock outcroppings, caves, wildlife habitats, etc.; and all substantial natural vegetation;
10. Proposed strategies for tree preservation including showing individual trees or tree masses that will be preserved, and the techniques that will be used to protect them during construction;
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 49
11. The layout and width (right-of-way lines and curb lines) of existing and proposed thoroughfares, collector streets and/or intersections, and specific configuration of proposed streets, lot s and blocks, proposed driveways including driveway widths and distances between driveways, proposed median openings and left turn lanes on future divided roadways and existing and planned driveways on the opposite side of divided roadways must also be shown for coordination and sharing of future median openings;
12. Specific locations and footprints of buildings, including but not limited to proposed nonresidential and residential densities; building heights, square footages (for multi-tenant or multi-purpose buildings, show square footage for each intended use), massing, orientation, loading/service areas (including proposed screening), recycling containers, compactors and dumpster enclosures (including proposed screening), pedestrian walkways, and parking areas (including parking ratio calculations); any proposed sites for parks, schools, public facilities, public or private open space; flood plains/drainage ways; all proposed and existing utilities and easements; drainage structures; retention/detention ponds with proposed aesthetic treatments; screening walls; fences; signage; fire lanes and fire hydrants; lighting; visibility easements; and other pertinent development related features;
13. A landscape plan showing turf areas, tree types and sizes, screening walls, ornamental plantings, planting schedule (including species, planted height, spacing, container/caliper size, numbers of each plant material, etc.) any existing wooded areas, trees to be planted, and irrigation plans, if required; and
14. Color building façade (elevation) plans showing elevations with any attached (wall-mounted) signage to be used, as determined appropriate by the City Manager or his/her designee.
15. General layout for the required public improvements, such as water, wastewater, grading/storm drainage, water quality, fire lanes and hydrants, screening and landscaping, the quantity of which shall be determined by the City Manager or his/her designee.
16. Reduced copies (11" x 17") of the site plan as required by the City Manager or his/her designee.
17. One set of all site plan pages submitted to the City in a readily readable digital format.
18. Any additional information/materials, such as plans, maps, exhibits, legal description of property, information about proposed uses, and other information deemed necessary by the City Manager or his/her designee in order to ensure that the development request is understood.
B. To ensure the submission of adequate information, the City is hereby empowered to maintain and distribute a separate list of specific requirements for site plan review applications. Upon periodic review, the City Manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to update such requirements for site plan and development review applications. It is the applicant's responsibility to be familiar with, and to comply with, these requirements.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 50
C. Extent of Area that should be Included in a Site Plan. When the overall development project is to be developed in phases, the site plan area shall include only the portion of the overall property that is to be developed/constructed.
SECTION 5.2.5 - LAPSE OF SITE PLAN APPROVAL
The approval of a site plan shall be effective for a period of two (2) years and shall thereafter lapse unless progress has been made on the construction of the project in accordance with the provisions of Section 245.005 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
SECTION 5.2.6 – EXTENSION AND REINSTATEMENT PROCEDURE
A. Before a site plan expires, the applicant may submit to the City a request to extend the time period of the site plan. The request will be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.
B. If no request for extension for a site plan is received, then the site plan will be considered null and void. Any new request for site plan approval shall be deemed a "new project;" shall be submitted with a new application form, with a new filing fee, and with new plans and materials in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Ordinance.
C. In determining whether to grant a request for extension, the City Council shall take into account the reasons for the lapse, the ability of the property owner to comply with any conditions attached to the original approval, and the extent to which development regulations would apply to the site plan at that point in time.
SECTION 5.3 - SPECIFIC USE PERMITS
SECTION 5.3.1 - PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. Nature of Specific Use. A specific use is a land use which, because of its unique nature, is compatible with the permitted land uses in a given zoning district only upon a determination that the external effects of the use in relation to the existing and planned uses of adjoining property and the neighborhood can be mitigated through imposition of certain standards and conditions. This Section sets forth the standards used to evaluate proposed special uses and the procedures for approving Specific Use Permit applications.
B. Permit Required. No specific use shall be established and no building permit shall be issued for any use designated as a specific use within any zoning district until a Specific Use Permit (SUP) is issued in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. An application for an SUP shall be accompanied by a detailed site plan prepared in the manner described in Section 5.2 of this Ordinance. The site plan shall illustrate the proposed use to be established, its relationship to adjoining properties, and how it meets the approval standards set forth in Section 5.2.
SECTION 5.3.2 - STATUS OF SPECIALLY PERMITTED USES
The following general rules apply to all special uses:
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 51
A. The designation of a use in a zoning district as may be permitted by SUP in Section 4.13 of this Ordinance does not constitute an authorization or assurance that such use will be approved.
B. Approval of an SUP shall authorize only the particular use for which the SUP is issued.
C. No use authorized by an SUP shall be enlarged, extended or relocated, nor may the number of dwelling units be increased, unless an application is made for approval of a new Specific Use Permit.
D. Development of the use shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all the permits and approvals required by these zoning regulations, the City Code of Ordinances, and any permits that may be required by regional, State or Federal agencies.
SECTION 5.3.3 - APPLICATION FOR SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
A. Application Requirements. An application for a Specific Use Permit may be submitted by the property owner or by the property owner's designated representative to the City. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 5.2 of this Ordinance. If a base zoning district amendment is required or requested, such rezoning application shall accompany the application for a Specific Use Permit.
B. Subdivision Approval. If the proposed use requires a division of or the platting of land, an application for the first step in subdivision approval shall be submitted in conjunction with the application for a Specific Use Permit. Approval of the Specific Use Permit shall not become effective until final approval of the subdivision application provided that, if the land is to be divided and developed in phases, the approval of the Specific Use Permit shall take effect upon final plat approval of the phase of the subdivision containing the property on which the special use is to be located.
SECTION 5.3.4 - PROCEDURES FOR SPECIFIC USE PERMITS
A. Planning and Zoning Commission Recommendation. Upon receipt of the recommendation from the City Manager or his/her designee the Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct a public hearing in order to formulate its recommendations to the City Council on the Specific Use Permit application. Following the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend approval, approval subject to modification, or denial of the proposal to the City Council. If the appropriateness of the use cannot be assured at the location, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend denial of the application as being incompatible with existing uses or with other uses permitted by right in the district.
B. City Council Action. The City Council shall be the final decision-maker on applications for Specific Use Permits. Following a public hearing and in consideration of the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendations, the City Council shall approve, modify or deny the proposal for a Specific Use Permit in accordance with Section 5.1 of this Ordinance. If the appropriateness of the use cannot be assured at the location, the application for Specific Use Permit shall be denied as being incompatible with existing uses or with other uses permitted by right in the district.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 52
SECTION 5.3.5 - STANDARDS
A. Factors for Consideration. When considering applications for a Specific Use Permit, the Planning and Zoning Commission in making its recommendation and the City Council in rendering its decision on the application shall, on the basis of the concept plan/site plan and other information submitted, evaluate the impact of the special use on, and the compatibility of the use with, surrounding properties and neighborhoods to ensure the appropriateness of the use at a particular location. The Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall specifically consider the extent to which:
1. The proposed use at the specified location is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies contained in the adopted Comprehensive Plan;
2. The proposed use is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the applicable zoning district regulations;
3. The proposed use is compatible with and preserves the character and integrity of adjacent development and neighborhoods and, as required by the particular circumstances, includes improvements or modifications either on-site or within the public rights-of-way to mitigate development related adverse impacts, including but not limited to:
a) Adequate ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular reference to vehicular and pedestrian safety and convenience, and access in case of fire;
b) Off-street parking and loading areas;
c) Refuse and service areas;
d) Utilities with reference to location, availability, and compatibility;
e) Screening and buffering features to minimize visual impacts, and/or set-backs from adjacent uses;
f) Control of signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties in the district;
g) Required yards and open space;
h) Height and bulk of structures;
i) Hours of operation;
j) Exterior construction material and building design; and
k) Roadway adjustments, traffic control devices or mechanisms, and access restrictions to control traffic flow or divert traffic as may be needed to reduce or eliminate development-generated traffic on neighborhood streets.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 53
4. The proposed use is not materially detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience and welfare, or results in material damage or prejudice to other property in the vicinity.
B. Conditions. In approving the application, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may impose, such additional conditions as are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with these standards and the purpose and intent of this Section, in accordance with the procedures in Section 5.1 of this Ordinance. Such additional conditions shall exceed the minimum standards contained herein or in any other applicable City Code or Ordinance, and they cannot relax or grant relief from any of the City's minimum standards. Any conditions imposed shall be set forth in the ordinance approving the specific use, and shall be incorporated into or noted on the concept plan or site plan for final approval. The City Manager or his/her designee shall verify that the plan incorporates all conditions set forth in the ordinance authorizing the special use, and shall sign the plan to indicate final approval. The City shall maintain a record of such approved special uses and the site plans and conditions attached thereto.
C. Prohibition on Waivers and Variances. The foregoing additional conditions shall not be subject to variances that otherwise could be granted by the Board of Adjustment nor may conditions imposed by the City Council subsequently be waived or varied by the BOA. In conformity with the authority of the City Council to authorize special uses, the City Council may waive or modify specific standards otherwise made applicable to the use by this Ordinance, to secure the general objectives of this Section.
SECTION 5.3.6 - EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION
A Specific Use Permit shall automatically expire if a building permit is not issued and construction begun within 180 days of the granting of the Specific Use Permit; the use has not begun operation (if no construction is required) within 180 days of the granting of the specific use permit.
The City Council, upon recommendation by the Planning & Zoning Commission, may extend the specific use permit for a period of 180 days if the applicant requests the extension prior to the expiration of the specific use permit.
SECTION 5.3.7 – MINOR AMENDMENTS
Upon request of the applicant, the City Manager or his/her designee may authorize minor amendments to a Specific Use Permit so long as such minor amendments do not change the land use or substantially change the character, development standards, or design of the development as shown on the approved detailed plan. For purposes of this provision, a “substantial change” shall mean a change which will increase the number of proposed dwelling units, increase the floor to area ratio, size of structure, height, lot coverage, or number of stories or buildings, reduce lot, or yard size, decrease the amount of required off-street parking spaces, change types of buildings, setbacks, street access points, or lots, increase density, change traffic patterns, or alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent properties. The City Manager or his/her designee shall make such authorization only in writing and such document shall be placed in the ordinance file governing the specific plan.
SECTION 5.3.8 - USE REGULATIONS
Uses allowed by SUP are specified in Section 4.13 Principal Permitted Uses.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 54
SECTION 5.4 - NONCONFORMING USES, LOTS AND STRUCTURES
SECTION 5.4.1 - GENERALLY
Within the districts established by this ordinance, or amendments that may later be adopted, there exists lots and uses of land, buildings and structures, uses of land and buildings in combination, and characteristics of use which were lawful before this ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this ordinance or future amendments. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue under regulations contained herein until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this ordinance that such nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended, not be used as grounds for adding other buildings and structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
SECTION 5.4.2 - REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS
Nonconforming uses are incompatible with permitted uses. Therefore, no nonconforming use of land or building, nonconforming lot or yard, or any nonconforming structure shall be enlarged, changed, altered or repaired except in conformance with the regulations contained in this article.
Repairs and alterations may be made to a non-conforming structure, provided that no structural alterations shall be made except those required by law or ordinance, unless the structure is changed to a conforming use and provided that no additional dwelling units shall be added where the non-conforming use results from there being more dwelling units on the lot than is permissible in the district in which the building is located. The Board of Adjustment shall have the authority after a hearing to grant extension of a building non-conforming as to uses not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the ground area of the same in case of evident hardship, subject to the yard restrictions herein provided.
SECTION 5.4.3 - USE
The lawful use of "land" existing at the time of the passing of this Ordinance, although such does not conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued, but if such non-conforming use is discontinued, any future use of said premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 5.4.4 - CHANGE OF USE
A non-conforming use, if changed to conforming use, may not thereafter be changed back to a non-conforming use. A non-conforming use, may not thereafter be changed unless to an equal or to a more restricted use.
SECTION 5.4.5 - DISCONTINUANCE OR ABANDONMENT
A. If, at the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereof, a lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this ordinance, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided:
1. The legal non-conforming use does not cease due to discontinuance or abandonment;
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 55
2. The legal non-conforming use shall not be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, unless provided for herein; or
3. The legal non-conforming use shall not be moved, in whole or in part, to any portion of the same lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance.
B. For the purpose of this section, "abandonment" shall be defined as intent by the owner to permanently close or cease the use, coupled with any act or statement by the owner that manifests such intent. The following conditions, events or conduct shall be presumed to constitute intent to abandon a legal non-conforming use:
1. the closure or cessation of the non-conforming use for a period of one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days; or
2. the failure of the owner to repair the structure or property used to operate the non-conforming use within thirty (30) days after the chief building official or code enforcement officer has given the owner written notice that the building, structure or property is:
a) in an advanced stage of dilapidation, as determined by either the zoning administrator or the chief building official;
b) in violation of one or more applicable health and safety codes adopted by the City that govern the use or condition of structures designed for human occupancy, as amended, including but not limited to the applicable building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, and life safety codes as adopted by the City; or
c) otherwise unsafe for the continuation of the current use or occupancy.
C. For the purpose of this section, "discontinuance" shall be defined as follows:
1. When a legal non-conforming use has historically been operated on a continuous basis, a closure or cessation of a use for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, irrespective of whether the owner has actual intent to abandon the use; or
2. When a legal non-conforming use has historically been operated only on a seasonal basis, such use shall be deemed to have been discontinued, regardless of whether the owner has actual intent to abandon the use, if either:
a) the structure or property upon or in which the use has been operated is closed or the non-conforming use ceases to operate for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or
b) the structure or property upon or in which the use has been operated is closed or the non-conforming use ceases to operate in a bona-fide manner during one or more normal and
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 56
customary seasons or periods of operation during which the non-conforming use has historically been operated.
SECTION 5.4.6 - EXTENSION
Upon evidence of hardship, the Board of Adjustment shall have the power to extend the time limits in Section 5.4.5 above not to exceed six (6) months.
SECTION 5.4.7 - DESTRUCTION
A building occupied by a non-conforming use that is destroyed by fire or the elements may not be reconstructed or rebuilt except to conform to provisions of this Ordinance. In the case of partial destruction by fire or other causes, not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of its value, the Building Official may issue a permit for reconstruction. If greater than fifty percent (50%) and less than total, the Board of Adjustment may grant permit for repair after public hearing, having due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered in the light of the public welfare and the character of the area surrounding the designated non-conforming use and the conservation and preservation of property.
SECTION 5.4.8 - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
A certificate of occupancy shall be issued for all non-conforming uses.
SECTION 5.4.9 - CONSTRUCTION COMPLETION REQUIREMENT
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a legal building permit has been heretofore issued, provided such construction shall have been started and shall be diligently prosecuted to completion.
SECTION 5.4.10- NONCONFORMITY OF RECORD
All legally conforming platted lots and all legally constructed structures existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be deemed to continue to be legally nonconforming as of the effective date of this ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lot or structure fails to meet the minimum requirements for area, width, or both, as governed by the applicable area regulations for that particular zoning district; however, all other provisions of the applicable zoning district area regulations, such as setback distances, heights, and percent of lot coverage shall apply. Any change, alteration, or modification decreasing the area of any said lot or structure shall conform to these zoning regulations contained herein or be authorized by variance granted by the Board of Adjustment.
SECTION 5.4.11 – CONDITIONS FOR CONTINUATION
Any nonconforming use, structure or lot which lawfully existed as of the effective date of this ordinance and which remains nonconforming; any use, structure or lot which has become nonconforming due to the acquisition of property for the purposes of right-of-way use by a governmental agency as part of an approved project; and any use, structure or lot which has become nonconforming as a result of the adoption of this ordinance or any subsequent reclassification of zoning districts or other amendment to this ordinance, may be continued or maintained only in accordance with the terms of this Section.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 57
SECTION 5.4.12 - RIGHT TO PROCEED PRESERVED
Nothing contained in this Section is intended to alter any rights that may have accrued under prior regulations, pursuant to sections 43.002, and 245.001 to 245.007 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
SECTION 5.4.13 - AMORTIZATION OF NONCONFORMING LAND USES AND STRUCTURES
A. The City Council may initiate the process to amortize a nonconforming land use or structure by filing an application to the Board of Adjustment. All actions to discontinue a nonconforming use of land and structure shall be taken with due regard for the investment of the persons affected when considered in the light of the public welfare and the character of the area surrounding the designated nonconforming use and the conservation and preservation of property.
B. The City Council may require the discontinuance of nonconforming uses of land or structure under a plan whereby the full value of the structure and facilities can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the regulations of this Subchapter.
1. Criteria for determining amortization period. Before the Board of Adjustment may determine an amortization period, it must consider the following factors:
a) The owner’s capital investment in the structures on the property at the time the use became nonconforming;
b) The amount of the investment realized to date and the amount remaining, if any, to be recovered during the amortization period;
c) The life expectancy of the investment;
d) The existence or nonexistence of lease obligations, as well as any contingency clauses therein permitting termination of such leases;
e) Removal costs that are directly attributable to the establishment of a termination date; and
f) Other costs and expenses that are directly attributable to the establishment of a termination date.
C. If the City Council establishes a termination date for a nonconforming use, the use must cease operations on that date and the owner may not operate it after that date unless it becomes a conforming use.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 58
ARTICLE
ARTICLE. . 66. . –– OFFOFF--STREET PARKISTREET PARKING NG AND LOADING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTSREQUIREMENTS
SECTION 6.1 – PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose and intent of these regulations are to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to lessen congestion in the streets and alleys; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation and circulation; to conserve the value of building and land uses; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land. To this end, in all zoned districts, there shall be provided at the time any use is established or expanded, or any building is erected or structurally altered (except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this section) minimum off-street parking in conformance with the requirements established herein.
SECTION 6.2 – LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES
All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served, except that where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located and maintained not to exceed three hundred (300') feet from an institutional or other non-residential building served.
A. Up to fifty (50%) percent of the parking spaces required for theaters, public auditoriums, bowling alleys, dance halls, night clubs or cafes, and up to one hundred (100%) percent of the parking spaces required for a church or school auditorium, may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours; provided, however, that written agreement thereto is properly executed and filed as specified below.
B. In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement assuring their retention for such purposes, shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form and execution by the City Attorney, and shall be filed with the application for a building permit.
C. No required off-street parking space shall be located within any public highway, street or alley right-of-way.
SECTION 6.3 – COMPUTATION OF PARKING SPACE SIZES AND PARKING AREAS
In computing the minimum size and area of parking spaces and parking areas the following rules shall govern:
A. Parking Space Size: No parking space shall be less than ten (10') feet in width by twenty (20') feet in length.
SECTION 6.4 – RULES FOR THE COMPUTATION OF THE NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
In computing the number of parking spaces required, the following rules shall govern:
A. Floor Area shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 59
B. Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the nearest whole number.
C. The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
D. Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this ordinance is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten (10%) percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance is enlarged to the extent of fifty (50%) percent or more in floor area or in the area used, said building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein.
E. In the case of mixed or joint uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately.
SECTION 6.5 – NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for residential and non-residential uses shall be in conformance with the following:
A. Residential Uses
1. Single Family Detached Dwellings: two (2) spaces per dwelling unit.
2. Duplex Dwelling: two (2) spaces per dwelling unit plus one (1) additional space for guest parking (total of five (5) spaces required)
3. Multi-Family Dwelling (Apartments, Condominiums, Apartment Hotels, Townhomes, etc.);
a) 1 Bedroom – 1.50 spaces
b) 2 Bedroom - 1.75 spaces
c) 3 Bedroom - 2.00 spaces
d) Greater than 3 Bedroom- 1 space per bedroom
Guest Parking:
(1) 0-30 spaces: 1 space per 5 required spaces
(2) 31-60 spaces: 5 spaces + 1 per 10 required spaces
(3) Over 60 spaces: 8 spaces + 1 per each 15 required spaces over 60
4. Boarding House or Rooming House: one (1) space per each bed or individual sleeping room.
5. Nursing, Rest or Convalescent Home, Assisted Living, Senior Citizens Apartment Dwelling, or other similar dwelling or institution: one (1) space per each three (3) beds or one (1) space per individual sleeping unit, whichever is greater.
B. Non-Residential Uses:
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 60
1. Public and Non-public Schools.
a) Elementary: one (1) space for each classroom or teaching station, plus one (1) additional space for each four (4) seats in any auditorium, gymnasium, or other place of assembly, whichever is greater.
b) Junior High/Middle School: Same requirements as for elementary schools.
c) High School: one (1) space for each classroom or teaching station, plus one (1) additional space for each three (3) students accommodated in the school.
d) College or University: Same requirements as for high schools.
e) Day Care Centers or Kindergarten: one (1) space per each five (5) pupils accommodated, plus sufficient space to accommodate off-street circulation for pick-up and delivery of children by auto.
2. Churches and Places of Worship: one (1) space for each three (3) seats in the main sanctuary or auditorium.
3. Other Institutions and Special Uses:
a) Hospital, General Acute Care: one (1) space per each bed.
b) Hospital, Chronic Care: one (1) space per each three (3) beds.
c) Institution for Alcoholic, Narcotic or Psychiatric Patients: one (1) space for each two (2) employees or attendants.
d) Health or Fitness Center: one (1) space per each two hundred (200 SF) square feet of floor area.
e) Institutions of a Philanthropic Nature: ten (10) spaces plus one (1) space for each employee.
4. Community Facilities.
a) Art Gallery or Museum: one (1) space per each one thousand (1,000 SF) square feet of floor area.
b) Library: one (1) space per each five hundred (500 SF) square feet of floor area.
c) Community Center (public or private): one (1) space per each one hundred (100 SF) square feet of floor area.
d) Meeting Rooms and Places of Public Assembly: one (1) space per each three (3) seats or one (1) space per each 100 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 61
e) Lodge or Fraternal Organization: one (1) space per each two hundred (200 SF) square feet of floor area.
5. Personal Service (including, but not limited to, beauty shops, barber shops, and nail salons) and Retail uses.
a) Personal Service Shop or Establishment: one (1) space per each two hundred (200 SF) square feet of floor area.
b) Mortuary/Funeral Home: one (1) space per each fifty (50) square feet of floor area in slumber rooms, parlors, and individual service rooms, or one (1) space per each two (2) seats accommodated in a chapel area, whichever is greater.
c) Furniture Stores and Appliance Stores: one (1) space per each four hundred (400 SF) square feet of floor area.
d) Gasoline Service Stations: Minimum of six (6) spaces. (For Gasoline sales in combination with convenience stores- both gasoline service station and retail store calculations must be used)
e) Retail Stores or Shops: one (1) space per each two hundred (200 SF) square feet of floor area.
f) Open (outdoor) Retail Sales: one (1) space per each six hundred (600 SF) square feet of open site area utilized, exclusive of buildings.
6. Office, Professional or Financial Uses.
a) Banks, Savings and Loan or other similar financial establishments: one (1) space per each three hundred (300 SF) square feet of floor area.
b) Doctor's Offices and Medical Clinics: one (1) space per each one hundred (100 SF) square feet of floor area.
c) Veterinarian Offices or Clinics: one (1) space per each three hundred (300 SF) square feet of floor area.
d) Offices, General: one (1) space per each three hundred (300 sq. ft.) square feet of floor area.
e) Dance, Music, Display or Drama Studios: one (1) space per each two hundred (200 SF) square feet of floor area.
f) Business, Trade or Craft School: one (1) space per each three (3) students in attendance at peak time of day.
7. Transient Lodging Uses.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 62
a) Hotel, Motel: one (1) space per each room, unit or guest accommodation plus specific requirements for restaurants, cocktail lounges, and related facilities prescribed elsewhere in this section.
b) Seasonal Camp or Cabin: one (1) space per each sleeping unit or cabin.
8. Eating and Drinking Establishments.
a) Restaurant, Cafeteria or Cafe: one (1) space per each three (3) seats under maximum seating arrangement, or one (1) space per each one hundred (100 SF) square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
b) Drive-In Eating and Drinking Establishments: twelve (12) spaces plus one (1) space per each fifty (50 SF) square feet of floor area.
c) Cocktail Lounges, Taverns and Similar Establishments: one (1) space per each one hundred (100 ft.) square feet of floor area.
9. Social, Recreation and Entertainment Uses.
a) Commercial Amusement Establishments: one (1) space per each one hundred (100 SF) square feet of floor area.
b) Bowling Alley: six (6) spaces per each bowling lane.
c) Private Club or Night Club: one (1) space per each one hundred (100 SF) square feet of floor area.
d) Theater: one (1) space per each three (3) seats.
e) Country Club: one (1) space per each one hundred (100 SF) square feet of floor area, exclusive of locker rooms and bathhouses.
f) Recreation Club or Area, Private: one (1) space per each one hundred (100 SF) square feet of floor area.
g) Golf Course: five (5) spaces per each green.
h) Dance Hall or Ballroom: one (1) space per each one hundred (100 SF) square feet of floor area.
i) Sports Arena, Stadium or Gymnasium: one (1) space per each four (4) seats or bench seating spaces.
10. Wholesale, Warehousing, Enclosed Storage, Manufacturing, Processing and Repairing Uses.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 63
a) Wholesale, Warehousing and Enclosed Storage: one (1) space per each two (2) employees, or one (1) space per each one thousand (1,000 SF) square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
b) Manufacturing, Processing or Repairing: one (1) space per each two (2) employees, or one (1) space per each one thousand (1,000 SF) square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
c) Building Materials/Lumber Yard: one (1) space per each one thousand (1,000 SF) square feet of site area.
d) Storage Yards for Sand, Gravel or Petroleum Products: one (1) space per each two thousand (2,000 SF) square feet of site area.
SECTION 6.6 – SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
A. No vehicle shall be parked on a lot or tract located within an area zoned as residential or multi-family unless the area upon which such vehicle is parked is paved with a hard surface. Hard surface shall be defined as asphalt or concrete. Pavers, paving stones, concrete blocks, or like materials shall not be considered asphalt or concrete.
B. In computing the parking requirements for any lot, the total parking requirements shall be the sum of the specific parking space requirements for each use included on that lot.
C. Where multiple uses are proposed for a building, the parking requirements shall be calculated on the basis of the most restrictive requirements unless specific areas of different uses are delineated by floor or building segment.
D. Wherever a non-residential parking lot is located across the street from, or adjacent to, residentially zoned property, and is designed so that headlight beams will shine into residences (whether or not such residences have been built at the time the parking lot is constructed), an irrigated earthen berm or a wall or fence or other screening material of not less than three (3) feet in height above the finished grade of the off-street parking area shall be erected and maintained so as to provide a headlight screen for the residential zoning district.
E. Parking spaces shall be provided with sufficient space for entering and exiting without backing onto a public street. Parking spaces on the perimeter of the parking lot and abutting a property line shall have a wheel stop or curb as a barrier two (2) feet from the end of the parking space.
F. For M-2 Districts, the off-street parking spaces designated for each dwelling unit shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of the dwelling unit served by such spaces.
G. No vehicle shall be parked on a lot or tract within an area zoned as residential or multi-family when such vehicle is greater than thirty (30) feet in overall length (including tongue), including a fifth-wheel trailer, bus or recreational vehicle, unless the following conditions are met:
1. The vehicle is parked in a building, either attached to the main residential building or detached, completely enclosed by three walls and a roof, and the open side of the building shall have an
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 64
opaque gate at least six (6) feet in height. A building used to meet the foregoing requirement shall comply with all applicable area, height, and setback requirements for attached or detached accessory buildings; and,
2. The vehicle is wholly parked on a hard surface driveway behind the front building line of the residence.
H. It shall be unlawful for a person or owner to leave, park, or stand a trailer that is over thirty (30) feet long, a fifth-wheel trailer or bus within an area zoned as residential or multi-family according to the zoning ordinance of the City of Everman.
I. Recreational vehicles shall not be parked or stored on any portion of a front or side yard of any single family or multi-family residential property except when the recreational vehicle is wholly contained and enclosed in a garage or unless it is parked on a hard surface behind the front building line of residential property.
J. No vehicle shall be parked on a lot or tract located in an area zoned as residential or multi-family when such vehicle is situated on blocks, jacks or anything other than the wheels or mechanism that are originally designed to equip such vehicles for traveling purposes.
K. In no instance shall such “equipment” be parked or left standing in any zoning district closer than five (5) feet to the front property line. Cars, vans, trucks, recreational vehicles, trailers, or boats shall not be permanently connected to sewer lines, water lines, or electricity. The recreational vehicle, trailer, or boat may be connected to electricity temporarily for charging batteries.
L. Parking spaces and loading spaces shall have an asphalt or concrete surface, whether enclosed or unenclosed and shall be connected by an asphalt or concrete paved driveway (of approved specifications) to a street or alley where curb cuts are provided. Drainage shall be in accordance with city standards.
M. Exceptions:
1. On residential lots where the driveway exceeds 150 feet alternate materials approved by the street department and fire marshal may be utilized. Materials shall be all weather and capable of supporting a 56,000 pound axle load
2. On Industrial zoned properties where heavy truck loads are required, alternative materials approved by the street department and fire marshal may be utilized. Materials shall be all weather and capable of supporting a 56,000 pound axle load. Employee and customer parking shall meet the design standards of this Section.
N. Where a lot or tract of land is used for a combination of uses or mixed uses, the off-street parking requirements shall be the composite or sum of the requirements for each type of use and no off-street parking space provided for one type use or building shall be included in calculating the off-street parking requirements for any other use or building except as prescribed by ordinance.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 65
O. No part of a parked vehicle may extend over the public sidewalk or the public right-of-way.
P. Stacking Requirements for Drive-Thru Facilities: A stacking space shall be an area on a site measuring eight (8) feet by twenty (20) feet with direct forward access to a service window or station of a drive-through facility which does not constitute space for any other circulation driveway, parking space, or maneuvering area.
1. For kiosks, a minimum of two (2) stacking spaces for each service window shall be provided.
2. For each service window of a drive-through restaurant, a minimum of seven (7) stacking spaces shall be provided.
3. For banks with drive-through facilities, each teller window or station, human or mechanical, shall be provided with a minimum of five (5) stacking spaces.
Q. Oversized Vehicles. No vehicle rated to have a carry capacity exceeding one (1) ton shall be parked on a lot or tract located in an area zoned as residential or multi-family unless such vehicle is being actively loaded or unloaded.
SECTION 6.7 – NONCONFORMING STATUS OF PARKING AREAS
Any lawful driveway that was in existence prior to November 10, 1997, shall be deemed legal nonconforming. Should the primary structure on the property where the nonconforming driveway is located be destroyed by more than 50% , or be deemed abandoned or discontinued in the case of a nonresidential use, the property shall conform to the provisions setforth in this Article. Normal repairs, including additional gravel to the existing driveway shall be allowed; however, no expansion to the existing driveway shall be allowed. Expansions to existing driveways will require compliance with the provisions as setforth in this Article.
SECTION 6.8 – VISIBILITY TRIANGLE REQUIRED
No fence, screen wall or visual barrier shall be located or placed where it obstructs the vision of motor vehicle drivers approaching any street or driveway intersection. At all street or driveway intersections clear visibility shall be maintained across the lot for a proper distance along both streets and driveways.
SECTION 6.9 – LOCATION OF LOADING SPACES
Off-street loading spaces shall be provided and maintained for all retail, commercial and industrial uses and structures for receiving and loading merchandise, supplies, and materials within a building or on the lot or tract adjacent thereto. Such spaces may be adjacent to a public alley or private service drive or may consist of a truck berth within a building or structure, however no portion of the off-street, loading space shall be located within or extend into any public street, highway or alley right-of-way.
SECTION 6.10 – COMPUTATION OF OFF-STREET AND LOADING AREAS
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 66
At least one-half (1/2) of the required off-street loading spaces or truck berths shall have a minimum dimension of ten (10') feet by fifty (50') feet each and the remaining required spaces or berths shall have a minimum dimension of ten (10') feet by twenty-five (25') feet each - exclusive of turnaround and maneuvering space .
SECTION 6.11 – RULES FOR THE COMPUTATION OF OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES
A. No building, structure or part thereof used for non-residential purposes in any commercial district shall hereafter be enlarged or extended unless off-street loading space is provided in accordance with the provisions of this section.
B. No building, structure or part thereof used for non-residential purposes in any industrial district shall hereafter be enlarged or extended to provide a gross floor area of twenty-five thousand (25,000 SF) square feet or more unless off-street parking is provided in accordance with the provisions of this section.
SECTION 6.12 – NUMBER OF OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES REQUIRED
The minimum number of off-street loading spaces required shall be in conformance with the following schedules:
A. Retail, Service (except personal service), Commercial and Industrial Uses.
SF of Floor Area In Building or Structure Minimum Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces or Berths Required
0,000 to 9,999
None
10,000 to 49,999
1
50,000 to 99,999
2
100,000 to 199,999
3
Each additional 100,000
1 additional
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 67
B. Office Buildings, Hotels/Motels, Restaurants and Similar Establishments
SF of Floor Area In Building or Structure Minimum Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces or Berths Required
0,000 to 49,999
None
50,000 to 149,999
1
150,000 to 299,999
2
300,000 to 499,999
3
500,000 to 999,999
4
Each additional 100,000
1 additional
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 68
ARTICLE
ARTICLE 77. . –– DEVELOPMENT STANDARDSDEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION 7.1 – DEVELOPMENT AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
SECTION 7.1.1 – EXTERIOR CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS, GENERALLY
The following design standards shall apply generally and by use type within the zoning district in which the development is proposed.
A. Masonry Construction. This term shall be construed to mean that form of construction composed of brick, stone, decorative concrete block or tile, or other similar building units or materials (or combination of these materials) laid up unit by unit and set mortar, and shall exclude wall area devoted to doors and windows. As applicable to meeting minimum requirements for the exterior construction of building within each zoning district, this term shall include the following materials:
1. Hard Fired Brick. Kiln fired clay or slate material. Brick may include concrete brick if it is to the same ASTM standard for construction as typical hard fired clay brick. Brick shall be severe weather grades; minimum thickness of three (3”) inches when applied as a veneer; and shall not include unfired or under fired clay, sand, or shale brick.
2. Stone. Stone shall include naturally occurring granite, marble, limestone, slate, river rock, and other similar hard and durable all-weather stone that is customarily used in exterior building construction. Stone may also include cast-or manufactured-stone product, provided that such product yields a highly textured, stone-like appearance; its coloration is integral to the masonry materials and shall not be painted or sprayed on; and it is demonstrated to be highly durable and maintenance-free. Natural or man-made stone shall have a minimum thickness that meets industry standards.
3. Decorative Concrete Block. Decorative Concrete Block shall include highly textured finish, such as split-face, indented, hammered, fluted, ribbed or similar architectural finish. Coloration shall be integral to the masonry material and shall not be painted or sprayed on. Decorative Concrete Block shall have a minimum thickness that meets industry standards when applied as a veneer and shall not include lightweight or featherweight concrete block or cinder block units. Decorative Concrete Block shall not be used as a material in single-family, duplex, multi-family, or single-family attached structures.
4. Concrete Pre-Cast or Tilt-Wall Panels. This material shall only be allowed if a highly textured architectural finish which appears texturally as face brick or stone. Concrete pre-cast or tilt-wall panels may be brick-like or stone-like in appearance. Coloration of the material shall be integral to the masonry material and shall not be painted on or sprayed on. This material shall not include smooth, un-textured or inadequately textured finishes. Concrete pre-cast or tilt-wall panels shall not be used as a material in single-family, duplex, multi-family, or single-family attached structures.
5. Glass Blocks or Tiles. This material shall be of the type customarily used in exterior building construction. It shall not comprise more than thirty (30%) percent of any exterior wall surface,
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 69
nor more than twenty (20%) of the building’s total exterior on all wall surfaces combined. It shall not be highly reflective or contain a mirror-like finish.
B. Prohibited Materials. Unless specifically approved by the City Council on an approved site plan for single-family, single family attached, attached multi-family, institutional, office, retail, commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structures, the following materials shall not qualify or be defined as “masonry construction” in meeting the minimum requirements for the exterior construction of buildings:
1. Stucco, exterior plaster, adobe or mortar wash, surface materials;
2. Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS), acrylic matrix, synthetic plaster, or other similar synthetic material;
3. Cementitious fiber board siding (such as “Hardy Plank, Hardy Board, etc.);
4. PVC or other plastic-based siding materials;
5. Lightweight or featherweight concrete blocks, cinder blocks or other lightweight based masonry unit;
6. Any other cementitious product not listed above.
SECTION 7.1.2 – MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS
The standards and criteria contained within this subsection are deemed to be the minimum standards and shall apply to all new building construction or redevelopment occurring within the City unless otherwise stated in this Ordinance.
A. Single Family and Two Family Residential Zoning Districts
1. The design standards for all single family and duplex residential structures within the Agricultural District (AG); Single Family Districts (A-1, A-2) and Two-Family District (M-1) shall be as follows:
2. All single-family and two-family (duplex) structures shall be of exterior fire-resistant construction, and shall have a minimum of eighty (80%) percent masonry construction, more-or-less equally distributed around all sides of the structure, for the first story of the structure, and a minimum of fifty (50%) percent masonry construction, more-or-less equally distributed around all sides, for any additional story above the first floor.
3. Areas of a single-family or duplex structure’s façade that are devoted to windows, doors, covered porches or patios that have a minimum size of four feet (4’) deep and eight (8’) feet wide (thirty two [32] square feet), chimneys, breezeways, or courtyards shall not be counted as “wall surface” when calculating the masonry requirement.
4. Prohibited materials. Concrete, concrete block, vinyl, plastic, or metal exterior construction is not permitted on any single-family or duplex residential structure.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 70
5. Roof materials. Roof materials for a single-family or two-family (duplex) structure shall be
comprised of an architectural, laminated, dimensional composition shingle (thirty [30] year
minimum); flat pan standing seam metal roofing, or architectural grade metal roofing products
which are stamped to appear as wood shakes, dimensional shingles, wood shingles, slate or tile;
or terra cotta or slate tile.. If roof is not visible to the public, there is no pitch requirement (i.e.
parapet roof); if roof is visible to the public a minimum 6:12 pitch is required.
6. Chimney Stacks. All chimney stacks for single family or duplex structures shall be of one hundred
(100%) percent masonry construction.
7. Elevation articulation. The elevation of a single family or duplex structure, including garages
facing the street shall contain at least one section of at least twenty (20%) percent of the total
street elevation that is offset at least two (2’) feet from the remainder of the street elevation.
8. Non-residential buildings. Any non-residential building constructed within the (AG), (A-1, A-2), or
(M-1) zoning districts shall conform to the design standards of Section 7.1.4 below.
9. Newly Constructed Single-Family Dwelling Required Architectural Features. All newly
constructed single-family dwellings are required to comply with the following architectural
features:
a) Garage spaces for a minimum of two (2) vehicles shall be attached to the primary structure
and shall be located behind the required building setback lines;
b) Wood or stained fiberglass or metal simulated wood grain front door;
c) No Façade may be repeated within any adjacent lots or across the street from those lots
within groupings of five (5) homes;
d) Concealed HVAC units, trash storage and utility meters;
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 71
e) If brick is used, brick shall be properly detailed. Brick shall be coursed exactly to the top and bottom of all wall openings;
f) Windows shall be single hung, double hung, triple hung, or casement;
g) Flush mounted windows are prohibited;
h) Windows are to be placed on each wall elevation with a wall to window ratio that meets the light and air requirements of the building code;
i) If shutters are used, shutters shall be one-half the width of, and the same height of the associated opening. All shutters shall be louvered, paneled, or constructed of boards as appropriate to the style of the building. Shutters do not need to be operable;
j) Gutters shall be copper, galvanized steel, aluminum or painted if exposed;
k) Dormers shall not use siding as window jamb material;
l) The body of a single-window dormer shall be vertically proportioned or square;
m) If chimneys are visible, they shall have a projecting cap;
n) If chimneys are located on a street facing wall, they shall extend to the ground;
o) If a porch is used, the porch column base shall not protrude beyond the bottom edge of the porch flooring.
B. Additional Newly Constructed Single Family Dwelling Architectural Features. All newly constructed single family dwellings shall contain at least four (4) of the following architectural features:
1. Stoop and portico at the front door
2. Front porch
3. Front porch or front stoop steps and railing
4. Front porch roof
5. Decorative or architectural porch railing
6. Second story porch
7. If brick or stucco is used, a stone base below first floor window shall be installed
8. Trim at gable rake
9. Decorative roof finials or ornamentation
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 72
10. Decorative attic or gable feature greater than 3 SF in size
11. Trim at windows and doors of the street façade
12. Arched window head or heads (depending on architectural style) on street façade
13. Dormer with window
14. Window shutters on street façade
15. Divided light windows
16. Decorative concrete driveway
SECTION 7.1.3 – MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS
A. The design standards for all multi-family and single family attached structures within the Multi-Family (M-2) zoning district shall be as follows:
B. All multi-family and single family attached residential structures shall be of exterior fire-resistant construction and shall have a minimum of eighty (80%) percent masonry construction, more-or-less equally distributed around all sides of the structure, for the first story of the structure, and a minimum of fifty (50%) percent masonry construction, more-or-less equally distributed around all sides, for any additional story above the first floor.
C. Areas of a multi-family and single family attached residential structure’s façade that are devoted to windows, doors, covered porches or patios that have a minimum size of (4’) feet deep and eight (8’) feet wide (thirty [32] square feet), chimneys, breezeways, or courtyards shall not be counted as “wall surface” when calculating the masonry requirement.
D. Prohibited materials. Concrete, concrete block, vinyl, plastic or metal exterior construction is not permitted on any multi-family or single-family attached structure.
E. Roof materials. Roof materials for a multi-family and single family attached residential structures shall be comprised of an architectural, laminated, dimensional composition shingle (thirty [30] year minimum); flat pan standing seam metal roofing, or architectural grade metal roofing products which are stamped to appear as wood shakes, dimensional shingles, wood shingles, slate or tile; or terra cotta or slate tile. If roof is not visible to the public, there is no pitch requirement (i.e. parapet roof); if roof is visible to the public a minimum 6:12 pitch is required
F. Accessory structures. Accessory structures, regardless of size, within the multi-family (M-2) zoning district shall conform to the minimum exterior construction standards for the main building on the lot, tract, site, and shall be architecturally compatible with the main building.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 73
G. Separation of Multi-family Buildings:
1. Buildings two stories or less in height with opposite walls that:
a) Contain openings for windows, light and air ventilation shall be separated by fifteen(15) feet between building walls;
b) Contain no openings shall be separated by ten (10) feet between buildings walls.
2. Buildings more than two stories in height with opposite walls that:
a) Contain openings for windows, light and air ventilation shall be separated by (20) feet between building walls;
b) Contain no openings shall be separated by fifteen (15) feet between building walls.
SECTION 7.1.4 – NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS
The design standards for all non-residential and institutional structures within the Neighborhood Commercial (C-1), General Commercial (C-2), Light Industrial (D), and Heavy Industrial (E) zoning districts, shall be as follows:
A. All non-residential and institutional structures in any zoning district, shall have a minimum of seventy-five (75%) percent masonry construction, more -or-less equally distributed around all sides of the building, for the first story defined as below the first floor ceiling plate, and a minimum of fifty (50%) for any story above. Any façade that faces, or is visible from a public street, shall have a minimum of seventy-five (75%) percent masonry construction, and all other façades shall be comprised of not less than fifty (50%) percent masonry construction.
B. Areas of a non-residential or institutional structure’s façade that are devoted to windows, doors, covered porches or stoops, breezeways or courtyards shall not be counted as “wall surface” when calculating the masonry requirement.
C. Metal exterior material use. Metal exterior construction is prohibited on any non-residential or institutional structure which is located within any zoning district, save and except the following:
1. Structures located on a through lot that both fronts and backs onto a public street. The rear façade, which must be located equal to or more than one thousand (1,000’) feet from the public street, may use metal exterior construction upon approval of the Site Plan by the City Council, and;
2. Upon approval of the Site Plan by the City Council, non-residential and institutional structures within any the (C-1), (C-2), (D), or (E), zoning districts may use metal as an exterior material on up to twenty (20%) percent of the façade as an architectural accent.
a) The use of any type of metal for exterior building construction shall be clearly shown on the Site Plan and shall only be allowed with the Site Plan approval. The exterior finish of metal used in exterior construction shall be permanent, maintenance free nature such as a baked-
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 74
on finish unless approved otherwise on the Site Plan. The use of corrugated, galvanized, aluminum-coated, zinc-coated unfinished, or similar metal surfaces shall be prohibited unless approved otherwise on the Site Plan.
D. Roof materials. Any roof materials for a non-residential or institutional structure that are visible from a public street shall be comprised of laminated, dimensional composition shingle (twenty-five [25] year minimum; flat pan standing seam metal roofing, or architectural grade metal roofing products which are stamped to appear as wood shakes, dimensional shingles, wood shingles, slate or tile; or terra cotta or slate tile. For non-residential or institutional structures where the roof is not visible to the public, there is no pitch requirement (i.e. parapet roof); if roof is visible to the public a 6:12 pitch is required. Non-residential or institutional structures with a flat-roof shall have highly articulated parapet that conceals the roof and any roof mounted mechanical equipment.
E. Structural exceptions to masonry standards. The following structures are exempt from the masonry construction requirements.
1. Barns located on the lots of four (4) acres or more provided that such barns are used solely for agricultural purposes (as distinguished from commercial purposes).
2. Mobile homes and HUD-Code manufactured homes lawfully existing are not subjected to the masonry requirements.
3. Temporary construction buildings, field offices, sales offices and temporary classrooms or storage buildings for the public school. The exception shall be only provided that such facilities are legally permitted by the City for a specific period of time, and provided that they are completely removed from the premises upon expiration of the permit or upon completion of construction, whichever occurs first.
4. Residential and non-residential structures legally in existence as of (date of this ordinance), and any additions to such structures that do not cumulatively exceed twenty (20%) percent of the original building size (as it existed on date of this ordinance). Such additions shall be allowed to be constructed of the same exterior materials as the original building.
F. Use of Alternative Exterior Materials.
1. All written requests for the use of alternative exterior building materials to include alternative roof material and/or roofing color and alternative roof pitch shall be clearly noted and described in detail on a color rendering of the structure’s elevation that is submitted along with the site plan for approval. The use of alternative exterior building materials, roof pitch and roof materials and/or color may only be requested for multi-family, single-family attached and non-residential structures. The City may require submissions of an actual sample(s) of the proposed exterior finish material(s) along with the elevation(s) and the site plan.
2. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may approve, all alternative exterior construction material(s), roof pitch and roof materials and/or color if it is determined to be equivalent or better than the exterior materials, roof pitch, or roof materials
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 75
and/or colors otherwise required by this Subsection and the City’s Building Code as part of the site plan approval process.
G. Consideration for exceptions to the above exterior construction requirements shall be based only upon the following:
1. Architectural design, creativity and innovation;
2. Compatibility with surrounding structures;
3. Relative ease of maintenance of the material(s);
4. Long term durability and weather-resistance of the materials(s); and
5. Long-term stability in property value due to the high quality of the material(s).
SECTION 7.2 – SCREENING AND FENCING
SECTION 7.2.1 – SCREENING ELEMENTS AND FENCES
A. General Requirements
1. A permit shall be required for any new fence or screening wall construction or replacement of an existing fence or screening wall unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance. No permit shall be required to repair a fence as long as the repair keeps the fence in the same location, at the same height, and utilizes the same materials.
2. All fences and screening walls shall be kept in good repair and shall not create blight. Dilapidated fences or screening walls shall be repaired or replaced in accordance with provisions of this section. Fences may be painted, but no bright, unnatural colors are allowed. Wood fences shall be painted or stained with natural wood colors.
3. No fence or screening wall shall exceed eight (8) feet in height, as measured from the grade of the property, unless otherwise approved by the City Manager or his/her designee.
4. Existing chain link fences may be replaced without a permit as long as the repair keeps the fence in the same location, at the same height, and utilizes the same materials.
5. Temporary fencing used for construction purposes or special events shall be exempt from the requirements of this section provided that such fencing is approved as part of the applicable building permit or special events permit.
6. Any variances to the requirements of this section shall be considered by the BOA unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
B. Fencing Requirements for Agricultural Uses
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 76
1. The following standards apply to tracts of land with four (4) acres or more used for agricultural or animal husbandry purposes in accordance with this Ordinance.
2. Pipe fencing, split rail fencing, barbed wire, hog wire, chicken wire, chain link, cable, and other open style types of fencing traditionally used in agriculture and animal husbandry shall be allowed. Such fencing may be located up to the right-of-way line and shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. Solid style types of fencing shall meet the fence height and setback requirements for residential uses. Open style fencing typically used in wildlife management may exceed eight (8) feet in height as necessary for the purposes of wildlife management.
3. No permit is required for agricultural fencing.
C. Electric Fences
1. An electric fence is allowed in the Agricultural (AG) zoning district or on other properties exceeding 20 acres in other zoning districts, with proof submitted to the electrical inspector that the fence will be designed to retain animals, be inaccessible to the general public and not pose a hazard to life.
2. An electric fence is allowed in association with a permitted nonresidential outdoor storage area in the Light and Heavy Industrial (D), (E) zoning districts subject to the following standards.
a) Unless otherwise specified in this Section, electric fences must be installed in conformance with the specifications set forth in the City’s electrical code and the International Electroctechnical Commission Standard No. 60335-2-76. In addition, the electric fence controller must meet the requirements of Underwriters Laboratories Standard UL69, Electric-Fence Controller, and labeled as such.
b) The electric fence controller and emergency entry key safe for the electric fence must be located in a single accessible location for the entire fence.
c) The electric fence must be surrounded by a non-electrical fence or wall six to eight feet in height.
d) The electric fence must be installed a minimum of one foot from the surrounding non-electric fence or wall, except along the gate. Along the gate, the electric fence must be installed a minimum of three inches from the surrounding non-electric fence or wall.
e) The electric fence must be clearly identified with warning signs at intervals of not less than sixty (60) feet.
f) The electric fence must only be energized during hours when the public does not have legal access to the protected property.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 77
D. Prohibited Materials
Permits must not be issued for materials not manufactured specifically for fencing, such as fibrous masonry products, landscape timbers, railroad ties, latticework panels, plywood, or fiberglass panels. Other prohibited material include razor wire fencing.
E. Fencing Requirements for Residential Uses
1. Fences shall be constructed of wood, ornamental metal (i.e. wrought iron), tubular steel, masonry, or other materials traditionally used in private fence construction. New and innovative materials such as plastics, PVC’s, metal panel or slat, cementitious fiberboard, and other similar materials may be approved for use by the City Manager or his/her designee if the material is compatible in character with traditional residential fencing and proven to be sturdy, durable and relatively maintenance-free.
2. The maximum height, as measured from the grade of the property, shall be as follows:
a) Three (3) feet for front yard or in front of the main structure in all residential zoning districts. Fences located in the front yard shall be constructed of split rail, ornamental metal, tubular steel, or similar open face material.
b) Maximum eight (8) feet for side or rear yards.
3. Fencing in the front yard of a residential lot shall be located no closer than three (3) feet (measured inside the residential lot) to the right-of-way line.
4. Gates designed for vehicular access shall be set back from the right-of-way line a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet.
5. The height of a fence adjacent or perpendicular to a screening wall shall not exceed the height of the subdivision’s screening wall or any other fence constructed by the developer at the time of initial development.
6. All fences adjacent to parks, trails, or designated open spaces shall be constructed of split rail, ornamental metal, tubular steel, masonry columns, or similar open face material and not exceed a height of six (6) feet. No wood fencing shall be allowed behind the required open space. Solid fencing constructed of Cedar (with metal posts and Cedar top and bottom caps and stained with wood sealant) or masonry material may be allowed if adjacent to a park or open space area that is used actively such as a public swimming pool, sport facility, etc.
7. Allowable wood fences adjacent to streets, schools, parks, open spaces or other public spaces shall have the finished side facing the public space. All fence posts and structural components shall be placed on the interior of the lot.
8. All fence posts and structural components shall be placed on the interior of the lot.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 78
9. The location of fences for double frontage lots or corner lots adjacent to a street shall be in accordance with the building setback line as shown on the final plat. If a property is not platted or if no building line is shown on the recorded plat, the location of fences shall comply with the building setback requirements of the zoning district that the property is located in.
10. If a corner lot is adjacent to a subdivision’s screening wall, a fence may be placed outside the required setback line to connect with the screening wall.
11. Fences for non-residential uses allowed in residential zoning districts such as schools or Churches shall meet the fencing standards for non-residential districts.
F. Fencing Requirements for Swimming Pools
1. Swimming pools shall have a fence that shall conform to the requirements of the International Building Code.
G. Fencing and Requirements for Multi-Family and Non-Residential Uses
1. Fencing shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
2. Fencing shall be constructed of wrought iron, tubular steel, masonry, live screening, or a combination thereof unless adjacent to single family dwellings, or two family dwellings, in which a screening wall shall be constructed and shall be made of masonry materials with masonry columns placed a minimum of thirty-two (32) foot on center. Wood, barbed wire, and chain link fencing is prohibited.
3. All fencing and screening walls for multi-family and non-residential developments shall be identified on the site plan for the development and approved as part of the site plan approval.
4. The City Council may approve variances to any of these requirements as a part of the site plan approval.
H. Screening Wall Requirements
1. Screening walls shall be constructed of masonry material such as brick, stone, concrete panels, or similar materials consistent in material, finish, and color with the primary buildings within the development or adjacent buildings in the area. The wall finish shall be consistent on both sides.
2. Screening walls shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height and a maximum of eight (8) feet in height.
3. Any dense evergreen hedge or plant material suitable for providing a visual barrier, for which such material shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition if approved by the City Manager or his/her designee.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 79
4. Landscaped earth berms may, when appropriate in scale, be considered and used as a screening element in lieu of a fence, wall, hedge or other dense planting material if approved by the City Manager or his/her designee.
5. Screening wall plans shall be submitted to the City for review and permitting and shall be signed and sealed by a Structural or Civil Engineer licensed by the State of Texas.
SECTION 7.3 – LANDSCAPING
A. Applicability This Section shall apply to all development within the City with the exception of single-family residential development in the Agricultural (AG) district and any tracts of land with two (2) acres or more used for agricultural purposes in accordance with this Ordinance.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage low maintenance landscaping, water conservation and tree preservation while providing guidelines for minimum landscaping for new development throughout the City, preserving the natural, open character of the Rural Residential areas, and not prohibiting the normal use of properties for agricultural purposes.
C. Nonresidential and Multi-family landscaping. These standards apply to new nonresidential developments. These standards may be met either by saving existing trees on the site, or planting new trees from the recommended list.
1. A twenty (20’) foot linear landscape strip shall be provided adjacent to all major thoroughfares. The landscape strip shall include a minimum of one (1) shade tree (two and one-half-inch caliper minimum) for every fifty (50) linear feet of street frontage.
2. Where parking lots and drives abut the landscape strip along a street right-of-way, a continuous hedge of evergreen shrubs shall be provided to screen those areas from the street. The shrubs must be a minimum of a ten-gallon size at planting with a minimum mature height of three (3) feet. Shrubs shall be planted according to the spacing recommended for their species. The screening shall extend along the entire street frontage of the parking lot, exclusive of driveways and visibility clips. A landscape berm may be provided in lieu of the screening hedge. The berm must be a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches above the average grade of the street and parking lot curbs with a slope not to exceed 3:1.
3. Landscaping shall also be provided for the interior parking areas. Trees shall be planted in each parking lot to attain a minimum average density of one (1) shade tree (two and one-half-inch caliper minimum) for each ten (10) parking spaces provided, or any fraction thereof. The planting area per tree shall be a minimum of nine (9’) feet wide and twenty (20’) feet deep.
a) Interior parking lot landscaping shall include a minimum eight (8%) percent open space. To calculate the total parking area and the subsequent percentage of required interior lot landscaping, total the square footage of parking spaces, planting islands, curbed areas and all interior driveways and aisles. Landscaped areas located contiguous to and within five (5’) feet of the parking lot may be used to meet the interior landscaping requirement. Landscaped
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 80
areas located greater than five (5’) feet away from the parking lot may not be used to meet the interior landscaping requirement.
b) The required landscaping for parking lots shall be more or less evenly distributed throughout the parking lot, although adjustments may be approved by the City Manager or his / her designee where the shape or size of the parking lot, the location of existing trees or other natural constraints reasonably prevent such distribution.
c) Except for customer and employee parking, parking lot landscape requirements do not apply to storage or standing parking spaces incidental to uses, such as sales and rental of motor vehicles, mobile homes, boats, trailers or other similar uses.
d) All landscaped areas, including the permeable areas and drip lines around trees and planting beds used for visual screening which abut any parking lot or vehicular travel area, shall be protected with curbs sufficient to protect them from vehicular intrusion.
4. Foundation Plantings. Exposed sections of building walls that are in high-use or high-visibility areas of the building exterior shall have planting beds at least five (5) feet wide placed directly along at least fifty (50) percent of such walls.
5. An automatic irrigation system is required for all landscaping. Irrigation systems shall be designed and installed with rain sensors and low gallonage, low angle nozzles in such a way as to avoid water overflow into the street. A freeze sensor shall be placed in each controller to prevent the irrigation system from activating to create unsafe spillage on roads and/or sidewalks.
D. Nonresidential Area Treatment
1. Landscape areas shall include all areas on the site that are not covered by buildings, structures, paving or impervious surface. Landscape areas shall consist only of landscaping. The selection and location of turf, ground cover (including shrubs, grasses, perennials, flowerbeds and slope retention), and pedestrian paving and other landscaping elements shall be used to prevent erosion and meet the functional and visual purposes such as defining spaces, accommodating and directing circulation patterns, managing visibility, attracting attention to building entrances and other focal points, and visually integrating buildings with the landscape area and with each other.
a) Turf grass. High-use areas shall be planted with irrigated turf grass. Nonirrigated shortgrass prairie grasses or other adapted grasses that have been certified as Xeriscape landscaping may be established in remote, low-use, low visibility areas.
b) Planting beds. Shrub and ground cover planting beds shall be separated from turf grass with edging and shall have open surface areas covered with mulch.
c) Slopes. Retaining walls, slope revetment or other acceptable devices integrated with plantings shall be used to stabilize slopes that are steeper than 3:1. If soil tests performed on the subject soils indicate steeper slopes are stable without the above required protection,
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 81
then the maximum slope allowed without the above required protection may be increased to the maximum stated in the soils report or 2:1, whichever is less steep.
d) Agricultural Use. If outdoor space is maintained in active agricultural use, the landscape surfaces and ground cover standards above shall not apply.
E. Water Conservation
1. All landscaping plans shall be designed to incorporate water conservation materials and techniques through application of Xeriscape landscaping principles. Xeriscape landscaping principles do not include or allow artificial turf or plants, mulched (including gravel) beds or areas without landscape plant material, paving of areas not required for walkways, plazas or parking lots, bare ground, weed covered or infested surfaces or any landscaping that does not comply with the standards of this section. Xeriscape landscaping principles shall be:
a) grouping plants with similar water requirements together on the same irrigation zones;
b) limiting high-irrigation turf and plantings to appropriate high-use areas with high visibility and functional needs;
c) use of low-water demanding plants and turf where practicable;
d) use of efficient irrigation systems;
e) incorporation of soil improvements;
f) use of mulches;
g) provision of regular and attentive maintenance.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 82
F. Plant Materials.
Trees (Large Shade) Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Oak, Burr
Quercus macrocarpa
80’h
80’w
Native
Oak, Chinkapin
Quercus muhlenbergii
80’ h
80’ w
Native
Oak, Live*
Quercus virginiana
90’ h
90’ w
Native
Oak, Red
Quercus shumardii
80’ h
60’w
Native
Pecan
Carya illinoinensis
100’ h
100’ w
Native
Trees (Medium Shade) Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Ash, Texas
Fraxinus texensis
50’ h
40’ w
Native
Bald Cypress*
Taxodium distichum
80’ h
50’ w
Native
Elm, Cedar
Ulmus crassifolia
90’ h
80’w
Native
Elm, Allee Lacebark
Ulmus pariviforia ‘Elmer II’
75’ h
50w
Adapted
Elm, Bosque Lacebark
Ulmus parivifoia ‘UPMTFI’
60’ h
40’ w
Adapted
Magnolia, Southern
Magnolia grandiflora
60’h
30’w
Native E. TX
Maple, Bigtooth
Acer grandidentatum
50’ h
40’ w
Native E. TX
Maple, Caddo
Acer saccharum ‘Caddo’
60’ h
30’ w
Native
Persimmon, Common
Diospyros virginiana
60’ h
30’ w
Native
Pistachio, Chinese
Pistacia chinensis
70’ h
50’ w
Adapted
Black Locust
Robinia pseudoacacia
40’ h
40’ w
Adapted
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 83
Trees (Small Ornamental) Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
American Smoke Tree
Cotinus obovatus
25’ h
25’ w
Native
Buckeye, Mexican
Ungnadia speciosa
20’ h
20’ w
Native
Carolina Buckthorn
Rhamnus caroliniana
15’ h
15’ w
Native
Desert Willow
Chilopsis linearis
30’ h
25’ w
Native
Crape Myrtle
Lagerstroemia indica
25’ h
15’ w
Adapted
Dogwood (Roughleaf)
Cornus drummondii
15’h
15’w
Native
Eastern Red Cedar
Juniperus virginiana
40’h
20 w
Native
Eve’s Necklace
Sophora affinis
30’ h
20’ w
Native
Flameleaf Sumac
Rhus lanceolata
30’ h
20’ w
Native
Goldenball Lead Tree
Leucaena retusa
25’ h
15’ w
Native
Goldenrain Tree
Koelreuteria paniculata
30’ h
20 w
Adapted
Hawthorn, Washington
Crataegus phaenopyrum
25’ h
15’ w
Adapted
Holly, Yaupon
Ilex vomitoria
20’ h
20’ w
Adapted
Magnolia, ‘Little Gem’
Magnolia, ‘Little Gem’
15’ h
10’ w
Adapted
Maple, Shantung
Acer trucatum
25’ h
20’ w
Adapted
Mexican Plum
Prunus Mexicana
25’ h
20 w
Native
Oak, Bigelow
Quercus sinuate var. breviloba
40’ h
35 w
Native
Oak, Lacey
Quercus laceyi (Q. glaucoides
35’ h
30’ w
Native
Pear, Callery
Pyrus calleryana
25’ h
25’ w
Adapted
Persimmon, Texas
Diospyros texana
20’ h
12’ w
Native
Possumhaw
Ilex decidua
15’ h
8’ w
Native
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 84
Trees (Small Ornamental) Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Rusty Blackhaw
Viburnum rufidulum
30’ h
35’ w
Native
Texas Redbud
Cercis Canadensis var ‘texensis’
30’ h
30’ w
Native
Trees (Living Screen) Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Arizona Cypress
Cupressus arizonica
40’ h
20’ w
Adapted
Eastern Red Cedar
Juniperus virginiana
40’ h
20 w
Native
Holly, Burford
Ilex cornuta ‘burfordii’
20’ h
15’ w
Adapted
Holly, Foster
Ilex x attenuata ‘Foster’
20’ h
10’ w
Adapted
Holly, Nellie R Stevens
Ilex x ‘Nellie Stevens’
25’ h
15 w
Adapted
Holly, Youpon
Ilex vomitoria
20’h
20’ w
Native
Magnolia, ‘Little Gem’
Magnolia ‘Little Gem’
15’ h
10’w
Adapted
Mahonia, Leather Leaf
Mahonia bealei
7’ h
5’ w
Adapted
Myrtle, Wax
Myrica cerifera
15’h
10’w
Native
Pine, Mondell
Pinus eldarica
40’ h
20’ w
Adapted
Shrubs Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Abelia
Abelia grandiflora
4’h
4’w
Native
Agarito
Berberis trifoliate
10’ h
10’ w
Native
American Beautyberry
Calicarpa Americana
5’ h
5’ w
Native
Apache Plume
Fallugia paradoxa
6’ h
6’w
Native
Aromatic Sumac
Rhus aromatic
6’ h
6’ w
Native
Black Dalea
Dalea frutescens
4’h
4’ w
Native
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 85
Shrubs Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Damianita
Compositae Chrysactinia Mexicana
2’ h
2’ w
Native
Desert Spoon
Dasylirion wheeleri
3’ h
3’ w
Native
Hawthorn, Indian
Raphiolepsis indica
3’ h
4’ w
Adapted
Holly, Burford
Ilex cornuta ‘Burfordii Nana’
5’ h
5’ w
Adapted
Flame Anisacanthus
Anisacanthus q. wrightii
4’ h
3’ w
Native
Texas Kidneywood
Eysenhardtia texana
12’ h
8’ w
Native
Red Yucca
Hesperaloe parviflora
3’ h
3’ w
Native
Texas Sage, Silverado
Leucophyllum f. ‘Silverado’
4’ h
4’ w
Native
Soft-leaf Yucca
Yucca recurvifolia
5’ h
5’ w
Native
Twist-leaf Yucca
Yucca rupcola
5’ h
5’ w
Native
Grass/Turf Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Big Blue Stem
Andropogon gerardii
5’ h
5’ w
Native
Blue Grama
Bouteloua gracilis
Turf/Sod
Native
Buffalograss
Buchloe dactyloides
Turf/Sod
Native
Bermuda grass
Cynodon dactylon
Turf/Sod
Adapted
Eastern Gamagrass
Tripsacum dactyloides
4’ h
3’ w
Native (Seed)
Green Sprangletop
Leptochloa dubia
3’ h
3’w
Native
Muhly, Seep
Mulenbergia reverchonii
2’ h
2’ w
Native
Muhly, Deer
Muhlenbergia rigens
3’ h
3’ w
Native
Muhly, Lindheimer
Mhulenbergia lindheimeri
4’ h
2’ w
Native
Indian Grass
Sorghastrum nutans
4’ h
3’ w
Native
Little Blue Stem
Schizachyrium scoparium
5’ h
2’ w
Native
Prairie Dropseed
Sporobolus heterolepis
5’ h
Native
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 86
Grass/Turf Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
5’ w
Prairie Wild Rye
Elymus Canadensis
3’ h
3’ w
Native (Seed)
Sideoats Grama
Bouteloua curipendula
3’ h
1’ w
Native
Switch Grass
Panicum virgatum
5’ h
5’ w
Native
Groundcover / Vines Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Ajuga
Ajuga reptans
6” h
Creeping
Adapted
Coral Honeysuckle
Lonicera sempervirens
Vine
Native
Crossvine
Bignonia capreolata
Vine
Native
Frog Fruit
Phyla nodiflora
12” h
Spreading
Native
Horseherb
Calyptocarpus vialis
10” h
36” w
Native
Liripoe
Liriope muscari
15” h
12” w
Adapted
Pigeonberry
Rivina humilis
18” h
24” w
Native
Snake Herb
Acanthaceae Dyschoriste linearis
6” h
18” w
Native
Trumpet Vine
Campsis radicans
Vine
Native
Water Clover
Marsilea macropoda
8” h
Creeping
Native
Wooly Stemodia
Stemodia lanata
5” h
Creeping
Native
Wood Violet
Viola missouriensis
6” Creeping
Native
Perennials Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
Angel Trumpet
Datura wrightii
3’ h
3’ w
Native
Autumn Joy Sedum
Sedum ‘Autumn Joy’
2’ h
2’ w
Adapted
Blackeyed Susan
Rudbeckia hirta
2’ h
2’ w
Native (Seed)
Blackfoot Daisy
Melampodium leucanthum
12” h
12” w
Native
Blazing Stars
Liatris mucronata
2’ h
Native
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 87
Perennials Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
2’ w
Brown-eyed Susan
Rudbeckia triloba
3’ h
2’ w
Native
Clasping Coneflower
Dracopis amplexicalis
2’ h
1’ w
Native (Seed)
Chocolate Flower
Berlandiera lyrata
1’ h
2’ w
Native
Cutleaf Daisy
Engielmannia pinnatifida
3’ h
3’ w
Native (Seed)
Fournerve Daisy
Hymenoxys scaposa
1’ h
1’ w
Native
Fall Aster
Aster longifolia
3’h
3’ w
Native
Globemallow, Scarlet
Sphaeralcea coccinea
12” h
12” w
Native
Indian Blanket
Gailardia pulchella
12” h
2” w
Native (Seed)
Indian Paint Brush
Castilleja indivisa
12” h
2” w
Native (Seed)
Green-headed Cornflower
Rudbeckia lanciniata
4’ h
2’ w
Native (Seed)
Gregg Dalea
Dalea greggii
1’ h
4’ w
Native
Gregg’s Mistflower
Eupatorium greggii
2’ h
1’ w
Native
Illinois Bundleflower
Desmanthus inllinoensis
2’ h
1’ w
Native (Seed)
Maximilian Sunflower
Helianthus maximilliani
5’ h
3’ w
Native (Seed)
Mexican Hat
Ratibida columnifera
2’ h
1’ w
Native (Seed)
Lindheimer’s Senna
Senna lindheimeriana
3’ h
3’ w
Native
Obedient Plant
Physostegia virginiana
4’ h
2’ w
Native (Seed)
Pink Evening Primrose
Oenothera speciosa
1’ h
1’ w
Native (Seed)
Pink Scullcap
Scutellaria suffrutescens
1’ h
1’ w
Native
Plains Coreopsis
Coreopsis tinctoria
1’ h
1’ w
Native (Seed)
Purple Coneflower
Echinacea purpurea
2’ h
2’ w
Native (Seed)
Prairie Verbena
Verbena bipinnitfida
6” h
Native
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 88
Perennials Common Name Botanical Name Size Remarks
18” w
Rockrose, Brazilian
Parvonia brazilliensis
3’ h
3’ w
Adapted
Rockrose
Parvonia lasiopetala
3’ h
3’ w
Native
Sage, Autumn
Salvia Greggii
3’ h
2’ w
Native
Sage, Big Red
Salvia penstemonoides
4’ h
3’ w
Native (Seed)
Sage, Indigo Spires
Salvia longespicata x farinacea
4’ h
6’ w
Native
Sage, Mealy Blue
Salvia farinacea
2’ h
1’ w
Native
Sage, Pitcher
Salvia
4’ h
3’ w
Native (Seed)
Sage, Russian
Perovskia atriplicifolia
4’ h
3’ w
Adapted
Sage, Scarlet
Salvia coccinea
3’h
3’ w
Native (Seed)
Skeletonleaf Goldeneye
Viguiera stenoloba
2’ h
2’ w
Native
Sundrops
Calylophus drummondianus
6” h
12” w
Native
Texas Betony
Stachys coccinea
18” h
24” w
Native
Texas Greeneyes
Berlandiera texana
4’ h
2’ w
Native
Texas Lantana
Lantana horrida
5’ h
5’ w
Native
Texas Star Hibiscus
Hibiscus coccinea
5’ h
3’ w
Native
Turk’s Cap
Malvaviscus drummondii
4’ h
4’ w
Native
Whirling Butterflies
Gaura lindheimeri
3’ h
3’ w
Native
Winecup
Callirhoe involucrate
1’ h
2’ w
Native
Zexmenia
Wedelia hispida
2’ h
Spreading
Native
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 89
ARTICLE
ARTICLE 88 –– SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONSSUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 8.1 – ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
A. In a residential district, an accessory building is a subordinate or incidental building detached from the main building, not used for commercial purposes and not rented. Accessory buildings other than carports, shall be located behind the primary structure.
B. In nonresidential districts, an accessory building is a subordinate building, the use of which is secondary to and supportive of the main building. Accessory buildings shall not be permitted without a main building or primary use being in existence. Accessory buildings should, wherever possible, be located behind the primary structure.
C. Accessory structures less than or equal to one hundred-twenty (120) square feet do not require a building permit.
D. Area regulations for accessory buildings:
1. Size of yards:
a) Front yard: Detached accessory buildings shall be prohibited in front of the main building with the exception of carports. Carports shall be allowed within the front yard, but may not encroach into any public right-of-way, public sidewalk, public utility easement or interfere with any sight visibility from the drive approach to the public right-of-way.
b) Side yard: There shall be a side yard not less than five (5) feet from any side lot line, or alley line for any accessory building provided that such building is separated from the main building by a minimum distance of ten (10) feet. In the case of an accessory building being closer than ten (10) feet to the main building, the minimum side yard requirements for the main building shall be observed.
c) Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard not less than five (5) feet from any lot line or alley line, or alley easement line when accessory buildings are constructed ten (10) feet or more from the main building,
2. Accessory buildings shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height.
3. Accessory buildings are not permitted without a primary structure. The combination of square footage of the primary structure and accessory buildings may not exceed the maximum lot coverage for any zoning district.
E. Carports shall be measured from the posts supporting the roof nearest to the street or alley. Carports may be constructed of masonry or as a prefabricated metal unit with a metal roof. All carports, require a building permit from the City of Everman and shall be inspected by the City to ensure structural integrity and appropriate anchorage to the ground.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 90
F. Swimming pools may occupy a required rear or side yard, provided that such pools are not located closer than ten (10) feet to a rear lot line or ten (10) feet to an interior or side lot line. Swimming pools are not permitted in the front yard. A pedestrian space of at least three (3) feet in width shall be provided between pool walls and the protective fences or barrier walls of the pool. Swimming pools shall be fenced according to International Building Code.
SECTION 8.2 - HOME OCCUPATIONS
A home occupation may be permitted as accessory to any principal dwelling unit in all residential districts, subject to the following standards:
A. Location The home-based business shall be conducted in the house by a resident of the primary dwelling.
B. Size and Area: The business or service located within the dwelling shall not exceed 25 percent of the floor area of the house. Activities are limited to the living portion of a house or its attached garage. Accessory buildings or detached structures cannot be used in conjunction with a home-based business.
C. Employees and Residency: The principal person(s) providing the business or service shall reside in the dwelling on the premises. Only one additional employee, other than the resident(s) of the primary dwelling unit, is permitted at the home-based business at any one time.
D. Neighborhood Compatibility
1. The home-based business shall cause no change in the external appearance of the existing buildings and structures on the property.
2. All vehicles used in connection with the home-based business shall be of a size, and located on the premises in such a manner, so that a casual observer or a person of normal sensibilities will not be able to detect any sign of the premises being used as a home occupation. No vehicle larger than one ton shall be kept on the premises
3. Parking of vehicles to accommodate off-site employees or permitted customers shall be limited to the driveway of such premises or along the curb immediately adjacent to such premises.
4. There shall be no advertising devices on the property or other signs of the home-based business that are visible from off the premises.
5. The property shall contain no outdoor display of goods or services that are associated with the home occupation. Outside storage is prohibited. For the purpose of this section, the parking of one trailer in a driveway or along the street curb is not considered outside storage.
6. Wholesale or retail sales of goods shall not occur on the premises.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 91
7. The home-based business shall not create traffic or parking congestion, noise, vibration, odor, glare, fumes, or electrical or communications interference that can be detected by the normal senses off the premises, including visual or audible interference with radio or television reception.
E. Prohibited Home-based Businesses: The following uses, because of their effects on the surrounding residential area, shall not be permitted as home-based businesses: auto repair or motorized implement repair; dance, music or other types of tutoring instruction where more than four students are being instructed at one time; dental offices; medical offices; the painting of vehicles, trailers or boats; private schools with organized classes; motor vehicle towing operation; barber or beauty shops having more than one chair; welding shops; nursing homes; bed and breakfast and other such transient lodging; or any other home-based business that will have negative effects on the neighborhood. If a determination is made by the Code Compliance Officer or City Manager that the home-based business is having a negative impact or effect on the neighborhood, the City Manager may place this on the first meeting of the City Council, after notifying the property owner in writing, for final determination.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 92
SECTION 8.3 – SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND ADULT CABERETS
SECTION 8.3.1 - PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the purpose of this section to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the continued concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
SECTION 8.3.2 - DEFINITIONS
In this section:
A. Adult Arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
B. Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store means a commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration anyone or more of the following:
1. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
2. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities.
C. Adult Entertainment Cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
1. Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
2. Live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by an emphasis on specified sexual activities; or
3. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 93
D. Adult Motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
1. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provided patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or
2. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or
3. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
E. Adult Motion Picture Theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
F. Adult Theater means a theater, concert hall auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by an emphasis on specified sexual activities.
G. Entertainment means live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by an emphasis on specified sexual activities, whether performed by employees, agents, contractors, or customers. The term entertainment shall also mean bartenders, waiters, waitresses, or other employees exposing specified anatomical areas or engaging in specified sexual activities in the presence of customers.
H. Chief of Police means the chief of police of the City of Everman or his designated agent.
I. Nude Model Studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration;
J. Nudity or a State of Nudity means less than completely and opaquely covered:
1. Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair;
2. Human buttock,
3. Female breast or breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or
4. Any combination of the foregoing.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 94
K. Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
L. Sexually Oriented Business means a sex parlor, nude studio, modeling studio, love parlor, adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult video arcade, adult movie arcade, adult video store, adult motel, or other commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer as defined in Section 243.002 of the Texas Local Government Code.
M. Specified anatomical areas means less than completely and opaquely covered:
1. Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; or
2. Human buttocks; or
3. Female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or
4. Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or
5. Any combination of the foregoing.
N. Specified Sexual Activities means and includes any of the following:
1. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals;
2. Sexual acts, normal or perverted, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
3. Masturbation; or
4. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (4) above.
SECTION 8.3.3 - LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
A. A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of:
1. A church;
2. A public or private elementary or secondary school ;
3. Residentially zoned property; or
4. A public Park.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 95
B. A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000') feet of another sexually oriented business.
C. A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one (1) sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
D. For the purposes of subparagraph (A) above, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary school or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park or residential zoning district.
E. For purposes of subparagraph (B) above, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
F. Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating prior to the effective date of this ordinance, that is in violation of subparagraph (A), (B) or (C) of this paragraph shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such nonconforming use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand (1,000) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established businesses is nonconforming.
G. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use after the effective date of this ordinance is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the operation of the sexually oriented business, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park or residential zoning district within one thousand (1,000) feet of the sexually oriented business.
SECTION 8.3.4 - REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS
A. Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this section.
B. A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.
C. For purpose of subparagraph (b) of this paragraph, the terms rent or subrent mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
D. If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio, then a violation of this ordinance [this section] shall be punishable as a Class B Misdemeanor.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 96
E. It is a defense to prosecution under paragraph (3) that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
1. By a proprietary school licensed by the State of Texas; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
2. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
3. In a structure:
a) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
b) Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
c) Where no more than one (1) nude model is on the premises at anyone (1) time.
SECTION 8.3.5 – ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABERETS - PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the purpose of this section to regulate adult entertainment cabarets as defined herein to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the continued concentration of adult entertainment cabarets within the City. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor the effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to adult entertainment cabarets protected by the First Amendment, nor to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult entertainment cabarets to their intended market.
SECTION 8.3.6 - LOCATION OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARETS
A. A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an adult entertainment cabaret within one thousand (1,000) feet of:
1. A church;
2. A public or private elementary or secondary school;
3. Residentially zoned property; or
4. A public park.
B. A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an adult entertainment cabaret within one thousand (1,000') feet of another adult entertainment cabaret or within one thousand (1,000) feet of a sexually oriented business.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 97
C. A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one adult entertainment cabaret in the same building, structure or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any adult entertainment cabaret business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another adult entertainment cabaret.
D. For the purposes of subparagraph (A) above, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where an adult entertainment cabaret business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary school, or the nearest boundary of an affected public park or residential zoning district.
E. For the purposes of subparagraph (B) above, the distance between any two (2) adult entertainment cabarets, or between an adult entertainment cabaret and a sexually oriented business, shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
F. Any adult entertainment cabaret business lawfully operating prior to the effective date of this ordinance that is in violation of subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of this section shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use. Such nonconforming use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more adult entertainment cabaret businesses are located within one thousand (1,000) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the adult entertainment cabaret business which was first established and continually operating at particular location is the conforming use, the later established business is the nonconforming use.
G. An adult entertainment cabaret lawfully operating as a conforming use after the effective date of this ordinance is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the operation of the adult entertainment cabaret, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, or residential zoning district within one thousand (1,000) feet of the adult entertainment cabaret.
SECTION 8.4 – TEMPORARY BUILDINGS
Temporary buildings accessory to new construction are permitted, provided such are razed within thirty (30) days after substantial completion of construction. Temporary real estate sales offices located within the subdivision, for which lots are being sold are permitted, but limited to the period of actual sales and not exceeding two (2) years.
SECTION 8.5 – TELECOMMUNCATIONS TOWERS
A. For the purpose of this ordinance, telecommunication towers shall include radio, wireless telephone, television, microwave, short wave radio and/or any other tower used exclusively for communication purposes as interpreted by the City Manager or his/her designee.
B. No telecommunication tower shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of a residential district unless the applicant can otherwise demonstrate by providing coverage, interference and capacity analysis that the proposed location of the antenna is necessary to meet the frequency reuse and spacing needs of the wireless telecommunications facility and to provide adequate coverage and capacity to areas which cannot be adequately served by locating the tower in a less sensitive area.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 98
C. Towers or structures supporting telecommunication antenna or otherwise conforming to all the applicable provisions of this ordinance are hereby permitted subject to approval of a specific use permit in the Heavy Industrial district when the tower is considered an accessory use. Towers and supporting telecommunication antennae are also permitted subject to approval of a specific use permit in the following locations regardless of the underlying zoning district:
1. Church sites when camouflaged as steeples or bell towers;
2. Park sites when compatible with the existing environment and nature of the park; and
3. Government, school, utility and institutional sites.
D. The minimum setback from the base of the tower to any property line or to any adjacent non-residential structure shall be equal to one-half (1/2) the height of the tower, unless the Zoning Board of Adjustment grants a variance due to special or unusual characteristics.
E. The following general criteria shall be considered in determining the appropriateness of sites for a communication tower when considering a conditional use permit:
1. Whether the proposed tower is to be located in an area where it would be unobtrusive to surrounding uses and would not substantially detract from the local aesthetic or neighborhood character;
2. Where the application represents a request for multiple use of a proposed tower;
3. Whether the application exhibits how the site and the tower and/or antenna will be designed and arranged to accommodate future multiple users.
F. In the event the tower and antenna array shall serve as the primary use of the property, any accessory facility or building greater than one hundred (100) square feet will be designed so as to be architecturally compatible with principal structures on the site and shall be compatible with the surrounding natural or built environment.
G. Advertising or signage provided for any use other than to provide warning or equipment instruction and/or other information pertinent to the safe operation of the facility on any portion of the tower and/or antenna or any other accessory facility shall be prohibited.
1. Each tower shall maintain a gray or other neutral colored finish.
H. If at any time the use of the tower and/or antenna ceases, the owner or leasee of the tower and/or antenna shall dismantle and remove it within six (6) months after ceasing to use it, unless a binding lease agreement with another wireless communications provider on the same tower has been executed in which case an additional six (6) months shall be granted.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 99
SECTION 8.6 – PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: NOISE, AIR AND WATER POLLUTION, GLARE, EXPLOSIVE OR HAZARDOUS GASES, LIQUIDS AND MATTER, RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS, VIBRATION, ELECTRO MAGNETIC INTERFERENCE
All uses in all districts shall conform in operation, location and construction to the performance standards herein specified. In conformance therewith, the following general provisions shall be observed:
A. Any and all county, state and federal rules, regulations and standards applicable to and governing, excess noise generation, pollution, emission of air pollution, water pollution by liquid or solid wastes, explosive or hazardous gases, liquids and matter, radioactive materials, vibration, electromagnetic interference, and storage, manufacture, handling, transportation or use of explosives or inflammable material shall be observed for all uses in all districts.
B. No use or light in any district shall be operated so as to produce any intense glare or direct illumination across the bounding property line from a visible source, or illumination of such intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from the use or enjoyment of privacy of adjacent properties. All exterior lights shall be made of a light source with a reflector so selected that, acting together, the light beam is controlled so as not to be directed across any adjacent property line.
C. Any use established after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with all of the performance standards herein established.
D. The City Manager shall have the power to refuse a building permit or Certificate of Occupancy when in his opinion the applicant's request could or would, if placed in use or operation, be in violation of the performance standards herein established. In such case, the City Manager shall request, and the applicant shall furnish, at his expenses, sufficient detailed information to show conformity with the applicable standards as respects his particular use or operation, prior to the issuance of such permit or certificate by the City Manager.
E. In the case of alleged violations of these standards of any use or operation, as prescribed herein, the City Manager shall investigate and determine what subsequent actions should be taken to abate the alleged violation. If after consultation with the owner of the use or operation alleged to be in violation with these standards, and if an appropriate solution cannot be mutually agreed upon by both parties, the City Manager shall cause to be placed on the first available agenda of the Planning and Zoning Commission for due consideration the proposed violation(s). If after consultation between the Planning and Zoning Commission and the owner of the use or operation alleged to be in violation with these standards, and if an appropriate solution still cannot be mutually agreed upon by both parties, the City Manager shall cause to be placed on the first available agenda of the City Council for due consideration the proposed violation(s). The City Council may employ the use of professional qualified experts to conduct a detailed investigation, report and recommendation thereon. Following receipt of the report, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the case, in the same manner and procedure as that employed for a zoning change. After considering all testimony submitted at the public hearing, the City Council shall make the final determination whether or not a violation exists. Costs incurred by the City in the employ of the expert's investigation, report and testimony shall be reimbursed by the violator if a violation is found to exist, otherwise such costs shall be borne by the City. The violator may appeal the City Council's findings and decisions through the Courts, as established by state statutes.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 100
ARTICLE
ARTICLE 99. . –– SIGN REGULATIONSSIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION 9.1 – PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of this Article is to protect and enhance the City's character and its economic base through the provision of appropriate sign standards and the avoidance of excessive or obtrusive signs on privately owned property. This Article also seeks to limit the size, type and location of signs in order to protect the public safety, health, and welfare; to maintain the quality of community life; to maintain the beauty of the City's natural and architectural features; to ensure that signs do not visually dominate the zone in which they are located; and to provide appropriate standards for achieving the primary intended purpose of identification.
SECTION 9.2 – ADMINISTRATION
A. The City Manager or his/her designee is hereby empowered to inspect and examine any tract of land and to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist therein or thereat in violation of any provision of this Sign Section. After any such order has been served, no work shall proceed on any building, other structure or tract of land covered by such order, except to correct such violation or comply with the order.
B. For new signs associated with new construction of a structure. The sign shall be approved by the Planning Commission, in accordance with the regulations of this Section and the Site Plan requirements.
C. No sign shall be constructed, established, placed, or painted on a building, structure, or site, and no existing sign shall be modified except for change of copy or repair, unless such sign has been approved by the City Manager or his/her designee and issued a sign permit, unless exempt from these regulations, or is a temporary sign.
D. Any sign authorized in this Article is allowed to contain a noncommercial message in place of any other authorized commercial or noncommercial message.
SECTION 9.3 – APPLICATION AND PERMITS
The application for a sign permit and the applicable fee must be submitted on such forms provided by the City and must be accompanied by the information, scaled drawings of the sign including placement thereof and descriptive data to ensure proper regulation of the sign and to ensure compliance with this Section.
A. Issuance of Permits - If the plans and specifications for a sign set forth in any application for a permit conform to all of the requirements of this Section and other City regulations, the administering employee will issue the appropriate permit.
B. Permit Not Required - A sign permit is not required:
1. To repaint a sign or to restore a conforming sign to its original condition if the sign otherwise complies with this Section;
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 101
2. To periodically change only the letters, numbers or message portion of a lawful sign specifically designed for that purpose;
3. For the placement or use of a stake sign; or
4. For the placement of a temporary freestanding sign as provided for in this Section.
C. Duration - Unless earlier revoked, a sign permit to construct, erect or place a freestanding or wall sign is valid for one hundred and eighty (180) days from the date of issuance. The durations of temporary signs are placed with each sign definition.
D. Revocation - A sign permit may be revoked for a violation of this Section. The City Manager or his/her designee shall give prior written notice of a proposed revocation to the permittee and an opportunity to respond to the reasons for revocation prior to making a decision thereon.
E. Appeals - Any person aggrieved by a decision of an administering employee in the application of this Section may appeal the decision to the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with the procedures applicable to appeals of decisions under the City's zoning regulations. The Zoning Board of Adjustment will hear and decide appeals in accordance with the provisions applicable to appeals under the City's zoning regulations.
F. Variances- The Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant variances to the provisions of these regulations in accordance with Section 3.2.6.
SECTION 9.4 – DEFINITIONS AND REGULATIONS
A. Abandoned Sign – A sign that had a permit, but the permit has expired and/or does not identify or advertise a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product, event, or activity, or pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies. Abandoned Signs are prohibited in the City.
B. Athletic fields - Signs located on the field side of scoreboards and fences of athletic fields. No sign permit required.
C. Audible Sign - Any sign that emits music, talking, words, or other sound amplification. Audible Signs are prohibited in the City with the exception of signs in connection with drive-up windows menu boards.
D. Awning Sign (Internally Illuminated) - Any sign which is located on or is part of an awning if the awning contains any form of interior illumination that is intended to or has the effect of making the sign more readily visible from a public street. Internally illuminated awning signs are prohibited in the City.
E. Balloon Sign – A temporary inflatable device sign.
1. Time – Sign permit required. For commercial establishments the sign may not be installed for a time period greater than fourteen (14) days. For authorized community events, which shall
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 102
include, but not be limited to, athletic events, parades, street fairs, and other civic, cultural, or recreational events; such signs shall be displayed for a period not to exceed the authorized duration of the event.
2. Place - no balloon sign, or portion thereof, shall extend to, or interfere with, any utility line or wire, or interfere with any pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or extend into or over any public right-of-way.
3. Manner - No balloon shall exceed eighteen (18) inches in diameter and shall not be displayed above a height of sixteen (16) feet or the height of the nearest adjacent wall, whichever is lower
F. Bandit Signs – Any sign which is not exempt or allowed by permit. These signs include signs located on or attached to a street light, utility pole, hydrant, bridge, traffic-control device, street sign, or other city-owned building, facility, structure, or equipment, and signs attached to trees and shrubs. Bandit signs are prohibited within the City.
G. Banners - A temporary sign having characters, letters, or illustrations applied to plastic, cloth canvas, or other light fabric or similar material, with the only purpose of such non-rigid material being for background. A Banner advertises the business’ name, opening dates, telephone number, hours of operation, and/or types of products offered or sold.
1. Time – A sign permit is required to be issued by the City Manager or his/her designee. No more than two (2) permits per calendar year may be issued by the City for any owner, tenant or occupant of a lot or leased space within a non-residential zone. Each permit may be issued for a time period of up to thirty (30) days.
2. Place – Banners may only be issued permits to owner, occupant or tenant of any lot in any non-residential zoning district. The banner shall be securely affixed to the wall of the structure or building, where feasible.
3. Manner – Banners shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area. The banner shall have affixed to it a label or mark identifying the expiration date of the permit.
4. Maintenance – All banners must be maintained in good condition and repair. Any banner which is torn, faded, sagging or in disrepair shall be replaced at the request of the City Manager or his/her designee.
5. Authorization for Removal - The applicant for a temporary banner permit shall consent to the City Manager or his/her designee entering upon the lot or parcel solely for the removal of the temporary banner if it is not promptly removed at the expiration of the permitted period. Such entry and removal shall occur only after not less than forty eight (48) hours written notice posted upon the property and left with a manager or other responsible person at the location of the temporary banner.
6. Deposit - The applicant for any temporary banner permit shall deposit a cash deposit in an amount to be set by the City which shall be forfeit in the event it is necessary for the City to remove the temporary banner under the provisions of this ordinance.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 103
7. Revocation of Permit - The City Manager or his/her designee may revoke a permit granted under this section under the following conditions:
a) The permit was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation, or
b) The banner(s) is not maintained pursuant to this ordinance.
8. Appeal - The applicant may appeal the decision by requesting a hearing in writing before the City Manager or his/her designee within ten (10) days of receiving written Notice of Revocation. The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing as soon as practical. Within forty-eight (48) hours after such Planning Commission hearing the City Manager or his/her designee shall mail a written Statement of Decision indicating therein the factual basis for the decision of the Planning Commission.
9. The City Manager or his/her designee may remove any banner by written notice pursuant to this ordinance if the Notice of Revocation is not appealed or if, after hearing, the Statement of Decision affirms the Notice of Revocation.
H. Billboard – A sign which is a primary sign and advertises businesses, commodities, activities, services or persons which are not usually available or present upon the premises upon which such sign is located, or which directs persons to any location not on the premises. Billboards are prohibited in the City.
I. Business Door Nameplates. Any sign which identifies the name of a business and may contain the name and address of the business.
1. Time – No sign permit required. Business Door Nameplates may be installed permanently on the building.
2. Place – Business Door Nameplates may only be affixed to the door of each individual business or immediately adjacent thereto.
3. Manner – A Business Door Nameplate may not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
J. Canopy and Awning Signs - Signs printed on, painted on, or attached onto a canopy or awning
1. Time - A sign permit is required. Canopy and awning signs may not be issued for any structure until they have been permitted by the City Manager or his/her designee.
2. Place – Canopy and awning signs shall only be permitted in conjunction with a nonresidential use in a nonresidential zoning district. Canopy and awning signs are limited to the ground floor.
3. Manner – Canopy and awning signs shall not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the length of the canopy or awning and shall consist of no more than one line of lettering not exceeding twelve (12) inches in height, and shall be located on the valance of such canopy or awning. In addition to lettering, an identification emblem, insignia, or other similar feature not exceeding an area of four (4)
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 104
square feet may be printed on, painted on, or attached onto any other portion of the canopy or awning.
K. Construction Sign - A temporary sign used to advertise or display contact information of property owners, opening dates, architects, contractors, engineers, landscape architects, and/or financiers, who are engaged with the design, construction, improvement or financing of a residential subdivision with homes under construction within the subdivision to which it pertains or within a commercial project to which it pertains.
1. Time – No sign permit required. May only be installed during the period of construction.
2. Place – Construction signs shall be installed no closer than fifteen (15’) feet to any property line. The minimum distance between a construction sign and another construction sign is two hundred (200’) feet.
3. Manner – Construction signs are not to exceed a total of thirty-two (32) square feet. A larger total area may be permitted subject to the approval of the City Manager or his/her designee for projects on larger sites with a substantial length of street frontage.
L. Custom Decorative Flags, Banners and Pennants - Custom decorative flags, banners, or pennants utilized as an integrated and permanent part of the architectural design of a building or site may be permitted pursuant to the approval of the Planning Commission and subject to the following criteria:
1. That the flags, banners or pennants do not contain written material or text, and are not solely for the purpose of calling attention to the premises.
2. That the flags, banners or pennants contribute to a theme or architectural harmony or architectural integrity of the project, building, structure, or site.
3. That the flags, banners or pennants do not adversely affect other properties in the neighborhood.
4. That the applicant has provided, or will provide, adequate written assurance that the flags, banners and pennants will be maintained in good repair and condition.
M. Dilapidated Sign - Any surface element, background, or support of any Sign that has finished materials that are missing, broken, bent, cracked, decayed, dented, harmful, hazardous, illegible, leaning, splintered, ripped, torn, twisted, or unsightly. Signs that are deteriorated, dilapidated, or unsafe are prohibited within the City.
N. Exempt Signs - The following signs do not require a sign permit. Refer to each sign’s definition for specific qualifications. Athletic Fields; Business Door Nameplates; Construction Sign; Governmental Sign; Holiday Signs and Lights; Mailboxes and addresses; National or State Flags; Plaques; Private Traffic Control Sign; Railroad Sign; Real Estate Sign; Signs on outdoor machines, devices or equipment; Signs on persons; Unused Signs; Utility or Hazard Signs; Vehicle Sign; Window and Door Sign.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 105
O. Governmental Sign – A Governmental Sign is any sign which is erected or maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental function or is required by law, ordinance or governmental regulation; or used to convey health, safety and welfare information to the public regarding City, County, State, or Federal government requirements and regulations such as water restrictions, burn bans, or other similar information. Governmental signs may also be defined as those located on property owned, leased or under the control of a governmental entity. No sign permit required.
P. Grand Opening Banner- In addition to the limitations of this ordinance, the owner, and any tenant or occupant of a lot shall be permitted a banner, for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, whose sole purpose is to announce or advertise the initial opening of an establishment, project, business or other enterprise.
Q. Hanging Signs - A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface such as a canopy or marquee and is supported by such surface.
1. Time – A sign permit is required.
2. Place – Hanging signs shall only be permitted in conjunction with a nonresidential use in a nonresidential zoning district. Hanging signs shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet vertical distance from the sidewalk grade and at approximately a ninety (90) degree angle to the face of the building.
3. Manner - The maximum area of such signs shall be determined by the following:
4. The length of such signs shall not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the projecting dimension of the awning, canopy, or parapet overhang.
5. Such signs shall not exceed two (2) feet in height.
R. Holiday Signs and Lights - Temporary signs, including Christmas lights, containing only holiday messages and no commercial advertising.
S. Illegally Placed Sign - Sign erected without the permission of the owner, or his agent, of the property on which or over which such sign is located.
T. Illuminated Sign (High Intensity) - Signs which are illuminated from within or without that:
1. Are illuminated to such intensity or without proper shielding so as to constitute a hazard to the operation of motor vehicles upon a public street or substantially interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of residential property; or
2. Are located or illuminated so that they obscure or interfere with the entirety of an official traffic sign, signal, or device, or obstruct or interfere with the view of approaching, emerging or intersecting traffic, or prevent any traveler on any Street from obtaining a clear view of approaching vehicles.
3. Illuminated Sign (High Intensity) are prohibited in the City.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 106
U. Imitation Governmental Sign - Any sign, which, by color, shape, location or other means endangers public safety by resembling or conflicting with any traffic control sign or device or which due to its dangerous construction, manner of display, or location is hazardous. Imitation Governmental Signs are prohibited in the City.
V. Mailboxes and Addresses - Addresses and names located on mailboxes. No sign permit is required.
W. Mobile Advertisement Sign - An operable or inoperable vehicle with illuminated or non-illuminated panels, other devices, or appendages used to advertise, promote or draw attention to products, services, events, or other similar purpose. No person shall park any vehicle or trailer on public property, or on private property so as to be visible from a public right of way, which vehicle has attached thereto or located thereon any sign or advertising device for the purpose of providing advertisements of products located on the same or nearby property or directing people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property. This definition is not intended to apply to standard advertising or identification practices as defined as a Vehicle Sign. Mobile Advertisement Signs are prohibited in the City.
X. Monument Signs A sign supported from the grade to the bottom of the sign having or appearing to have a solid and opaque base and used to identify tenants or name of a business located within a development or on a separately platted lot.
1. Time - A sign permit is required. Monument signs may not be issued for any parcel until they have been permitted by the City Manager or his/her designee.
2. Place – Monument signs shall only be permitted in conjunction with a nonresidential use.
a) Monument signs shall be setback from property lines by fifteen (15) feet.
b) One (1) monument sign per street frontage may be permitted.
c) A monument sign must not be located within one hundred twenty-five (125) linear feet of another freestanding sign.
3. Manner -
a) The maximum sign area permitted shall not be more than one hundred (100) square feet per face for any monument sign. Not more than two (2) sign faces shall be permitted, and such sign faces shall be parallel.
b) Monument signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height above existing grade, except where otherwise allowed by this Section. Berming incorporated with the placement of the sign shall be included in any height measurement.
c) Monument signs shall be placed in a landscaped area of not less than the area of one face of such sign.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 107
Y. Moving Sign - Any sign, sign appendages or apparatus designed or made to move freely in the wind or designed or made to move by an electrical or mechanical device. Moving signs, and/or any sign appendage that moves, are prohibited in the City.
Z. Multi-tenant Development Sign - A MTDS is a sign that is supported from the grade to the bottom of the sign having, or appearing to have, a solid base or a sign that is supported by poles or supports in or upon the ground independent of any building and is used to identify multiple tenants within a development. A MTDS is permissible on a nonresidential zoned property subject to the following conditions.
1. Time - A sign permit is required. A sign permit shall not be issued to erect, install or place a MTDS on a development containing multiple parcels until a Unified Sign Development Plan has been approved or is approved as part of a Planned Development zoning district. A Unified Sign Development Plan is not required for a MTDS on a single parcel development. A sign permit for a MTDS shall not be issued to erect, install or place a MTDS until a subdivision plat, preliminary site plan, and/or site plan for the property has been approved and after issuance of a building permit for a building within the development.
2. Place –
a) MTDS shall be located within a development that may contain multiple tenants and/or multiple lots under a single development.
b) A MTDS is permitted on the same lot as a Monument Sign, but the total number of MTDS and Monument Signs located within a development shall generally not exceed the number of lots located within the development. The total number of signs shall not be permitted to exceed to the total number of lots in the development when additional MTDS are permitted on a property.
c) The minimum front yard setback for a MTDS is fifteen (15’) feet from the property line.
d) No minimum side yard and rear yard setbacks are required for a MTDS, but a MTDS shall not be located closer than seventy-five (75') feet to another MTDS or a Monument Sign.
3. Manner -
a) A MTDS shall be constructed of masonry materials and a design consistent with the buildings located on the property.
b) The maximum area and height of a MTDS shall be based on the classification of the streets adjacent to the development.
Street Classification
Maximum Area
Maximum Height
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 108
Local and Collector Streets
Fifteen (15) square feet per tenant up to one hundred twenty (120) square feet inclusive of development identification
Twelve (12’) Feet
Arterials
Twenty five (25) square feet per tenant up to three hundred (300) square feet inclusive of development identification
Twenty (20’) Feet
Limited Access Highways
Forty (40) square feet per tenant up to six hundred (600) square feet inclusive of development identification
Forty (40’) Feet
4. Architectural embellishments for MTDS are encouraged. Exceptions in maximum height and area may be considered through the review of the Unified Sign Development Plan.
5. One MTDS is permitted per street frontage of the development. One additional MTDS is permitted along a street for each additional seven hundred and fifty (750’) linear feet, or portion thereof, of street frontage that exceeds seven hundred and fifty (750’) linear feet of street frontage.
6. Electronic variable messages are generally not permitted within MTDS but may be considered through the review of the Unified Sign Development Plan.
AA. National or State Flags - A national or state flag, or both, on any one premises if they do not exceed the total area regulations applicable to freestanding signs for that premises. No sign permit required.
BB. Non-Compliant Sign - Any sign that does not comply with the standards of this Section or other City ordinances. Non-compliant signs are prohibited in the City.
CC. Non-Railroad Related Sign - A freestanding sign located on any railroad right of way that is not used for or related to railroad operations. Non-Railroad Related Signs are prohibited in the City.
DD. Plaques - Historical and commemorative plaques of recognized historical societies and organizations. No sign permit is required if the signs are less than fifteen (15) square feet in total area.
EE. Portable Sign - Any sign designed or intended to be relocated from time-to-time, whether or not it is permanently attached to a building or structure, or is located on the ground. Portable Signs include signs on wheels or on portable or mobile structures, such as, among other things, trailers, skids, banners, tents or other portable structures, A-frame signs, T-shaped signs, airborne devices, or other devices used for temporary display or advertising. Portable Signs are prohibited in the City except as specifically allowed by this Ordinance.
FF. Private Traffic Control Sign - Signs on private property containing no advertising that direct the movement of traffic, warn of obstacles or overhead clearances, or control parking, including entrance and exit signs. No sign permit required.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 109
GG. Prohibited Signs - It is unlawful for any person to erect, install, construct, display, maintain, reconstruct, place, locate, relocate or make use of any of the following signs for advertising purposes. These signs are specifically defined within this Section. Abandoned Sign; Audible Sign; Awning Sign (Internally Illuminated); Bandit Signs; Billboards, Blocking of Public Access Signs; Dilapidated Sign; Illegally Placed Sign; Illuminated Sign (High Intensity); Imitation Governmental Sign; Mobile Advertisement Sign; Non-Compliant Sign; Non-Railroad Related Sign; Portable Sign; Roof Sign; and signs which interfere with Sight Visibility.
HH. Projecting Signs - A sign projecting out from and attached to the exterior wall of any building and forming an angle of thirty (30) degrees or more to said wall.
1. Time – A sign permit is required.
2. Place - Projecting signs shall only be permitted in conjunction with a nonresidential use in a nonresidential zoning district. Projecting signs shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet vertical distance from the sidewalk grade. No projecting sign shall extend above the adjacent eave or parapet line of the roof.
3. Manner - The maximum sign area per face shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each linear foot of building frontage.
II. Pylon Sign - A sign erected on a vertical framework consisting of two or more uprights supported by the ground independent of support from any building.
1. Time – A Sign permit is required. A Sign permit shall not be issued to erect, install or place a Pylon Sign on a property until a site plan and a sign visibility study has been approved for development of the property and after the issuance of a building permit for a building on the property.
2. Place - The minimum front yard setback for a Pylon Sign is fifteen (15’) feet from the property line. The minimum side and rear setback from the property line shall be equal to ten (10) percent of the lot width. Pylon Signs shall not be placed within any designated or dedicated public utility easements without the approval of an Easement Use Agreement from the appropriate utility. Pylon Signs shall not be placed within two hundred fifty feet of another Pylon Sign.
3. Manner – The maximum area and height of a Pylon Sign shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area or exceed twenty-five (25') feet in height. The supporting structures of any Pylon Sign shall be constructed of approved masonry materials.
JJ. Railroad Sign - Any sign on railroad property placed or maintained in reference to the operation of the railroad. No sign permit required.
KK. Residential Nameplate - An un-illuminated nameplate bearing the family name of the occupants residing in the residence.
1. Time – No sign permit is required.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 110
2. Place – Allowed in the AG, A-1, A-2, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts.
3. Manner – Residential nameplates shall be un-illuminated and shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area.
LL. Real Estate Sign - An on-site, temporary stake sign used to advertise a home or residential property for sale or lease. A real estate sign is used to advertise the name of the owner or realtor, telephone number, property information, and/or website address
1. Time - No sign permit required. A real estate sign may be erected 24 hours each and every day.
2. Place - A real estate sign shall be erected only on the lot on which the home or property is for sale or lease. A real estate shall be erected no closer than ten (10’) feet from the street pavement.
3. Manner - A real estate sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area, except where more than one unit of a condominium is offered for sale, rent or lease, the signs may be combine din a single supporting structure, and the sign area shall not exceed three (3) square feet per unit offered. A maximum of one real estate sign shall be erected on a lot.
MM. Roof Sign - Signs located on a roof or attached to a building if it projects above the highest point of the facade or parapet. Roof Signs are prohibited in the City.
NN. Sight Visibility - Any sign that violates any sight visibility regulations of the City. These signs are prohibited in the City.
OO. Signs for Permitted Uses within Residential Zones (Un-illuminated) – A sign for permitted non-residential uses within certain residential zones including AG, A-1, A-2, M-1, M-2 and MH.
1. Time – A sign permit is required.
2. Place – Allowed in the AG, A-1, A-2, M-1, M-2, and MH zoning districts. Nameplate signs shall be setback ten (10) feet from the property line. Such signs shall not be placed within twenty (20) feet of drives providing ingress and egress to the property. These signs shall not be placed higher than twenty-five (25) feet above grade.
3. Manner – These signs shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet in area.
PP. Signs on outdoor machines, devices, and equipment - Signs located on outdoor machines, devices or equipment which display the trademark, trade name, manufacturer, cost, or operating or service instructions or similar information but do not advertise the business where located. This exemption includes signs on coin-operated vending machines, fuel dispensing pumps, telephone facilities, automatic teller machines, automotive vacuum cleaners, amusement rides, and similar machines, devices, or equipment. No sign permit required.
QQ. Signs on persons - Hand-held signs on persons. No sign permit required.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 111
RR. Stake Sign - A temporary sign with a base/stake commonly made of metal, wood or other similar material with an end for driving into the ground.
1. Time – A stake sign may only be displayed between the weekend hours of 8:00 a.m. on Friday to 10:00 a.m. on the following Monday. A stake sign that advertises a particular event or happening must be removed within three (3) days after the conclusion of the event by the owner of the premises on which it is located.
2. Place – A stake sign may not be located within the right-of-way of a public street or within a railroad right-of-way. On any public property that is used as an election polling place, a person may place a stake sign on the public property in a manner consistent with State law. The City may remove and dispose of any sign that does not comply with these regulations. Garage Sale signs may be exempt from the placement provision.
3. Manner – A stake sign may not have a total area in excess of nine (9) square feet or a height in excess of four (4) feet.
SS. Temporary Freestanding Sign– A temporary on premise sign.
1. Time – A sign permit is required. The permit shall be valid for one (1) year and renewable for one (1) additional year for one (1) temporary freestanding sign on any one premises. The sign must be in compliance with the place and manner sections of this definition.
2. Place – Setback fifteen (15) feet from the property line and is not located within a sight visibility area.
3. Manner – Temporary freestanding signs shall be constructed as follows:
a) Is unlighted;
b) The face is fabricated of one-half (1/2) inch thick medium density overlay plywood of yellow treated pine mounted on both sides of a frame with dimensions of four (4) feet by four (4) feet where no part of the frame or posts extend beyond the sign faces at the sides or top of the sign;
c) The plywood face of the sign is four (4) feet in width and eight (8) feet in height and extends down to within six (6) inches of the ground;
d) The sign is anchored by two (2) four (4) inch by four (4) inch yellow pine treated posts anchored in sand filled holes extending down at least two feet in the ground; and
e) The plywood face is securely held to the frame by galvanized nails or screws installed with the heads flush to the surface; all seams are tight; all holes are filled and sanded smooth; and all surfaces are coated with primer and painted with good quality exterior grade semi-gloss paint.
TT. Temporary Identification Banner - In addition to the limitations of this ordinance any owner, tenant or occupant of a lot not otherwise having a permitted permanent sign shall be entitled to a banner for
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 112
a period not to exceed sixty (60) days to direct attention to the name of the owner or occupant of the premise upon which the banner is placed, or identifying the premises; or advertising goods manufactured or produced or services rendered on the premises upon which the banner is placed pending the installation of a permanent sign.
UU. Temporary Sign - Any sign used to display information that relates to a land use, or a sign with a limited duration which is not rigidly and permanently installed into or on the ground, attached to a building, or as identified in this Section as Balloon Sign; Banners; Grand Opening Banner; Temporary Freestanding Sign; Temporary Identification Banner; Stake Sign; and Wind Device Sign.
VV. Utility and Hazard Signs - Signs marking utility or underground communication or transmission lines and hazards. No sign permit is required.
WW. Vehicle Sign - A sign attached to any vehicle, truck, car, bus, trailer, boat, recreational vehicle, motorcycle or any other vehicle; however, any vehicle, whether operable or not, shall not be parked and/or decorated where the intent is to use the vehicle as advertising. Vehicle signs shall exclude bumper stickers and state required registration or inspection stickers/identifications.
1. Time - No sign permit required. Vehicle signs are allowed 24 hours each and every continuing day.
2. Place - Vehicle signs are permitted provided that during periods of inactivity such vehicle is not parked in the right-of-way or placed in a manner that the vehicle sign is readily visible from an adjacent right-of-way. "For sale" signs placed in or on vehicles when the vehicle is parked or placed in a manner that the vehicle sign is readily visible from an adjacent public right-of-way are prohibited, with the exception that one vehicle may contain a "for sale" sign parked or placed at an occupied single-family, two-family, townhome, or multifamily dwelling unit is permitted.
3. Manner. Vehicle signs are permitted provided that:
a) The primary purpose of the sign is not for display of the sign;
b) The signs are painted upon or applied directly to an integral part of the vehicle;
c) The vehicle is operable, currently registered and licensed to operate on public streets and actively used in the daily function of the business to which such signs relates;
d) The vehicle is not used as a static display, advertising a product or service, not utilized as storage, shelter, or distribution points for commercial products or services for the public.
XX. Wall Signs - Any sign erected against an exterior wall, erected parallel to a wall or painted directly onto a wall. A Wall Sign is a sign erected parallel to and extending not more than sixteen (16”) inches from the facade of any building to which it is attached, supported throughout its entire length by the building face. Wall Signs are permissible subject to the following conditions and upon issuance of a sign permit.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 113
1. Time – A sign permit is required. Wall signs may not be issued for any structure until they have been approved by the City Manager or his/her designee.
2. Place – Wall signs shall only be permitted in conjunction with a nonresidential use in a nonresidential zoning district.
3. Manner – Wall signs shall conform to the following standards:
a) Front wall signs shall be flush against the face of the building and not projecting more than sixteen (16) inches therefrom. Sign area shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the area of the front wall of the building.
b) Rear wall signs flush against the rear wall of a building and not projecting more than sixteen (16) inches therefrom shall only be permitted if the rear wall of the building faces a street, parking area, or pedestrian area and shall not exceed ten (10) percent of said rear wall in total sign area or three hundred (300) square feet, whichever is less.
c) Side wall signs flush against the side wall of the building and not projecting more than sixteen (16) inches therefrom may be permitted a total sign area not to exceed seven and one half (7.5%) percent of said side wall, except a total sign area up to fifteen (15) percent of the area of the wall may be permitted where the side wall faces a street.
d) For multi-tenant buildings the total area regulations apply to that portion of the building facade leased to each tenant.
e) A wall sign may not extend above the highest point of the building to which it is attached.
YY. Wind Device Sign – Any devices made of cloth, canvas, plastic or any flexible material designed to float or designed to move, or moves freely in the wind, with or without a frame or other structure, used for the purpose of advertising or drawing attention to a business, commodity, service, sale or product. Wind device signs may not extend beyond the property lines of the premises where located, over any public highway, street or sidewalk, or to a greater height than the maximum height allowed for a structure on the premises.
ZZ. Windows and Door Sign - Signs painted on or placed on and supported by the glass surfaces of windows or doors, if not illuminated with the intent of being viewed from the public street. No sign permit required.
SECTION 9.5 – MANNER OF MEASUREMENT
A. The size of a sign is determined by its total area. For freestanding signs, the total area includes the entire structure on which all signs are placed or mounted.
B. The setback is measured perpendicularly from the curb line to the closest point of the sign.
C. The height of a sign is measured from the natural ground level at the base of the sign to the highest point of the sign.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 114
D. The width of a sign is measured along a line drawn from the outermost edges of the sign, parallel to the ground.
E. Directional signs or incidental signs are signs such as "entrance" or "exit' that give information but do not contain advertisements. They require a sign permit but do not count toward the size requirements of this section.
F. Informational signs are signs that give information of a non-commercial or advertising nature such as historic markers, highway identification markers, or traffic signs within the parking area of a building. They require a sign permit but do not count toward the size requirements of this document.
SECTION 9.6 – NONCONFORMING SIGNS
A. Nonconforming signs are allowed if the sign was erected in compliance with the regulations in effect prior to the effective date of this ordinance or was lawfully in place at the time the sign was annexed into the City.
B. The owner of a nonconforming sign must register the sign with the City by completing a form provided for that purpose by the City.
C. A freestanding sign becomes nonconforming if not removed within thirty (30) days of the date the sign becomes an abandoned sign. Within sixty (60) days of the date a freestanding sign becomes an abandoned sign, the message portion of the sign must be painted over, covered, removed, or modified so that the remaining sign structure is left visually unobtrusive, presents a solid facade, and does not appear to be in disrepair or dismantled.
D. Any nonconforming sign, including its supporting structure, which is destroyed, damaged, dilapidated or deteriorated must not be replaced, repaired or renovated, in whole or in part, if such replacement, repair or renovation would require an expenditure of monies in excess of sixty (60) percent of the reproduction cost of a new sign, including its supporting structure, which is substantially the same or similar to the nonconforming sign destroyed, damaged, dilapidated or deteriorated, unless such alteration or repair makes the sign conforming. A person may not repair, renovate or alter a nonconforming sign without first receiving a sign permit. A permit is not required to repaint a sign.
E. The City Manager or his/her designee may, whenever deemed necessary to reasonably determine the applicability of this Section, require the owner of the nonconforming sign to submit two or more independent estimates from established sign companies of the cost of replacing, repairing or renovating, in whole or in part, the existing nonconforming sign and two or more independent estimates from established sign companies of the reproduction cost of a new sign, including its supporting structure, which is substantially the same or similar to the nonconforming sign destroyed, damaged, dilapidated or deteriorated.
F. Any part of a sign or the supporting structure of a sign that is a nonconforming use may be repaired or renovated only by the use of the types of materials and dimensions of materials that are the same as the parts of the sign or supporting structure being repaired or renovated.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 115
ARTICLE
ARTICLE 1010. . –– DEFINITIONSDEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined in this section. Words used in the present tense shall also include the future tense; words used in the masculine gender shall also include the feminine gender; words used in the singular number shall also include the plural number; and words in the plural number shall also include the singular number, except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
Accessory use means a use that is customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings and that is located upon the same lot therewith.
Agricultural farming and livestock means uses such as dairy, livestock, swine, poultry and hatcheries, horse raising and breeding, field and truck crop, horticulture, hydroponic raising.
Alley means a minor right-of-way that is dedicated to public use and which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may also be used for public utility purposes.
Amusement arcade (also video arcade) means any building, room, place or establishment of any nature or kind, and by whatever name called, where more than ten percent (10%) of the public floor area is devoted to three or more amusement devices that are operated for a profit, whether the same is operated in conjunction with any other business or not, including but not limited to such amusement devices as coin-operated pinball machines, video games, electronic games, shuffleboards, pool tables or other similar amusement devices. However, the term "amusement device," as used herein, shall not include musical devices, billiard tables which are not coin-operated, machines that are designed exclusively for small children, and devices designed to train persons in athletic skills or golf, tennis, baseball, archery or other similar sports.
Amusement, commercial (indoor), means an amusement enterprise that is wholly enclosed within a building which is treated acoustically so that noise generated by the enterprise is not perceptible at the bounding property line, and that provides activities, services and/or instruction for the entertainment of customers or members, but not including amusement arcades. Uses may include, but are not limited to, the following: bowling alley, ice skating rink, martial arts club, racquetball/handball club, indoor tennis courts/club, indoor swimming pool or scuba diving facility, and other similar types of uses.
Amusement, commercial (outdoor), means an amusement enterprise offering entertainment and/or games of skill to the general public for a fee wherein any portion of the activity takes place outdoors and including, but not limited to, a golf driving range, archery range, miniature golf course, batting cages, go-cart tracks, amusement parks, and other similar types of uses.
Antique shop means a retail establishment engaged in the selling of works of art, furniture and/or other artifacts of an earlier period, with all sales and storage occurring inside a building.
Art gallery or museum means an institution for the collection, display and/or distribution of objects of art or science, and which is typically sponsored by a public or quasi-public agency and generally open to the public.
Assisted living facility means residential care facilities that provide housing, meals, personal care and supportive services to older persons and disabled adults and are able to live independently. Units include limited or full kitchen
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 116
facilities. Full-time medical or nursing care is not typically provided by the facility, but may be privately arranged for by individual residents on a part-time or temporary basis.
Auto parts and accessory sales means the use of any building or other premises for the primary display and sale of new or used parts for automobiles, panel trucks or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles. No outside storage is permitted.
Auto rental means storage of vehicles for the purpose of renting automobiles or light trucks.
Auto sales means retail sales of new or used automobiles or light load vehicles and the service of new or used vehicles.
Auto storage or auto auction means the storage or impoundment, on a lot or tract which is paved in accordance with parking lot paving requirements set forth in this Ordinance, of operable automobiles for the purpose of holding such vehicles for sale, distribution and/or storage. This definition shall not include the storage of wrecked or inoperable vehicles.
Automobile means a self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of goods and people including but not limited to the following: passenger cars, light duty trucks and sport utility vehicles, vans and minivans, motor scooters and motorcycles.
Automobile accessory installation means minor installation of minor automobile accessories such as car alarms, radio and stereo equipment, window tinting, pin striping, cellular telephones and similar accessories.
Automobile repair garage means an establishment providing major or minor automobile repair services to all motor vehicles except heavy load vehicles.
Automobile parking (garages and commercial lots)
Automobile repair, major, means general repair or reconditioning of engines, air conditioning systems and transmissions for motor vehicles; wrecker service; collision repair services including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; customizing; painting; vehicle steam cleaning; undercoating and rustproofing; those uses listed under "Automobile repair, minor" and other similar uses.
Automobile repair, minor, means minor repair or replacement of parts, tires, tubes and batteries; diagnostic services; minor maintenance services such as grease, oil, spark plug and filter changing; tune-ups; emergency road service; replacement of starters, alternators, hoses and brake parts; automobile washing and polishing; performing state inspections and making minor repairs necessary to pass said inspection; normal servicing of air conditioning systems; and other similar minor services for motor vehicles except heavy load vehicles, but not including any operation named under "Automobile repair, major" or any other similar use. Vehicles which are inoperative or are being repaired may not remain parked outside these facilities overnight
Bakery or confectionery (non-industrial) means a facility less than 1,500 square feet for the production and/or sale of baked goods.
Bakery or confectionery (industrial) means a manufacturing facility over 1,500 square feet for the production and distribution of baked goods and confectioneries intended for off-premises distribution.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 117
Barn means a structure intended for the purpose of storing farming and ranching related equipment and supplies and/or housing livestock.
Basement (or cellar) means a portion of a building that is at least one half (1/2) of its height underground. A basement shall not be counted as a story in computing building height.
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the City Manager or his/her designee shall determine the outline of the block.
Boardinghouse or roominghouse means a dwelling other than a hotel, where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, lodging and/or meals are provided.
Bus station or terminal means any premises for the transient housing and/or parking of motor-driven buses and the loading and unloading of passengers.
Caretakers' or guards' residence means a residence located on a premises with a main residential or nonresidential use and occupied only by a caretaker or guard employed on the premises.
Carnival, circus or tent service (temporary) means outdoor or indoor commercial amusement provided on a temporary basis.
Carport means a structure that is open on a minimum of two (2) sides and designed or used to shelter vehicles. Also called "covered parking area."
Car Wash, Automated: A facility where a customer can have a motorcycle, automobile and light load vehicle washed in exchange for financial consideration.
Car Wash, Self-Serve: A facility, typically coin operated, used by the customer to wash motorcycles, automobiles and light load vehicles.
Cemetery or mausoleum means land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbarium's crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.
Cemetery, animal, means the same as cemetery except only for the burial of dead animals.
Certificate of occupancy means an official certificate issued by the city through the Building Official or his/her designee which indicates conformance with the zoning regulations and building codes and which authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued.
Child care center (or day care center) means the care, supervision, training, or education of an unrelated child or children (13 years old or younger) for less than 24 hours per day in a place other than the child’s own home.
City Manager or his/her designee means the inspector or administrative official charged with responsibility for issuing permits and enforcing this Ordinance and building codes of the City.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 118
City means the City of Everman, Texas.
City council means the governing body of the City.
Civic center means a building or complex of buildings that house municipal offices and services, and which may include cultural, recreational, athletic, food service, convention and/or entertainment facilities owned and/or operated by a government agency.
Cleaning plant (commercial/wholesale) means an industrial facility where fabrics are cleaned with substantially non-aqueous organic solvents on a commercial or wholesale basis.
Cleaning shop or laundry (small shop, pickup and self-service) means a custom cleaning shop not exceeding 2,500 square feet of floor area and may include customer self-service laundry and cleaning.
College or university means an institution established for educational purposes, accredited or recognized by the state, offering courses for study beyond the secondary education level and covering a program or series of programs of academic study.
Community home means community-based residential home as defined and regulated by Chapter 123, Human Resources Code, of the Texas state statutes.
Comprehensive plan means the plan adopted by the City that consists of graphic and textual policies which govern the future development of the City and which consists of various components governing specific geographic areas and functions and services of the City.
Concrete or asphalt batching plant (permanent) means a permanent manufacturing facility for the production of concrete or asphalt.
Concrete batching plant (temporary) means a temporary manufacturing facility for the production of concrete or asphalt during construction of a project, and to be removed when the project is completed.
Contractor's shop with outside storage yard means a building, part of a building, or land area for the construction or storage of materials, equipment, tools, products, and vehicles.
Convenience Store with or without gasoline sales means a retail establishment that sells food and other consumable and non-consumable products for off-premise use or consumption. This definition shall also include the dispensing or sale of motor vehicle fuels, lubricants, and accessories, but shall not include automotive repair or the sale of replacement parts.
Copy shop or printing shop means an establishment which reproduces, in printed form, individual orders from a business, profession, service, industry or government organization and occupies less than 4,000 square feet.
Country club (private) means a land area and buildings which may include a golf course, clubhouse, dining room, swimming pool, tennis courts and similar recreational or service uses available only to members and their guests.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 119
Court means an open, unobstructed space, bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court has one side open to a street, alley, yard, or other permanent open space.
Density means the total number of residential buildings allowed upon a given tract of land usually expressed in total number of units per gross acres or net acre.
Detached means having no physical connection above the top of the floor line of the first floor with any other building or structure.
Distribution center means a building or facility used for the storage and distribution of wholesale items/products.
Drapery or furniture upholstering shop means an establishment for the production, display and sale of draperies and soft coverings for furniture.
Electrical substation means a subsidiary station in which electric current is transformed.
Fairgrounds or exhibition area means an area or space either outside or within a building for the display of promoting agricultural, horticultural, mechanical, and domestic arts, fine arts, and allied sciences including but not limited to temporary and seasonal educational, exhibition and entertainment events.
Family means one or more individuals occupying a dwelling unit and living together as a single household unit with common access to, and common use of, all facilities comprising the dwelling unit.
Family home (residential child care) means a child-care facility that provides care for not more than six children for 24 hours a day, as defined and regulated by Chapter 42, Human Resources Code, of the Texas state statutes.
Farm, ranch, garden, crops or orchard means an area used for growing usual farm products, vegetables, fruits, trees, and grain and for the raising thereon of the usual farm animals such as horses, cattle, and sheep and including the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating, and storing products raised on the premises, but not including the commercial feeding of offal or garbage to swine or other animals and not including any type of agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by ordinance or law.
Feed and grain store means an establishment for the selling of corn, grain and other foodstuffs for animals and livestock, and including implements and goods related to agricultural processes, but not including farm machinery.
Financial Institution means an establishment for the custody, loan exchange, and/or issue of money, the extension of credit, and/or facilitating the transmission of funds.
Fire, police or municipal building means any public service building of the municipal government including a library or city hall, but excluding storage yards, utility shops and equipment centers.
Floodplain means an area of land subject to inundation by a 100-year frequency flood as determined using standard engineering practices and generally as shown on the FIRM, Flood Insurance Rate Map of the city.
Floor area means the total gross square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor level, but excluding carports, residential garages, and breezeways.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 120
Floor area ratio (FAR) means the floor area of a main building or buildings on a lot, divided by the lot area.
Florist shop means an establishment for the display and retail sale of flowers, small plants and accessories.
Food processing means a manufacturing or light industrial use that primarily deals with the processing and packaging of food products that are intended for human consumption, but which are not typically sold in volume to end users on the premises. Incidental retail sales of food products created and packaged on the premises may be allowed as an accessory use.
Fraternal organization, lodge, civic club, or union means an organized group having a restricted membership and specific purpose related to the welfare of the members such as Elks, Masons, Knights of Columbus, or a labor union.
Front yard. See "Yard, front."
Funeral home or mortuary means a place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial or cremation, or a building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation.
Furniture, home furnishings or appliance store means a retail store selling goods for furnishing the home including, but not limited to furniture, floor coverings, draperies, glass and chinaware, domestic stoves, refrigerators, and other household electrical and gas appliances.
Garage, private, means an accessory building, or a part of a main building, that is enclosed on at least three sides, used for storage of automobiles and used solely by the occupants and their guests. Also called "enclosed parking space."
Garage, Storage (Parking) A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, used exclusively for parking or storage of self-propelled vehicles, but with no other services provided except facilities for washing.
Garden shop means a facility which is engaged in the selling of flowers, ornamental plants, shrubs, trees, seeds, garden and lawn supplies, and other materials used in planting and landscaping, but not including cultivation and propagation activities outside a building.
General manufacturing. See "Industrial, manufacturing."
Golf course means an area improved with trees, greens, fairways, hazards, and which may include clubhouses.
Gymnastic or dance studio means a building or portion of a building used as a place of work for a gymnast or dancer or for instructional classes in gymnastics or dance.
Hauling or storage company. See "Motor freight company."
Heavy load vehicle means a self-propelled vehicle having a manufacturer's recommended gross vehicle weight (GVW) of greater than 16,000 pounds (including trailers), such as large recreational vehicles, tractor-trailers, buses,
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 121
vans, and other similar vehicles. The term "truck" shall be construed to mean "heavy load vehicle" unless specifically stated otherwise.
Heavy machinery sales and storage means a building or open area used for the display, sale, rental or storage of heavy machinery, tractors or similar machines, or a group of machines which function together as a unit.
Height of buildings - The vertical distance of a building measured from the average established grade at the street line or from the average natural front yard ground level, whichever is higher, to:
A. the highest point of the roof's surface if a flat surface,
B. to the deck line of mansard roofs, or,
C. to the average height of the highest roof surface.
Home occupation means an occupation commonly carried on within a home by a member of the occupant’s family occupying the dwelling. The use of the home as an occupation shall be incidental and subordinate to the use of the home as a dwelling.
Hospital means an institution providing health services primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities. Hospitals can be limited purpose establishments, such as:
A. Acute care means an institution where sick or injured patients are given medical and/or surgical treatment intended to restore them to health and an active life, and which is licensed by the state.
B. Chronic care means an institution where those persons suffering from illness, injury, deformity and/or deficiencies are given care and treatment on a prolonged or permanent basis and which is licensed by the state.
Hotel means a facility offering temporary lodging accommodations or guestrooms on a daily rate to the general public and providing additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, housekeeping service and recreational facilities. A "guestroom" shall be defined as a room designed for the overnight lodging of hotel guests for an established rate or fee. Guestrooms shall be accessed internally from the structure.
Household appliance service and repair means the maintenance and rehabilitation of appliances that are customarily used in the home including, but not limited to, washing and drying machines, refrigerators, dishwashers, trash compactors, ovens and ranges, countertop kitchen appliances, vacuum cleaners, etc., but not including appliances/equipment which have internal combustion engines.
Independent Senior Living Facility A facility containing dwelling units, accessory uses, and support services specifically designed for occupancy by persons 60 years of age or older. Such facilities may include accommodations for people who are fully ambulatory or who require no medical or personal assistance or supervision, as well as accommodations for people who require only limited or intermittent medical or personal assistance.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 122
Industrial, manufacturing and assembly means establishments engaged in the manufacturing or transformation of materials into new products. These establishments are usually described as plants and factories, and characteristically use power driven machines and materials handling equipment. Manufacturing production is usually carried on for the wholesale market, rather than for direct sale to the domestic consumer.
Institution for alcoholic, narcotic or psychiatric patients means an institution offering out-patient treatment to alcoholic, narcotic or psychiatric patients.
Kennels (indoor pens) means an establishment with indoor pens in which more than four dogs or domesticated animals more than one year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained and/or sold for commercial purposes.
Kennels (outdoor pens) means an establishment with outdoor pens in which more than four dogs or domesticated animals more than one year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained and/or sold for commercial purposes.
Kindergarten or nursery school (private) means an establishment where more than three children are housed for care and/or training during the day or portion thereof.
Laboratory equipment manufacturing means a facility that makes or produces equipment or products used for research or testing.
Laboratory, scientific or research, means an establishment that engages in research, testing or evaluation of materials or products, but not medically-related (see "Medical facilities" and "Medical laboratory").
Landscaping means material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees or palms, and nonliving durable materials that are commonly used in landscaping such as, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, walls or fences, but excluding paving.
Laundromat or self-serve washateria means a facility where patrons wash, dry and/or dry clean clothing and other fabrics in machines that are operated by the patron.
Light load vehicle means a self-propelled vehicle having a manufacturer's recommended gross vehicle weight (GVW) not greater than 16,000 pounds and having no more than two axles, such as pickup trucks, sport utility vehicles, vans and minivans, recreational vehicles (less than thirty-two (32’) feet in length), campers and other similar vehicles but not including automobiles and motorcycles.
Loading space means an off-street space or berth used for the delivery and loading/unloading of vehicles.
Local utility line means the facilities provided by a municipality or a franchised utility company for distribution or collection of gas, water, surface drainage water, sewage, electric power or telephone service, including pad-mounted and pole-mounted transformers.
Lot means a platted (as specified in Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended) parcel of land that is occupied or intended to be occupied by one main building or a group of main buildings and any accessory building, which includes such parking, landscaping and open space as are required by this Ordinance or other laws and/or ordinances, and also which has its principal frontage upon a public street.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 123
Lot area means the total area, measured on a horizontal plane, included within lot lines.
Lot, corner, means a lot which has at least two adjacent sides abutting for their full lengths upon a street, provided
that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees.
Lot coverage means the percentage of a lot covered by primary and accessory buildings.
Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines which create an area that meets
the zoning district's minimum width and depth requirements.
Lot, double frontage, means a lot having frontage upon two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner
lot.
Lot frontage means that dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting onto a street, excluding the side dimension
of a corner lot.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 124
Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. Lot, key, means a corner lot whose exterior side is adjacent to the front yard of another lot.
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk.
Lot width means the horizontal distance measured between side lot lines parallel to the front lot line, and measured from the point on the building line which is closest to the front lot line.
Main building means the building or buildings on a lot which are occupied by the primary use.
Manufactured housing means any one of two types of prefabricated housing products which are typically manufactured/assembled at a location other than the end user's permanent site, and which are regulated by the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act, Chapter 1201 of the Texas Occupations Code, as amended. For the purpose of this Ordinance, there are two types of manufactured homes:
A. Mobile home means a moveable dwelling designed to be transported on its own chassis on the highway (either intact or in major sections) by a prime mover, which is constructed with a base section so as to be independently self-supporting, and which does not require a permanent foundation for year-round living. A mobile home is also defined as any manufactured home that was constructed prior to June 15, 1976.
B. HUD-Code manufactured home means a moveable dwelling designed to be transported on the highway (either intact or in major sections) by a prime mover, which can be used as a residential dwelling either with or without a permanent foundation. A HUD-Code manufactured home is also defined as a moveable manufactured home that was constructed after June 15, 1976.
Masonry construction means that form of construction composed of brick, stone, decorative concrete block or tile, or other similar building units or materials (or combination of these materials) laid up unit by unit and set in mortar, and shall exclude wall area devoted to doors and windows.
Medical facilities means:
A. Medical clinic or office means a facility or group of offices for one or more physicians for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted human outpatients provided that patients are not kept overnight except under emergency conditions.
B. Dental office or doctor's office means the same as "medical clinic."
C. Public health center means a facility primarily utilized by a health unit for providing public health services including related facilities such as laboratories, clinics and administrative offices operated in connection herewith.
D. Surgical outpatient facility means an establishment offering any type of surgical procedures and related care which, in the opinion of the attending physician, can be performed safely without requiring inpatient overnight hospital care and exclusive of such surgical and related care as licensed physicians ordinarily may elect to perform in their private offices.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 125
E. Medical laboratory means an indoor establishment that includes laboratories and/or experimental equipment for medical testing, prototype design and development, and product testing.
Model home means a dwelling in a developing subdivision, located on a legal lot of record that is limited to temporary use as a sales office for the subdivision and to provide an example of the dwellings which have been built or which are proposed to be built within the same subdivision.
Motel A building or group of buildings designed for and occupied as, a temporary dwelling place and that is not classified as a hotel. Guest room access for a motel is from the exterior of the building and not an internal hallway.
Motor freight company means a company using trucks or other heavy load vehicles to transport goods, equipment and similar products. The term "motor freight company" includes companies that move residential or commercial belongings.
Motorcycle sales and repair means the display, sale and/or servicing, including repair work, of motorcycles.
Multiple-family dwelling means three or more dwelling units on a single lot designed to be occupied by three or more families living independently of one another, exclusive of hotels or motels. Includes three-family units (triplex) and four-family units (quadraplex), as well as traditional apartments.
Municipal facility or use means any area, land, building, structure and/or facility which is owned, used, leased or operated by the city.
Nonconforming use means a building, structure, or use of land lawfully occupied as of the effective date of this Ordinance, which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated.
Nursery means an establishment, including a building, part of a building or open space, for the growth, display and/or sale of plants, shrubs, trees and other materials used in indoor or outdoor planting.
Nursing home, means a facility or area furnishing food and shelter in single or multiple facilities to five or more persons who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or proprietor of the establishment. In addition, the facility provides minor treatment under the direction and supervision of a physician, or provides a service which meets some need beyond the basic provision of food, shelter, and laundry.
Occupancy means the use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants.
Off-street parking incidental to main use means off-street parking spaces provided in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance, located on the lot or tract occupied by the main use.
Office center means a building or complex of buildings used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, government or similar entity that may include ancillary services for office workers such as a coffee shop, newspaper stand, sundries shop, hair/nail salon, etc.
Office showroom means an establishment with no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of its total floor area devoted to storage and warehousing, but not accessible to the general public. The remaining area may include retail
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 126
and wholesale sales areas, sales offices, and display areas for products sold and distributed from the storage and warehousing areas.
Office warehouse means an establishment with more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor area devoted to storage and warehousing, but not generally accessible to the public.
Offices, professional and general business, means a room or group of rooms used for the provision of executive, management and/or administrative services. Typical uses include administrative offices and services including real estate, insurance, property management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone answering, and business offices of public utilities, organizations and associations; but excluding medical offices. A room or group of rooms used for the provision of executive, management and/or administrative services. Typical uses include administrative offices and services including real estate, insurance, property management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone answering, and business offices of public utilities, organizations and associations; but excluding medical offices.
Officially approved place of access means access to a property, other than from a dedicated street, which is approved by the city.
Oil and gas extraction means any uses that create an oil or gas well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of natural gas or other hydrocarbons.
Outside display means outside temporary display of finished goods that are specifically intended for retail sale but not displayed outside overnight.
Outside storage means the keeping, displaying or storing, outside a building, of any goods, materials, merchandise or equipment on a lot or tract for more than twenty-four (24) hours. Also referred to as open storage.
Paint shop means a commercial establishment where painting services are performed, but not automotive-related painting services. (For automotive-related painting services see "Automobile repair, major.")
Park or playground (private). See "Private recreation facility."
Park or playground (public). See "Public recreation."
Parking lot means an off-street, ground level area, paved in accordance with city parking lot standards, for the short-term or long-term storage of motor vehicles.
Parking lot or structure, commercial (auto) means an area or structure devoted to the parking or storage of automobiles that may or may not charge a fee.
Parking space means an off-street area, paved in accordance with city parking lot standards, that is used for parking a vehicle, and that is accessed from a paved driveway which connects the parking space with a public street.
Pawnshop means an establishment where money is loaned on the security of personal property pledged in the keeping of the owners (pawnbroker). Retail sales of primarily pre-owned items are also allowed, provided that the sale of such items complies with local, state and federal regulations.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 127
Personal service shop or custom personal services means establishments less than 2,000 square feet in gross floor area, primarily engaged in providing services generally involving the care of the person or his apparel and including, but not limited to, barber/beauty shops, dressmaking, shoe shining and repair, dry cleaning and laundry pickup stations, tailor or seamstress services, and other similar types of uses. No outside storage permitted.
Pet and animal grooming shop means a retail establishment offering small animals, fish and/or birds for sale as pets, where such creatures are housed within the building, and which may include the grooming of dogs, cats and similar animals.
Petroleum distribution/storage/wholesale facility means a facility for the long-term storage and distribution of petroleum that may also involve wholesale sales, but not retail sales, of petroleum and petroleum-based products. No manufacturing or refining of petroleum or petroleum-based products occurs on the premises, only storage and/or distribution functions.
Planned development district means planned associations of uses developed as integral land use units, such as industrial parks or industrial districts, offices, commercial or service centers, shopping centers, residential developments of multiple or mixed housing, including attached single-family dwellings or any appropriate combination of uses which may be planned, developed or operated as integral land use units either by a single owner or by a combination of owners.
Planning and zoning commission means a committee appointed by the city council as an advisory body, and which is authorized to recommend changes in the zoning of property and other planning functions as delegated by the city council. The planning and zoning commission is also referred to as the "commission."
Plat means a plan showing the subdivision of land, creating building lots, showing all essential dimensions and other information in compliance with the subdivision standards of the city, and which is approved by the city and recorded in the plat records of the county.
Platted lot. See “lot” and “lot of record."
Portable building sales means an establishment which displays and sells structures capable of being carried and transported to another location, but not including manufactured housing, as defined by this Ordinance.
Porta-cochere - A roofed structure covering a driveway at the entrance of a building to provide shelter while entering or leaving a vehicle.
Premises means land together with any buildings or structures situated thereon.
Primary use means the principal or predominant use of any lot or building.
Principal building. See "Main building."
Private club means an establishment providing social and/or dining facilities which may provide alcoholic beverage service, to an association of persons, and otherwise falling within the definition of, and permitted under the provisions of, that portion of Chapter 32 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, as the same may be hereafter amended, and as it pertains to the operation of private clubs.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 128
Private recreation facility or private park means a recreation facility, park or playground which is not owned by a public agency such as the city or school district, and which is operated for the exclusive use of private residents or neighborhood groups and their guests and not for use by the general public.
Produce stand means a seasonal temporary use for which the primary purpose and design is to sell fruit, nuts, vegetables and similar foods. No cooking or on-premises consumption of produce occurs on the site.
Professional service means work performed which is commonly identified as a profession, and which may be licensed by the state.
Public agency building, shop, yard or facility means any building, land, area and/or facility (including maintenance/storage yards and shops) which is owned, leased, primarily used and/or occupied by any governmental entity or agency of the following: the state, the United States, or other public utility or agency. Any facility which is owned, leased, used and/or occupied by the city is defined as "municipal facility or use."
Public recreation means publicly owned and operated parks, recreation areas, playgrounds, swimming pools and open spaces that are available for use by the general public without membership or affiliation. This land use shall include special event type uses such as rodeos, concerts, festivals and other special events requiring special event permits, as set forth in this Ordinance.
Public view means areas that can be seen from any public street.
Rear yard. See "Yard, rear."
Recreation center means a place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities, and other customary and usual recreational activities.
Recreational vehicle/camper sales and leasing means an establishment that sells, leases and/or rents new and/or used recreational vehicles, travel trailers, campers, boats/watercraft, and similar types of vehicles.
Recreational vehicle (RV) means a self-propelled, mobile living unit which is typically used for temporary human occupancy away from the users' permanent place of residence. A recreational vehicle may also be utilized as a permanent place of residence within districts that allow them to be used as such. (See also "Heavy load vehicle.")
Recreational vehicle (RV) park means an area or commercial campground for users of recreational vehicles, travel trailers, and similar vehicles to reside, park, rent or lease on a temporary basis. (See also "Manufactured home park.")
Recycling kiosk means a small uninhabited structure, not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet, or temporary container which provides a self-service location for the depositing of recyclable materials such as aluminum cans, glass bottles, magazines/newspapers, metal or plastic containers, etc. Recyclables are picked up periodically from the site. This definition does not include large trailers or manned collection centers.
Rehabilitation care facility (halfway house) means a dwelling unit which provides residence and care to not more than nine persons regardless of legal relationship who have demonstrated a tendency towards alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct living together with not more than two supervisory personnel as a single housekeeping unit.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 129
Rehabilitation care institution means a facility which provides residence and care to ten or more persons, regardless of legal relationship, who have demonstrated a tendency toward alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct together with supervisory personnel.
Religious Institution means a building for regular assembly for religious worship which is used primarily and designed for such purpose and those accessory activities which are customarily associated therewith, and the place of residence for ministers, priests, nuns or rabbis on the premises. For the purposes of this Ordinance, religious study and other similar activities which occur in a person's primary residence shall not apply to this definition.
Residence means the same as a dwelling; also, when used with district, an area of residential regulations.
Residential district means a district where the primary purpose is residential use.
Restaurant , café, or cafeteria (with drive-through service) means an eating establishment where customers are primarily served at tables or are self-served, where food is consumed on the premises, and which may include a drive-through window.
Restaurant or cafeteria (with no drive-through service) means an eating establishment where customers are primarily served at tables or are self-served, where food is consumed on the premises, and which does not have a drive-through window.
Restaurant or eating place (drive-in service) means an eating establishment where food and/or drinks are primarily served to customers in motor vehicles, or where facilities are provided on the premises which encourage the serving and consumption of food in automobiles on or near the restaurant premises.
Retail or service, incidental, means the rendering of retailing or services incidental to the primary use. Such retail or service use shall be operated for the benefit of convenience of the employees, visitors or customers of the primary use. Incidental uses shall mean uses which occupy less than fifteen percent (15%) of the main use.
Retail store or shop means an establishment engaged in the selling of goods and merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. (Also see "General retail stores.")
Room means a building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied or intended to be occupied as living or sleeping quarters but not including toilet or cooking facilities.
Roominghouse. See "Boardinghouse."
Salvage or reclamation of products means the reclamation and storage of used products or materials. (See also "Wrecking yard.")
Sand, gravel or stone or mineral extraction and/or storage means the process of extracting and/or storing sand, gravel, stone, topsoil, compost or other products from the earth.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 130
School, business, means a for-profit business that offers instruction and training in a profession, service or art such as a secretarial or court reporting school, barber/beauty college or commercial art school, but not including commercial trade schools.
School, commercial trade, means a for-profit business that offers vocational instruction and training in trades such as welding, brick laying, machinery operation/repair, and similar trades.
School, private (primary or secondary), means a school under the sponsorship of a private agency or corporation, other than a public or religious agency, which offers a curriculum that is generally equivalent to public elementary and/or secondary schools.
School, public or parochial, means a school under the sponsorship of a public or religious agency which provides elementary and/or secondary curricula, but not including private business or commercial trade schools.
Screened means shielded, concealed, and effectively hidden from the view of a person standing at ground level on an abutting site, or outside the area or feature so screened, by a fence, wall, hedge, berm or similar architectural or landscape feature.
Seasonal uses means the sales of items such as Christmas trees, pumpkins, snow cones, fresh produce, and other items which are typically only available at certain times of the year.
Self-Storage Facility means small individual storage units for rent or lease, restricted solely to the storage of items. The conduct of sales, business or any other activity within the individual storage units, other than storage, shall be prohibited.
Shopping center means a group of primarily retail and service commercial establishments that is planned, constructed and managed as a total entity, and which provides customer and employee parking on-site, unloading/delivery areas which are separated from customer access, and aesthetically appropriate design and protection from the elements.
Side yard. See "Yard, side."
Single-family dwelling, attached, means a dwelling that is part of a structure containing more than two dwellings, which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a shared wall, which is designed for occupancy by one family, and which is located on a separate lot delineated by front, side and rear lot lines.
Single-family dwelling, detached, means a dwelling designed and constructed as a freestanding structure for occupancy by one family, and located on a lot or separate building tract having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract.
Small engine repair shop means a shop for the repair of lawnmowers, chainsaws, lawn equipment, and other machines with one-cylinder engines.
Stable, commercial, means a stable used for the rental of stall space or for the sale or rental of horses or mules.
Stable, private, means an area used solely for the owner's private purposes for the keeping of horses, mules or ponies which are not kept for hire or sale.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 131
Storage or wholesale warehouse means a building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
Story means that portion of a building (above grade) that is included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling above it. For the purposes of computing building height pursuant to this Ordinance, the average height for a story shall be defined as twelve feet (12'). The definition of a story does not include parapets, gables and other normal roof structures. In cases where the site has a significant slope, the number of stories of a building shall be measured from a point representing the average slope from front to back, or side to side, of the building.
Story, half, means a space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is finished off for use. A half-story containing an independent apartment or self-contained living quarters shall be counted as a full story.
Street means any dedicated public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
Street intersection means any street which joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other.
Street yard means the area between the building front line and the front property line.
Structural alterations means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as load-bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
Structure: Anything constructed or built, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground.
Studio, health/reducing/fitness, means, but is not limited to, an establishment which provides facilities and equipment which are intended to promote health, fitness, weight reduction and/or similar health-related activities. Such facilities may include such accessory uses as food service, sales of sundries and apparel, and child care services, provided that such accessory uses are clearly incidental to the primary use and are for the use of studio patrons only. No outside signage may be used to advertise accessory uses.
Studio, tattoo or body piercing, means a building or portion of a building used for selling and/or applying tattoos, permanent cosmetics, and/or for piercing the skin with needles, jewelry or other paraphernalia, primarily for the purpose of ornamentation of the human body.
Swimming pool, commercial, means a swimming pool with accessory facilities which is not part of the municipal or public recreational system and which is not a private swim club, but where the facilities are available for use by the general public for a fee.
Swimming pool, private, means a swimming pool constructed for the exclusive use of the residents of a one-family, two-family or multiple-family dwelling and located and fenced. A private swimming pool shall not be operated as a business nor maintained in a manner to be hazardous or obnoxious to adjacent property owners.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 132
Telephone, internet, wireless, server farm and exchange, switching/relay or transmitting station means a line for the transmission of telephone signals and a central office in which telephone lines, internet connections / servers are connected to permit communication including a business office, storage (inside or outside) or repair yards.
Temporary means used or lasting for only a limited period of time; not permanent.
Temporary building means any nonresidential prefabricated structure which is not originally manufactured or constructed at its use site, and does not require on-site installation of utilities and/or foundation.
Temporary field office or construction yard or office means a structure or shelter used in connection with a development or building project for housing on the site of temporary administrative and supervisory functions and for sheltering employees and equipment. Temporary permits for one year for a specific time and location as determined may be issued by the City Manager or his/her designee and shall be subject to review and renewal for reasonable cause.
Tennis court, private, means a surface designed and constructed for playing the game of tennis along with all fencing, nets and related appurtenances but excluding lighting for nighttime play in residential areas except as may be otherwise provided or restricted by the specific use permit.
Tool and machinery rental shop means a building or a portion of a building used for the display and rental of tools, machinery and instruments.
Tractor sales. See "Heavy machinery sales and storage."
Trailer, hauling, means a vehicle or device which is pulled behind an automobile or truck and which is designed for hauling animals, produce, goods or commodities, including boats.
Trailer rental means the display and offering for rent of trailers designed to be towed by automobiles and light load vehicles.
Transportation and utility structures/facilities means permanent facilities and structures operated by companies engaged in providing transportation and utility services including but not limited to railroad track rights-of-way, sewage pumping stations, telephone exchanges, transit station turnarounds, water reservoirs and water pumping stations.
Truck means a light or heavy load vehicle (see definitions for "Light load vehicle" and "Heavy load vehicle").
Truck and bus leasing means the rental of new or used panel trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles or motor-driven buses in operable condition and where no repair work or intensive cleaning operations are performed.
Truck and bus repair means an establishment providing major and minor automotive repair services to heavy load vehicles.
Truck sales (heavy trucks) means the display, sale or rental of new or used heavy load vehicles in operable condition.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 133
Two-family dwelling (duplex) means two attached dwellings in one structure, each designed to be occupied by
one family.
Usable open space means an open area which is designed and intended to be used for outdoor living and/or
recreation purposes, and may include landscaping, walks, recreational facilities, water features and decorative
objects such as artwork or fountains.
Use means the purpose for which land or buildings are or may be occupied in a zoning district.
Variance means an adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of this Ordinance to a particular parcel
of property which, because of special conditions or circumstances of hardship peculiar to the particular parcel, is
necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the same
vicinity and zoning district. Only the board of adjustment of the city can grant a variance.
Veterinarian clinic means an establishment where animals and pets are admitted for examination and medical
treatment (also see "Kennels").
Yard means an open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed
by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except where otherwise specifically provided in this Ordnance
that the building or structure may be located in a portion of a yard required for a main building. In measuring a yard
for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the
shortest horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space located in front of the front elevation of a building and extending
across a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line
and the outside wall of the main building.
Yard, rear, means an open, unoccupied area extending across the rear of a lot measured between the lot lines and
being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the outside wall of the main building.
City of Everman - Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance - 134
On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied area between the building and side line of the lot and extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the outside wall of the side of the main building.
Zoning board of adjustment means a board which is appointed by the city council, and which is authorized to grant special exceptions or variances to this Ordinance, and to hear and decide any appeals that allege error in an order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this Ordinance. Also referred to as the "BOA."
Zoning district means a classification applied to any certain land area within the city stipulating the limitations and requirements of land usage and development.
Zoning district map means the official map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are drawn and which is an integral part of this Ordinance. (See Section 2.3 regarding the zoning district map and Section 2.4 regarding zoning district boundaries).

EXHIBIT A
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS OF THE
CITY OF EVERMAN
w··EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdiv1s1on.wpd (01128/03)
CHAPTER 1
POLICIES, PURPOSES AND ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY
Section 1.1 Title
These regulations shall hereinafter be known, cited and referred to as the Subdivision
Regulations of the City of Everman, Texas.
Section 1.2 Authority
These Subdivision Regulations are adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws
of the State of Texas, as promulgated by Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government
Code, as amended.
Section 1.3 Purpose
These Subdivision Regulations are adopted to promote and encourage the development
of high quality subdivisions by establishing standards for the provision of adequate light,
air, open space, storm water drainage, transportation, public utilities, and suitable building
lots. Through the application of these regulations, the interests of the public, as well as
those of public and private parties, both present and future, having interests in property
affected by these regulations, are protected by establishing fair and rational procedures for
developing land.
These regulations are designed and intended to achieve the following purposes and shall
be administered so as to:
A. Promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City; and
B. Promote the orderly, safe and healthful development of the City; and
C. Provide orderly policies and procedures to guide development of the City;
and
0. Provide for the establishment of an equitable and expeditious review of plat;
and
E. Realistically and harmoniously relate new development of proximate tracts:
and
F. Provide for establishment of minimum specifications for construction and
engineering design criteria for public infrastructure in order to maintain land
values, reduce inconveniences to residents of the area, and to reduce
unnecessary costs to the City for correction of inadequate facilities that are
designed to serve the public; and
G. Provide the adequate light, air, and privacy; to secure safety from fire. flood.
and other danger; to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion
W:'EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01/28/03i
of population; and to provide minimum width and depth of building lots and
building lines; and
H. Protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City; and
I. Provide the most beneficial circulation of traffic throughout the City, having
particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways,
and pedestrian traffic movements; and to provide for the proper location and
width of streets; and
J. Establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions
and re-subdivisions, in order to further the orderly layout and use of land; and
to ensure proper legal descriptions and documentation of subdivided land;
and
K. Ensure that public facilities are available for every building site and with
sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision, and to provide public
facilities for future development; and
L. Provide proper utilities and services for adequate drainage, water supply, and
disposal of sanitary and industrial waste; and
M. Assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; and to encourage the wise use
and management of natural resources throughout the City in order to
preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community; and
N. Preserve the topography of the City and to insure appropriate development
with regard to natural features; and
0. Furnish adequate and convenient sites, for schools, parks and open spaces,
playgrounds, and other community services, respecting topography and
existing vegetation so that the natural beauty of the land shall be preserved;
and
P. Assure that new development adequately and fairly participates in the
dedication and construction of public improvements and infrastructure that
are necessitated by or attributable to the development or that provide value
or benefit that makes the development feasible; and
Q. Address other needs necessary for ensuring the creation artd continuance
of a healthy, attractive, safe and efficient community that provides for the
conservation, enhancement and protection of its human and natural
resources.
Section 1.4 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to consider the subdivision and
development of land, as subject to the control of the City, in order to carry out the purpose
W:'EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivis1on.wpd (01/28/03) Page 3
of the Comprehensive Plan, and to promote the orderly, planned, efficient and economical
development of the City. Furthenmore, it is the policy of the City that:
A. Land shall not be subdivided or otherwise developed until proper provision
has been made for drainage, water, sewerage, transportation and other
facilities required by the Subdivision Regulations.
B. All public and private facilities and improvements shall be of at least a
minimum capacity necessary to adequately serve the development and shall
conform to and be properly related to the Comprehensive Plan of the City
and the Design Manual.
C. These regulations shall supplement, and facilitate the enforcement of,
provisions and standards contained in the Zoning Ordinance and building
codes adopted by the City.
Section 1.5 Applicability; Intent
A. These Subdivision Regulations shall apply to all tracts of land within the
corporate limits of the City of Everman and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Wherever this ordinance refers to "City" or the "City of Everman" it shall also
be deemed to refer to and shall apply to the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction.
This ordinance is designed, intended and is to be administered in a manner
to:
1. not contravene the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Everman;
2. implement the Master Land Use Plan, the Master Water and Sewer
Plans, the Master Drainage Plan, the Master Thoroughfare Plan, and
any other elements of the City's Comprehensive Plan
B. Where other ordinances of the City are more restrictive in their requirements,
such other ordinances shall control.
C. These Subdivision Regulations govern the subdivision and platting of land
and are intended to require the creation of usable sites that meet minimum
standards designed to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the City. Separate and distinct regulations have been adopted by
the City to govern other aspects of development, such as lana use, building
construction, and other health, safety and welfare issues such as the
prohibition of nuisances. Although these other ordinances are designed to
complement these Subdivision Regulations and may incorporate similar
goals, objectives, and similar means to accomplish these goals and
objectives, they are separate and distinct from these Subdivision
Regulations. Applications made under these Subdivision Regulations for the
approval of subdivision or development sites are not intended to negate the
need to make separate applications for different projects or aspects of
development.
W:\EVERMAMOrdinanceslSubdivision.wpd (01/28103)
•
Section 1.6 Conflicts with Public and Private Provisions
A. Except where indicated, these Subdivision Regulations are not intended to
interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule, regulation,
statute, or other provision of law.
B. These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, deed
restriction, covenant or any other private agreement or deed restriction.
Section 1.7 Impact of Subdivision Regulations
It is the intent and policy of these Subdivision Regulations that any requirement imposed
hereunder as a condition of development be fair and equitable to each development and
be based upon the impact the proposed development is projected to have on public
facilities and services which are necessitated by the proposed development or anticipated
benefits derived by the development from compliance with such conditions. Any conditions
placed on development shall be designated to assure the orderly growth of the community
in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. Any developer who believes that proposed
conditions of development will work a hardship or are in excess of the impacts caused or
benefits derived by the development shall, prior to approval of any plat, identify in writing
to the Planning and Zoning Coordinator any such excessive conditions which the developer
believes are being improperly or unfairly imposed, along with any engineering or other
evidence supporting the developer's position. In addition, the developer shall apply for a
variance from such proposed conditions in accordance with the procedures set forth in
these regulations. The failure to submit a timely request for relief under these procedures
shall be deemed to be the developer's consent to the conditions imposed.
Section 1.8 Building Permits
A. Public Facilities Available - No building permit for a primary building will be
issued until all proposed public facilities have been installed and have been
approved by the City unless specifically authorized by the Developer
Agreement after a determination that adequate security has been provided
to assure construction of the public facilities.
B. Platting shall be required for all building permit requests for new buildings on
unplatted real property except as follows:
1. Residentially developed property not exceeding one afre in size may
obtain a building permit for additions to the main structure if such
addition does not exceed 25 percent of the main structure;
2. Adding an accesory building or structure on an unplatted residentially
developed lot provided a primary structure exists on the unplatted lot
or
3. Restoring any residential building or structure on an unplatted
residentially developed lot, destroyed by fire, explosion, or any other
W:\EVERMANIOrdinanceslSubdivision.wpd (01128103) P39;; 5
I
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
' ' ~
' ~
'
' ~
' i
casualty or an Act of God where the extent of the destruction is not
more than 50 percent of the current value of the structure.
Section 1.9 Official City Map
The Planning and Zoning Coordinator shall maintain an Official City Map which shall
indicate all subdivisions, lots and street rights-of-way. Subdivision plats hereafter approved
shall be placed on the Official Map in a timely order. The Official City Map shall include the
names of all streets and street suffix classifications. Where street name inconsistencies
exist from one subdivision to another, the Planning and Zoning Coordinator shall place on
the Official City Map the generally accepted street name, its proper spelling, and suffix
classification. The Planning and Zoning Coordinator shall assign street address ranges for
each block and coordinate these with the Fire Chief.
Section 1.10 Variances
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend variances from these
Subdivision Regulations to the City Council upon written request from the
developer stating the justification for such variance. A variance includes an
adjustment, offset, credit, or waiver of any dedication, construction, or
payment requirements where the requirement places an unreasonable
burden on the development or does not bear a rough proportionality to the
requirements necessary to serve the development. Any request for a
variance must be accompanied by engineering or other evidence supporting
the developer's request for relief.
8. A variance may only be recommended by the Planning and Zoning
Commission or granted by the City Council upon findings that:
1. the requirement places an unreasonable burden on the development
and does not bear a rough proportionality to the requirements
necessary to serve the development; or
2. extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties will result from strict
compliance with these Subdivision Regulations, and/or the purpose of
these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative
proposal; and
a. the conditions upon which the request for a varjance is based
are unique to the property and are not applicable to other
properties, or the tract has peculiar physical surroundings,
severe topographical conditions or unique environmental
qualities worthy of protection; and
b. the variance will not have an adverse effect on the intent of
these Subdivision Regulations or the Comprehensive Plan
C. If a finding is reached that a variance should be granted, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may impose,
conditions relating to the variance as will, in its judgment, substantially secure
W:\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01/28/03) Page6
'
' •
'
''I
'
'
'
'
'
' '
'
'
'
'
' ' I
the objectives of the standards or requirements to which the variance was
granted .
Section 1.11 Enforcement of Regulations
A. Appropriate actions may be taken to prevent a violation of these Subdivision
Regulations; to prevent unlawful construction; to restrain, correct, or abate
a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building structure or premises.
Furthermore, water meters, sewer taps or other utilities shall not be made
available until the provisions of these Subdivision Regulations have been
met.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Planning and Zoning Coordinator to
enforce the administrative provisions of these regulations.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the Building Official or Director of Public Works
to enforce the development provisions of these regulations.
0. The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land by the use of a metes and
bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer, or lease with the intent
of creating a building lot by evading these regulations, shall be considered a
violation of this Ordinance. All such described subdivisions shall be subject
to all of therequirements contained in-these Subdivision Regulations.
E. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a building or
structure, located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the
provisions of these Subdivision Regulations.
F. The Planning and Zoning Coordinator shall be responsible for any
interpretation of these Subdivision Regulations and where a determination of
these regulations is in conflict with a request by a developer, the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall rule and decide on these questions.
Section 1.12 Conformance with Applicable Rules and Regulations
These Subdivision Regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
development of a subdivision or lot within the corporate limits of the City. In addition to the
requirements established herein, all plats shall be in conformance with the following:
A. All applicable State statutory provisions contained in Chapter 212, Texas
Local Government Code.
B. The zoning ordinance, building and housing codes, and other applicable laws
of the City.
C. Any official plans adopted by the City under Chapter 213, Texas Local
Government Code, including but not limited to the Official Comprehensive
Plan, Capital Improvements Program of the City, Parks Plan, Master
Thoroughfare Plan, and any other official plan adopted by the City Council
which has an effect on the development of property in the City.
W :IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Su bdivis ion. wpd (01128103) Pago 7
1
i f
'
'
' '
'
' '
'
'
' '
' '
'
'
'
' I
D. Any regulations of the City Health Official and County Health Departments
and appropriate state agencies.
E. Any applicable regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality or any other agency related to the installation of water, sewer, or
other facilities.
F. The regulations of the Texas Department of Transportation, when the
subdivision, or any lot contained therein, abuts a state maintained highway.
G. The standards, codes and regulations adopted for administration by the
Building Official.
Section 1.13 Amendments
Amendments to these regulations may be made by the City Council upon recommendation
by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission and the
City Council shall conduct public hearings on all proposed amendments to these
regulations. Amending actions may be initiated in one of the following manners:
A. Upon a majority vote of the City Council; or
B. Upon a majority vote of the Planning and Zoning Commission; or
C. Upon written request from the Planning and Zoning Coordinator.
Section 1.14 Penalties
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates any of these
regulations shall be subject to a fine of not more than Five Hundred ($500) Dollars. Each
day that such violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate violation.
'
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01/28/03) Pages
,
'
'
'
' '
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
' '
' I
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
Section 2.1 General Construction of Language
A. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the
present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural number
include the singular; the word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "herein"
means "in these regulations"; the word "regulations" means "these
Subdivision Regulations."
B. All definitions of words contained herein shall correspond with the most
appropriate definitions appearing in the Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary,
unless specifically defined in this Ordinance.
Section 2.2 Words and Terms Defined
For purposes of these regulations, certain terms herein are defined as follows:
A. Alley - A minor public right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary
vehicular service access to the side or rear of properties whose principal
frontage is on some other street.
B. Applicant - The owner, authorized representative, or designated agent of land
being proposed for subdivision or development.
C. Block - A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets,
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of water-ways, or
boundary lines of municipalities and containing one or more building sites.
D. Bond - A form of security other than a cash deposit to be used as surety or
as a guarantee.
E. Building -Any structure which is built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind. A "building"
includes a "structure"; a "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof;
"used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to
include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied."
'
F Building Official - The senior building officer of the City charged with
responsibility for issuing building permits and enforcing the building code.
G. Building Set-back Line -A line established beyond which no part of a building
shall project, except as otherwise provided in the Zoning Ordinance.
H. City - The City of Everman, Texas.
I. City Attorney - The licensed attorney or law firm designated by the City to
furnish legal assistance for the administration of these regulations.
W:\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdiv1s1on wpd (01/28/03) Page 9
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'I
J.
K.
L.
City Council - The legislative governing body (City Council) of the City having
the power to adopt and amend these regulations.
City Engineer - A registered professional engineer on the City Staff or a
consulting firm of registered professional engineers designated to represent
the City.
Collector Street - A major road identified on the Master Thoroughfare Plan
intended to move traffic from local roads to minor arterials. A collector road
generally surrounds a neighborhood or a group of neighborhoods.
M. Comprehensive Land Use Plan - A written document containing the
development policies of the City including a map of the City showing a
graphic representation of the proposed uses of the various land areas of the
City and which has been adopted by the City Council as the official guide for
future development.
N. Construction Plans - The maps or engineering drawings accompanying a plat
and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed
in the development in accordance with the requirements of the Design
Manual.
0. Crosswalk Way -A public right of way, usually four (4) feet or more in width,
between property lines which provides pedestrian circulation.
P. Cul-De-Sac - A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate
terminal for the safe and convenient turnaround of vehicular traffic.
Q. Dead-End Street - A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet.
R. Design Manual - Refers to the Everman Public Works Design Manual which
establishes minimum criteria for the design of Public Works and Utilities,
attached hereto and incorporated herein for all purposes as Exhibit "A".
S. Developer - The owner, or agent representing the owner, of any land being
proposed for subdivision or development.
T. Development - Any activity that requires submission of a plat under this
ordinance. A development includes a subdivision.
U. Development Review Committee - A committee composed of municipal
department representatives provide technical services in the administration
of these regulations.
V. Drainage Flume - A concrete drainage way usually centered on lot lines and
designed to carry storm water runoff from adjoining lots.
W. Easement - Authorization by a property owner of a designated part of his
property for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, such as a
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdiv1sion.wpd (01/28/03) Page 10
X.
Y.
Z.
drainage easement, utility easement or a public access easement.
Engineer - A person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas
Engineering Practices Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice
the profession of Civil Engineering.
Escrow - A deposit of cash to guarantee a performance or maintenance
bond.
Final Plat - The authentic map or official plan of record of a subdivision or
other development of land prepared from actual field measurement and
staking of all identifiable points by a Registered Professional Land Surveyor
with the subdivision location properly referenced to a survey corner or
specific landmark reference.
AA. Frontage - The side or sides of a lot abutting a street right-of-way.
BB. Frontage Street - Any street to be constructed by a developer or any existing
street in which development takes place on both sides.
CC. Highway, Limited Access - A freeway, or expressway, providing a traffic way
for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting
property on lands and other persons have no authorized right to access to or
from the same, except at such points and in such manner as may be
determined by the public agency having jurisdiction over such traffic way.
DD. Land Planner- Persons other than Surveyors who possess actual experience
and practice in the field of land planning.
EE. Local Street - A road intended to provide direct access to individual
properties and to provide right-of-way for sewer, water, storm drainage
systems, and electric, telephone, gas, and cable TV utilities.
FF. Lot - A platted parcel of land having frontage on a public street or approved
public access easement and intended to be used as a building site or for
purposes of building development and which is designated as a distinct and
separate parcel identified by a lot number or symbol in a duly approved
subdivision or development plat which has been properly filed and recorded.
A lot is not a parcel of unplatted property with an acreage status.
'
GG. Minor Arterial - A road intended to collect and distribute traffic in a manner
similar to Mil)~.-.. arterials, except that these roads service minor traffic
generating areas such as community-commercial areas, primary and
secondary educational plants, hospitals, major recreational areas, churches,
and offices, and/or designed to carry traffic from collector streets to the
system of primary arterials.
HH. Nonresidential Subdivision -A subdivision in which the intended use is either
commercial or industrial.
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdiv1s1on.wpd (01/28/03) Page 11
' '
'
'
'I
II. Off-Site - Any premises not located within the area of the property to be
platted, whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for plat
approval.
JJ. Owner - Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient
proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these
regulations, or their authorized agent.
KK. Perimeter Street - Any street to which the parcel of land to be platted abuts
on only one (1) side.
LL. Person -Any individual, association, firm, corporation. governmental agency,
political subdivision, or any other entity.
MM. Planning and Zoning Commission - The body appointed by the City Council
having authority to recommend approval or disapproval of plats in
accordance with these regulations and state statutes.
NN. Planning and Zoning Coordinator - The person designated with the
responsibility of accepting plats for the City and preparing the necessary
documentation for the Planning and Zoning Commission.
00. Plat - The map, drawing, chart, or plan showing the exact layout of land into
lots, blocks, streets, parks, school sites, drainage ways, easements, and/or
any other element required by these Subdivision Regulations which a
developer is required to submit for approval in accordance with these
Subdivision Regulations. A plat includes both a subdivision plat and a
development plat.
PP. Preliminary Plat - The preliminary drawing indicating the proposed manner
or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commissibn for approval.
QQ. Primary building - The building which represents the main intended use in
that zoning district. Examples are: a home in a residential zoning district, a
store or business building in a commercial district, or, the major plant building
in an industrial zoning district. Storage buildings and separate garage
structures are examples of secondary (accessory) buildings.
'
RR. Mu'J.;;r Arterial - A road identified on the Master Thoroughfare Plan
intended to move through traffic to and from such major attractors as central
business districts, regional shopping centers, colleges and/or universities,
major industrial areas, and similar traffic generators within the city; and/or as
a route for traffic between communities or large areas.
SS. Public Improvement - Any public water and sewer utility, drainage ditch,
W:\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subd1v1sion.wpd (01128103) Page 12
'
'
'
'
' '
' 'I
roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, or other facility for which the
City may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation,
or which may affect an improvement for which local government
responsibility is established.
TI. Replat - A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat if
such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved thereon
for public use, or any lot line; or if it affects any map or plan legally recorded
prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions.
UU. Right-of-Way - A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline,
water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use. The
usage of the term "right-of-way" for land-platting purposes shall mean that
every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a plat is to be
separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and
not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-ofway
intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm
drains, or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be
dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way
is established.
W. Right-of-Way Width - The distance between property lines measured at right
angles to the center line of the street.
WW. Subdivider - Any person or any agent thereof dividing or proposing to divide
land so as to constitute a subdivision as that term is defined herein. The
term "subdivider" shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable
owner or authorized agent of such owner or equitable owner, of land sought
to be subdivided.
XX. Subdivision - A division of any tract of land into one or more parts for the
purpose of creating lots for sale, for the purpose of identification, and/or to
provide for the dedication of streets, alleys and easements. Subdivision
includes re-subdivision (replat). The term "subdivision" may also refer to a
single lot that is proposed to be developed.
YY. Utility Easement - An interest in land granted to the City, to the public
generally, and/or to a private utility corporation, for installing and maintaining
utilities across, over or under private land, together with the right to enter
thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance of said
utilities.
W:\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivis•on.wpd (01128103) Page 13
'
'
' '
'
'I
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL PLATS
Section 3.1 Plat Required
Subdivision Plats. Any person, firm, corporation or organization owning a tract of land
located within the corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Everman who
hereafter divides the tract into two or more parts to lay out a subdivision, to layout a
building lot, or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the tract intended
to be dedicated to public use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or
adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts for purposes of development
shall have a plat of the subdivision prepared and approved according to these Subdivision
Regulations. A division of a tract includes a division regardless of whether it is made by
using a metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed,
by using a contract of sale or other executory contract to convey, or by using any other
method for purpose of development. A division of land under these regulations does not
indude a division of land into parts greater than five acres, where each part has access and
no public improvement is being dedicated. No land shall be subdivided for purposes of
development until:
A. A Preliminary Plat, when applicable, in the format as described within these
regulations, has received approval from the Planning and Zoning
Commission and a Replat, Final Plat, Minor Plat, or Amending Plat, when
applicable, in the format described within these regulations, has received
approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council and
has been filed with the County Clerk; or
8. A Minor Plat or Amending Plat, when applicable, in the format described
within these regulations, has received approval of the City Manager and has
been filed with the County Clerk.
Section 3.2 Exception to Platting Requirements
Nothing herein shall require a plat to be approved and filed as a prerequisite to construction
where such construction occurs on land which is within the city limits and is zoned residential
or agricultural, or is not within the municipal city limits and therefore is not zoned,
and such construction is for any of the following purposes:
A. Adding to or altering an existing building or structure, provided the value of
such addition or alteration does not exceed fifty percent ( 50%) of the current
value of the existing structure;
8. Adding an accessory building or structure on an unplatted lot provided a
primary structure exists on the unplatted lot;
C. Restoring any building or structure destroyed by fire, explosion, or any other
casualty or act of God, where the extent of the destruction is not more than
fifty percent (50%) of the current value of the structure.
W:1EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subd1vision.wpd (01128103) Page 14
Section 3.3 Classification of Plat Submittals
Whenever a subdivision or development of land is proposed, the Planning and Zoning
Coordinator will advise the applicant whether the review procedures of a Preliminary Plat,
Final Plat, Minor Plat, Amending Plat, Replat or Development Plat will apply and supply the
applicant with the appropriate application forms.
Section 3.4 General Platting Procedures
The procedures for obtaining approval of a subdivision plat for unplatted property include
the following steps to be completed in the sequence listed below:
A.
B.
C.
0.
E.
F.
Preliminary Plat - The submission of a Preliminary Plat Application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, with subsequent approval thereof, is a
prerequisite to the submission of a Final Plat. The minimum requirements for
a Preliminary Plat submittal are contained in Chapter 5, "Requirements for
Submittal of a Preliminary Plat".
Zoning Change - Submission of an Application for a Zoning District Change
to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council, with
subsequent approval thereof, is required where the current zoning
classification is not compatible with the type of development being proposed.
This procedure may be concurrent with the submittal of the Plat.
Final Plat or Repeat - Submission of a Final Plat or Rep/at Application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council, with subsequent
approval thereof, is required prior to the filing of a Final Plat or Replat with
the Tarrant County Clerk's Office. The minimum requirements for a Final Plat
submittal are contained in Chapter 6. Replat requirements are contained in
Chapter 7 hereof.
Minor Plats and Amending Plats may be approved by the City Manager or
may be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City
Council for approval prior to filing with the Tarrant County Clerk's Office.
Minimum requirements for submittal of Minor Plats and Amending Plats are
contained in Chapters 8 and 9 hereof.
Development Plat- The Planning and Zoning Coordinator shall determine the
type of Development Plat required to be submitted for -approval, i.e ..
Preliminary/Final Development Plat, Minor Development Plat, Amending
Development Plat, or Development Replat, and shall process the
Development Plat in accordance with the applicable requirements and
procedures for those plats to the extent they don't conflict with the specific
requirements for Development Plats. Specific Development Plat
requirements are contained in Chapter 10 hereof.
Construction of Public Improvements - Upon approval of the Final Plat by the
City Council and authorization from the Director of Public Works, the
developer may proceed with the construction of ail public improvements. The
requirements for public improvements are contained in Chapter 4.
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subd1vis1on.wpd (01128103) Page 15
'
'
'
'I
"Requirements for Public and Semi-public Improvements".
Section 3.5 Approval of Plat Required
No improvements shall be initiated and no permit for the erection of a structure shall be
granted until the owner has applied for and obtained approval of a plat from the Planning
and Zoning Commission and City Council (or City Manager, when appropriate).
Section 3.6 Application Form and Content
The owner shall submit a written application for plat approval to the City on the forms
furnished by the Planning and Zoning Coordinator. Written consent shall be required from
the legal owner of the premises if the applicant is not the owner of record. The Jack of
information under any item specified herein, or incorrect information supplied by the
applicant, shall be cause for disapproval of the plat.
Section 3. 7 Official Submittal Dates; Approval Within 30 Days
A. No plat shall be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission, City
Council or City Manager, as applicable, until it has been determined that the
submittal is complete and in conformance with the requirements of this
Ordinance. For the purpose of these Subdivision Regulations, the date on
which all requirements have been met and all applicable fees have been paid
shall constitute the official submittal date of the plat from which the statutory
period requiring formal approval or disapproval of the plat shall commence.
Action shall be taken by the Planning and Zoning Commission within 30 days
of the official submittal date unless a waiver is requested by the developer or
City Manager, as applicable. Action shall be taken by the City Council within
30 days of the date action is taken by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
B. If the plat is not approved, conditionally disapproved or disapproved within
30 days from the date of acceptance, it shall be deemed to have been
approved and a certificate, showing said acceptance date and the failure to
take action thereon with 30 days from said acceptance date, shall on demand
be issued by the Commission and said certificate shall be in lieu of the
endorsement herein required.
Section 3.8 Coordination of Zoning Application with Subdivision Approval
Every plat shall be consistent with, and conform to, existing zoning regulations and the
following criteria:
A. No plat will be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
approval which contains any inconsistent zoning classification. However, this
requirement may be waived when an application for a zoning change,
seeking proper zoning classification, has been filed with the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
B. In the event that a change in the zoning classification is required to
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision wpd (01128103) Page 16
r1
~
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
' '
' ~
~
' '
' '
'
accommodate the proposed development. it is the intent of these Subdivision
Regulations that subdivision review be carried out simultaneously with the
review of any zoning application.
C. No lot shall be approved which is bisected by a zoning district boundary,
unless said lot contains multiple types of uses.
D. No lot shall be approved which does not meet the minimum size and
dimension in the Zoning Ordinance unless:
1. the lot is a nonconforming lot of record under the Zoning Ordinance;
or
2. a variance has been approved by the Board of Adjustment.
Section 3.9 Taxes and Liens Paid
Prior to the consideration of a final plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission, any
delinquent taxes, fees, and outstanding liens due the City must be paid.
Section 3.10 Plat Application Fees
Every applicant requesting approval of a plat shall pay the applicable fee at the time of
submittal. Such fee shall include any recording fees required by the Tarrant County Clerk's
Office. Application fees for Preliminary Plats, Replats, Minor Plats, Amending Plats, Final
Plats, and Development Plats shall be established by separate ordinance approved by the
City Council.
Section 3.11 Development and Inspection Fees
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance, the City's development and inspection
fees for developments located inside the City and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall
be four percent (4%) of the construction costs of the water, sewer, street and drainage
facilities required by this Ordinance, as determined by the Director of Public Works.
Payment shall be made as the construction is incurred or within ten (10) days thereof.
Section 3.12 Frontage on Improved Roads Required
No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided has a minimum of fifty
(SO) feet of contiguous frontage on and access to an existing public street, or an acceptable
public access approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and sucn access meets
the minimum street construction requirements contained in the Design Manual. Where such
street does not meet said minimum standards, the owner shall construct that portion of the
street which provides public access and frontage to the subdivision, or provide a cash
escrow to the City for the estimated cost of improvement, or provide an alternative which
is acceptable to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Section 3.13 Vacating Plats
All actions for vacating a plat shall be consistent with applicable State statutes as contained
in Chapter 212, Texas Local Government Code.
W:\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01/28/03) Page 17
,,
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
' I
Section 3.14 Plats Straddling Municipal Boundaries
Whenever access to a subdivision is required across land situated in an adjacent
municipality, written approval is required from the affected city.
Section 3.15 Processing Preliminary Plats
A. Upon receipt of a Preliminary Plat, all required documents, and payment of
all required filing fees, the Planning and Zoning Coordinator shall check the
Preliminary Plat for completeness. No Preliminary Plat shall be processed
for review which is determined to be incomplete. The Planning and Zoning
Coordinator shall coordinate the review of the Preliminary Plat with the
applicable municipal departments, the City Engineer, and public utility
companies. Upon determination that the Preliminary Plat does not meet the
minimum requirements of these Subdivision Regulations, the Planning and
Zoning Coordinator shall give the developer written notice of the revisions
required to complete the plat.
B. Upon completion of the staff review and receipt of necessary revisions from
the developer, the Preliminary Plat shall be placed on the next available
meeting agenda for consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
C. After the Planning and Zoning Commission has reviewed the Preliminary
Plat, the applicant shall be advised of any changes and/or additions required
by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Upon satisfactory completion of
any requirements imposed by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
applicant may proceed with the submittal of a Final Plat.
Section 3.16 Effective Period of Preliminary Plat Approval
The approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission of a Preliminary Plat shall be
effective for a period of one (1) year. If a Final Plat Application has not been submitted on
at least a portion of the area covered by the Preliminary Plat within one (1) year from the
date of the approval of the Preliminary Plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
Preliminary Plat shall be deemed null and void. If only a portion of the Preliminary Plat has
been submitted for Final Plat action, those areas not platted within three (3) years of the
date of Preliminary Plat approval shall be declared null and void, unless an extension of
time is granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Any portion of a Preliminary Plat
not receiving final approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council
within the period of time set forth herein shall be null and void, and the developer shall be
required to resubmit a Preliminary Plat for approval. Such resubmittal shall be subject to
any new subdivision or development regulations and payment of all applicable fees.
Section 3.17 Processing Final Plats, Amending Plats, Minor Plats, or Replats
A. Upon receipt of a Replat, Amending Plat, Minor Plat, or Final Plat, all required
documents, and payment of al required filing fees, the Planning and Zoning
Coordinator shall check the submittal for completeness. No Replat,
Amending Plat, Minor Plat, or Final Plat shall be processed for review which
is not determined to be complete. No Final Plat shall be processed for
W:\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdiv1sion.wpd (01/28103) Page 18
11 f
f
f
' •
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
' '
' I
review for any area in which a Preliminary Plat has not been previously
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and
Zoning Coordinator shall coordinate the review of all plats with the applicable
municipal departments, City Engineer, and public utility companies. Upon
determination that the Preliminary Plat does not meet the minimum
requirements of these Subdivision Regulations, the Planning and Zoning
Coordinator shall give the developer written notice of the revisions required
to complete the plat.
B. Upon completion of the staff review and receipt of any necessary revisions
from the developer, the Plat shall be placed on the next available meeting
agenda for consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission .
C. If applicable under these Subdivision Regulations, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall hold any required public hearing on Replats in
conformance with Sections 212.014 and 212.015 of the Texas Local
Government Code.
D. After the Planning and Zoning Commission has reviewed the plat, the
Commission may either: (1) approve the plat as presented, (2) approve the
plat with conditions, or (3) disapprove the plat. After the Planning and Zoning
Commission has approved the plat, it shall be forwarded to the City Council
for consideration. Upon satisfactory completion of any conditions required
by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the plat submittal shall be placed
on the next available agenda for consideration by the City Council.
Disapproval of the plat by the Commission shall require submittal to the City
Council for final consideration.
E. In all final plat considerations, City Council may either approve or disapprove.
The City Council shall hold a public hearing on Replats. Notice of such
hearing shall be advertised in the official newspaper at least 15 days prior to
the hearing. The City Council shall approve a Plat, according to Section
212.010 of the Texas Local Government Code, if it conforms to the general
plan of the city and to these Subdivision Regulations. However, the City
Council may disapprove a plat which does not conform to the general plan
or to these Subdivision Regulations. If City Council determines that
additional conditions must be met, the plat shall be disapproved and returned
to the Planning and Zoning Commission for reprocessing, including
Commission approval, prior to resubmittal to City Council. Any disapproval
shall be deemed a refusal by the City to accept the offered dedications
shown thereon. Furthermore, the action of the City Council shall be final in
the consideration of the proposed plat.
Section 3.18 Official Filing and Recording of Final Plats
Upon approval of the plat by the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Coordinator shall
proceed with the official filing of record procedures using the following guidelines:
A. The signature showing final approval of the plat shall not be affixed until all
taxes, assessment charges and other monetary obligations due to the City
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01/28/03) Page 19
have been paid.
B. The Planning and Zoning Coordinator shall obtain the necessary signatures
from the Mayor, City Secretary, Planning and Zoning Commission Chairman
and Planning and Zoning Commission Secretary. The Planning and Zoning
Coordinator shall verify that all required covenants have been accepted by
the applicant prior to submitting the plat to the Tarrant County Clerk's Office
for filing.
C. To be recorded, the plat must:
1. Describe the subdivision by metes and bounds;
2. Locate the subdivision with respect to a corner of the survey or tract
or an original corner of the original survey of which it is a part;
3. State the dimensions of the subdivision and of each street, alley,
square, park, or other part of the tract intended to be dedicated to
public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or
adjacent to the street, alley, square, park, or other part; and
4. Meet all other requirements of these Subdivision Regulations and
State law.
D. The owner of the tract must acknowledge the plat in the manner required for
the acknowledgment of deeds.
E. The plat must be filed with the Tarrant County Clerk's Office.
F. The plat is subject to the filing and recording provisions of Section 12.002,
Texas Property Code.
G. Upon receipt of the official filed plat, the Planning and Zoning Coordinator will
place mylar film and a blackline copy in the City Plat File showing the official
filing notation from the Tarrant County Clerk's Office.
H. Approval of the plat by the City Council authorizes the developer to proceed
with the installation of the public facilities in the subdivision provided such
plans have been approved by the City Engineer, a Developer Agreement has
been executed, and all fees have been paid. '
Section 3.19 Effect of Approval on Dedication
The approval of a plat is not considered an acceptance of any proposed dedication for
public use or use by persons other than the owner of the property covered by the plat and
does not impose on the municipality any duty regarding the maintenance or improvement
of any purportedly dedicated parts until the municipality's governing body makes an actual
appropriation of the dedicated parts by formal acceptance, entry, use, or improvement.
Section 3.20 Notice of Noncompliance
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subd1v1s1on.wpd (01/28/03) Page 20
'l
~
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
' ~
~
I
For any subdivision existing for which a plat to be filed for record has not been approved
or which fails to meet the standards contained or referred to herein, the Commission may
adopt a resolution concerning such failure or lack of approval and indicating that same is
a violation of the provisions of this ordinance. The Commission may cause a certified copy
of such resolution to be filed in the Tarrant County Deed Records in which said subdivision
or part thereof lies. If compliance and approval are secured following the filing of said
resolution, the Commission shall file in the Tarrant County Deed Records an instrument
which, in effect, rescinds such earlier field resolution.
W:\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01/28/03) Page 21
CHAPTER 4
REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Section 4.1 General Infrastructure Policy
A. The developer shall install all water and sewer systems, street and drainage
facilities, and any other facilities required by these Subdivision Regulations
which are necessary for the proper development of the subdivision. The
design, construction and inspection of any public or semi-public
improvements, as well as the cost of engineering review, shall be borne by
the developer. All such facilities shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the Design Manual and be in conformance with the general
layout of the Master Land Use Plan.
8. Where considered necessary by the City Engineer, the facilities shall be
sized in excess of that dictated by the Design Manual to provide for future
growth and expansion of the City systems. Where oversizing of public
facilities is required, or where the relocation of public facilities is required, or
where specific public or semi-public improvements are necessary for the
proper development of the subdivision, the developer shall construct or
relocate said public or semi-public facilities. City participation in the cost of
oversized lines shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article IV of
Chapter 20 of the Everman Code, as amended.
C. Where, in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, construction
of said public or semi-public facilities should be deferred to a future date, the
developer shall place in escrow with the City an amount equal to the
estimated cost of the improvements as determined by the Planning and
Zoning Coordinator. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend
alternate arrangements to the City Council when appropriate.
D. When a tract of land is proposed for development and public improvements
are to be installed between or paralleling two or more tracts of land under
different ownership and participation is required by both owners, the
developer desiring to plat first shall comply with the following:
1. If the public improvements are required for the actual development of
the property, then the first developer shall be responsibfe for obtaining
the necessary right-of-way or easements from the adjoining property
owner or owners and for installing those improvements at his own
expense. Pro rata reimbursement may be authorized under the
provisions of Article IV of Chapter 20 of the Everman Code, as
amended.
2. If the improvements are not required at the time of development of the
subdivision, then the developer shall provide, within his subdivision,
the easements or rights-of-way necessary for the future
improvements.
W:\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivis1on wpd (01/28103) Page 22
E. The developer shall be responsible for the proper design and construction of
all public infrastructure required to serve the development in accordance with
these Subdivision Regulations and other applicable regulations.
Section 4.2 Minimum Standards and Levels of Service
The standards and criteria established in these Subdivision Regulations for dedication and
construction of public facilities and infrastructure are based upon engineering studies and
historical usages and demands by different categories of development. These Subdivision
Regulations identify certain minimum requirements and sizings for utilities, roadways,
parks, and other facilities that have been determined by the City Council to be necessary
in order to provide the minimum level of service necessary to protect or promote the public
health, safety, and welfare and to assure the quality of life currently enjoyed by the citizens
of Everman. It is the intent of these Subdivision Regulations that no development occur
until and unless these minimum levels of service are met. Therefore, each development
in the City shall be required to dedicate, construct or upgrade required facilities and
infrastructure to a capacity that meets these minimum levels. Whenever the City Council
determines that levels of service in excess of these minimum standards are necessary in
order to promote the orderly development of the City, the developer shall qualify for
reimbursement for any costs in excess of the minimum levels of service through City
participation, a pro rata reimbursement policy or other means adopted by the City.
Section 4.3 Water Facility Requirements
The developer shall furnish, install, construct, or extend, at his own expense, water
distribution facilities necessary for the proper development of the subdivision. The water
system shall provide individual service to every lot in the subdivision. All water mains
constructed within a proposed development shall be extended to the perimeter of the
proposed development to allow for future extension of the water system into adjacent
properties. The water system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
specifications contained in the Design Manual. Where considered necessary by the City
Engineer, the facilities shall be sized in excess of that dictated by the Design Manual to
provide for future growth and expansion of the City water distribution system. In addition.
the water system shall conform to the City's current Master Water Distribution System Plan.
Section 4.4 City Participation in Water System Oversizing
Where oversizing of water system improvements is required by the Water Plan, City
participation in any proposed water line shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article
IV of Chapter 20 of the Everman Code, as amended. City participation will not be available
for water lines which are not part of the proposed improvements contained in the Water
Plan.
Section 4.5 Fire Hydrant Requirements
The developer shall install, at his own expense, a sufficient number of fire hydrants to
provide fire protection service to every lot in the development. The fire hydrant system
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision. wpd (01128103) Page 23
,
'I ' f
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
' I
shall be designed according to the specifications contained in the Design Manual. The
layout of the system shall be determined by the Director of Public Works and approved by
the Fire Chief.
Section 4.6 Sewage Facility Requirements
The developer shall furnish, install, construct, or extend, at his own expense, sewage
collection facilities necessary for the proper development of the subdivision. The sewage
system shall provide individual service to every lot in the development. All sewer mains
constructed within the proposed development shall be extended to the perimeter of the
proposed development to allow for future extension of the sewer system into adjacent
properties regardless of whether or not such extensions are required for service within the
development. The sewage system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the specifications contained in the Design Manual. Where considered necessary by the City
Engineer, the facilities shall be sized in excess of that dictated by the Design Manual, to
provide for the future growth and expansion of the City sewer systems. All sanitary sewer
installations shall be in conformance with the City's Sewer Plan.
Section 4.7 City Participation in Sewer System Oversizing
Where oversizing of sewer system improvements is required, City participation in any
proposed sewer line shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article IV of Chapter 20
of the Everman Code, as amended. City participation will not be available for sewer lines
which are not a part of the proposed improvements contained in the Sewer Plan.
Section 4.8 Utilities to be Constructed in Rights-of-Way
All public utilities shall be constructed within a public street right-of-way or an appropriate
utility easement. When a proposed water or sewer line or a drainage facility will be placed
adjacent to a public road maintained by the Texas Department of Transportation, a
separate specific use easement shall be provided for each utility or drainage facility. If the
developer cannot obtain the necessary easements to make required off-site improvements,
he may request the City to institute condemnation proceedings to acquire the easement,
provided that the developer shall bear all costs of such proceedings.
Section 4.9 Street Right-of-Way Dedication
Each plat shall dedicate public street right-of-way of sufficient width to comply with the
standards contained on the Master Thoroughfare Plan and the following requirements:
'
A. All street rights-of-way shall be integrated with the existing and proposed
system of thoroughfares and rights-of-way.
B. Every lot shall front on a public right-of-way which complies with the width
shown on the Master Thoroughfare Plan or, when approved by the City, an
acceptable public access easement.
C. Street rights-of-way shall be configured so as to allow for future access to
adjacent properties.
W:\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01/28/03) Page 24
,
,
f
' f
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
' '
' I
Section 4.10 Street Improvement Requirements
The developer shall construct, at his own expense, street facilities necessary for the proper
development of the subdivision. The street system shall provide access to every lot in the
subdivision, and comply with the following:
A. All street surfaces within or abutting the proposed subdivision shall be paved,
with curbs and gutters installed, and otherwise constructed in accordance
with the standards and specifications contained in the Design Manual.
B. All paving shall be constructed to the width specified by the "Functional
Classification" of streets as contained in the most current revision of the
Master Thoroughfare Plan.
C. Permanent dead-end roads shall not be allowed.
D. Proposed new streets shall be laid out, where possible, so as to eliminate or
avoid new perimeter half-streets.
Section 4.11 City Participation in Thoroughfare Street Improvements
The City will only participate in the construction costs of a Collector or Arterial street as
designated by the Master Thoroughfare Plan and located in conventional single-family
residential areas. When the Director of Public Works has determined that the need for
additional street capacity is not directly attributable to the traffic pattern of the proposed
development, the City may participate in the portion of the roadway in excess of thirty-six
(36) feet, measured from curb face to curb face. The developer shall pay for thirty-six (36)
feet of roadway, curb and gutter for both sides, and all other costs connected thereto,
including engineering costs.
When a street is required to be constructed with extra width, or with special conditions by
the City for aesthetic value or special circumstances, the City will participate on the same
basis as in thoroughfare considerations. Where the oversizing of the street is at the
discretion of the developer for aesthetic purposes or special considerations, no participation
will occur.
In non-single-family residential areas, when existing development would require additional
strength design or additional width of pavement to accommodate expected traffic use, no
City participation will occur.
Section 4.12 Perimeter Street Requirements
A. Where an existing perimeter street is adjacent to a proposed new
subdivision, the developer shall establish the location of the street centerline
and dedicate sufficient right-of-way within his own subdivision to provide one
half of the street right-of-way width shown on the Master Thoroughfare Plan,
not to exceed the size of right-of-way required to serve the development. The
developer shall construct one half of the required street according to the
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdiv1s1on.wpd (01/28/03) Page 25
' '
'
' '
' ~
'I
standards contained in the Design Manual, or in the discretion of the City,
deposit with the City an amount equal to his/her computed pro-rata share as
set by the City Council as a per linear foot fee, before building permits will be
issued.
B. Construction on a single residential lot is excluded from the above perimeter
street requirements.
Section 4.13 Insurance and Bonding
A. Insurance. The owner or contractor will comply with the insurance
requirements applicable to the City's public works projects.
B. Performance bond; escrow agreement.
1. Performance and payment bonds will be submitted in an amount, as
determined by the City Engineer, to insure completion of all
improvements therein; or
2. If the cost of completing the improvements is $100,000 or less, cash
money in the amount of the cost of completing the improvements, as
determined by the City Engineer, may be deposited with a bank as
escrow agent pursuant to an escrow agreement, the form and
provisions thereof to be approved by the City Engineer and City
Attorney, to insure completion of the improvements.
C. Maintenance bond. Prior to acceptance by the City of any improvements, a
maintenance bond will be furnished in an amount of one hundred percent
(100%) of the contract amount of all improvements, insuring the repair and
replacement of all defects due to faulty materials and workmanship that
appear within a period of two (2) years from the date of acceptance of the
improvements by the City. The furnishing of the maintenance bond shall not,
however, relieve the developer of responsibility for the proper construction
and maintenance of the improvements.
D. Payment bond. Prior to commencing construction of any improvements:
1. A payment bond will be furnished in an amount of not less than one
hundred percent (100%) of the approximate total cost of the contract
guaranteeing the full and proper protection of all claimants supplying
labor and material for the construction of the improvements; or
2. If the total contract amount of all improvements is fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000) or less, as determined by the City Engineer, the
owner and contractor may, in lieu offurnishing a payment bond, agree
to pay and satisfy all claims, liens, charges, and encumbrances
arising from construction of the improvements and furnish a written
affidavit, in a form provided by the City Engineer, stating that all
charges, accounts, and claims for labor performed and material
furnished in connection with; the improvements have been paid in full
W:\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01128103) Page 26
,
,
f
f
' ,
f
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
' I
and that there are no unreleased recorded liens filed against the
improvements or land to which they are affixed that are to be
dedicated to the public.
E. The City Engineer may require the owner or contractor or both to furnish a
list of all contractors and subcontractors who performed labor on or persons
supplying material for the improvements and require a written release of all
claims from any such persons prior to acceptance of the improvements.
Section 4.14 Sidewalk Requirements
A. Every new subdivision, or re-subdivision hereafter approved, shall be
required to install sidewalks, with appropriate curb ramps, adjacent to all
public street rights-of-way. Construction of any sidewalk shall conform to the
standards and specifications contained in the Design Manual. Sidewalk
placements shall conform to the following:
1. All corner lots shall have sidewalks placed on the two frontages or
sides adjacent to the streets.
2. Any triple frontage lots shall have sidewalks placed on the three
frontages or sides adjacent to the streets.
3. Any double frontage lots shall have sidewalks placed on the two
frontages adjacent to the streets.
4. Construction of all side yard sidewalks and rear yard sidewalks
adjacent to perimeter streets shall be the developer's responsibility to
construct after plat approval. Front yard sidewalks shall be
constructed for each lot prior to completion of any primary structure.
8. The above sidewalk requirement shall also apply to any Development Plat
where sidewalks exist on adjacent property.
Section 4.15 Drainage Improvement Requirements
A. The developer shall be required to furnish, install, construct, or extend, at his
own expense, all storm sewers and drainage structure facilities necessary for
the proper development of the subdivision. Concrete channel improvements
shall be required where specified in the Master Drainage Plan and in the
Design Manual. Alternate earthen channels may be approved when in
accordance with the criteria established in the Design Manual. All public
drainage facilities shall be constructed within a public drainage easement or
drainage right-of-way as required by the City.
8. With respect to off-site drainage, the following provisions shall apply:
1. The developer shall be responsible for all runoff from fully developed
property upstream of the proposed development.
W:IEVERMANIOrdinances\Subdivision.wpd (01128103) Page 27
n
~
'
'~
I
'
'
'
'
'
' '
'
' ' ~
'
' I
2. The Director of Public Works may require the developer to furnish a
drainage study to determine the impact the development will have on
adjacent properties. Where a drainage study indicates that additional
runoff from the developing property will overload downstream
drainage facilities and may result in hazardous conditions, the City
may withhold approval of the development until appropriate provisions
have been made. These provisions shall include any drainage design
or construction plans necessary to accommodate the off-site drainage.
Section 4.16 Street Lighting
The developer shall furnish, install, construct, or extend, at his own expense, street lighting
facilities necessary for the proper development of the subdivision. The street lighting
system shall comply with the location and spacing requirements for street lighting systems
contained in the Design Manual.
Section 4.17 Developer Agreements
The developer must execute a Developer Agreement in the form contained in Appendix A
of these regulations.
A. In developments where, by reason of City policy, the City Council deems it
advisable to participate in the public improvements being constructed to the
extent of twenty-five thousand ($25,000) dollars, or more, the contract for
such construction shall be advertised for bids in accordance with the State
requirements. The developer shall deposit with the City the funds, or
acceptable security as required by the applicable City Ordinances, required
to pay his portion of the construction costs prior to the construction. It shall
be the responsibility of the developer's engineer to prepare all contract
documents for the use of the City and the contractor, as well as all copies of
the Engineering Plans for the bidding and construction of the project.
B. On projects not requiring City participation, the Final Plat approval authorizes
the Developer to proceed with construction of the water, sewer, street
drainage, and traffic facilities required by the Engineering Plans, provided
that all fees have been paid and that such plans have been approved by the
City Engineer. All construction shall be in accordance with the applicable
sections of these Subdivision Regulations and the Design Manual. The
developer may choose his own contractor, subject to the contractor executing
the necessary bonds with the City and payment of the inspection fees
required for each portion of the public facilities; provided however, that the
execution of bonds by the developer's contractor shall not relieve the
developer of his responsibilities and liabilities to the City under the Developer
Agreement.
Section 4.18 Temporary Improvements
The developer shall build and pay for all costs of temporary improvements required by the
Director of Public Works and shall be responsible for maintaining same for a period
specified by the City.
W:IEVERMANIOrdinanceslSubdivision.wpd (01/28/03) Page 28
Section 4.19 Public Works Construction Permit Required
Construction shall not start on any street, sidewalk, drainage, utility or other public
improvement until a Public Works Construction Permit and an acceptable two (2) year
maintenance bond has been issued for all facilities in the subdivision or the approved
phase of the subdivision.
Section 4.20 Inspection of Proposed Public Facilities
The Director of Public Works shall provide for inspection of required public improvements
during construction and insure their satisfactory completion. If the Director of Public Works
finds upon inspection that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in
accordance with City construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be
notified that building permits will not be issued until all inconsistencies have been corrected.
All construction debris or waste shall be removed from all areas of the subdivision prior to
the issuance of the Letter of Acceptance of Public Improvements by the Director of Public
Works.
Section 4.21 Final Walk-Through and Construction Debris
The developer shall arrange for a final walk-through inspection with the Director of Public
Works. No cut trees, timber, debris, rocks, stones, junk, rubbish, or other waste materials
of any kind shall be buried in any land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time
of completion of public facilities. Removal of all debris and waste shall be required prior to
approval and acceptance of all public improvements and prior to the issuance of any
building permit or certificate of occupancy.
Section 4.22 Letter of Completion of Public Improvements
A. · The City will not accept dedication of required improvements until the Director
of Public Works has issued a Letter of Acceptance of Public Improvements
as provided in this section.
8. Upon approved completion of the construction of the public facilities, the
developer's engineer shall submit to the Director of Public Works a complete
set of "as-built" documents for the project along with a complete accounting
of all construction units "as-built" and the total project cost. The Director of
Public Works will then issue a Letter of Acceptance of Public Improvements
to the developer and authorize the issuance of building per~its.
Section 4.23 Impact Fees
The requirements in this Chapter shall be in addition and not in lieu of any impact fees that
may be applicable to development within the City.
W:IE VERMAN\Ordinances\Su bdivision. wpd (01128103) Page 29
CHAPTER 5
4it REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBMITTAL OF A PRELIMINARY PLAT
Section 5.1 Preliminary Plat Approval Required
All applicants seeking approval of a Preliminary Plat shall comply with the requirements of
this Chapter and the following:
A. Every Preliminary Plat shall require approval of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
B. The procedures contained in this Chapter shall be used when the property
being proposed for development is considered "an unplatted tract" and which
is not currently developed into platted lots and blocks, and filed for record in
the Tarrant County Clerk's Office as a previously platted subdivision of
record.
C. When previously platted property is being combined with unplatted property
and the redevelopment plan is substantially different from the existing lot
configuration, the procedures for a Preliminary Plat will be used for the
review of the proposal. Any public hearing requirements associated with
previously platted property must comply with the provisions of Sections
212.014 and 212.015 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
D. The developer shall show all factors necessary to enable the Planning and
Zoning Commission to determine whether the proposed subdivision is
satisfactory from the standpoint of the public interests and be consistent with
the Comprehensive Land Use Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, and these
Subdivision Regulations.
Section 5.2 Platting Land Under Same Ownership
Every Preliminary Plat shall include all the land which the applicant proposes to subdivide
and all contiguous tracts owned under the same ownership. This requirement will enable
the Planning and Zoning Commission to, (1) determine the need for public improvements
or easements which may be required on portions of the land and make future subdivisions
uneconomical to develop if the improvements are not installed as a part of the land being
proposed for development, and (2) plan for or require reservations for futur~ rights-of-way.
This requirement may be waived by the Planning and Zoning Commission when the
proposed subdivision appears to have no impact on, or from, the contiguously owned
property which is not being developed.
Section 5.3 Phasing Development
A. The Preliminary Plat shall indicate any phasing of the proposed development
with a heavy dashed line. Each phase shall be numbered sequentially and
in the proposed order of development. The proposed utility and drainage
layout for each phase shall be designed in such a manner that the phases
can be developed in numerical sequence. Thereafter, plats of subsequent
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision. wpd (01128103) Page 30
units of such subdivision shall conform to the approved overall layout and
phasing, unless a Preliminary Plat is submitted. However, a subsequent
reduction of a phase may be considered provided that it conforms to the
original street arrangement.
B. The Planning and Zoning Commission may impose reasonable conditions
upon the filing of the phases as it may deem necessary to assure the orderly
development of the City.
Section 5.4 Preliminary Plat Documents Required
The application packet shall include all documents listed below and no Preliminary Plat will
be reviewed by the City until all required documents are submitted in a completed format
and all fees have been paid. A letter requesting any variances from these regulations shall
be submitted in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.1 O, hereof.
Preliminary Plat Application (See Section 5.5)
• Preliminary Plat Drawing (See Section 5.6)
Preliminary Drainage Analysis (See Section 5.7)
Preliminary Utility Layout (See Section 5.8)
Section 5.5 Preliminary Plat Application
The applicant shall submit a written Preliminary Plat Application to the Planning and Zoning
Coordinator not less than thirty-five days (35) prior to the regular meeting of the Planning
and Zoning Commission for which approval is being sought. Written authorization from the
owner shall be furnished when the applicant is not the owner of record.
f Section 5.6 Preliminary Plat Drawing
The applicant shall submit the required number of copies of the Preliminary Plat Drawing
as indicated by the Preliminary Plat Application. The Preliminary Plat Drawing shall contain,
at a minimum, all the information listed in the "Requirements for All Plat Drawings"
contained in Section 1+.-'I and include all the information listed as "Additional Requirements
for Preliminary Plat Drawings" contained in Section 1 'f-:2 of these Subdivision Regulations.
Section 5.7 Preliminary Drainage Analysis
The applicant shall submit a Preliminary Drainage Analysis of the subdivision area to
determine the need for drainage facilities within the area being considered for development
or off-site on adjacent properties. The Preliminary Drainage Analysis shall conform to the
technical specifications contained in the Design Manual.
Section 5.8 Preliminary Utility Layout
The applicant shall submit a Preliminary Utility Layout to show the general location and
approximate sizes of all existing and proposed public utilities. The size of all proposed
water and sewer lines shall be determined using methods prescribed in the Design Manual.
Section 5.9 Review, Processing and Approval of Preliminary Plat
W:\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01/28103) Page 31
ll
,~
'
' '
' I
I
I
I
'
'
'
'
'
' ~
~
I
Every Preliminary Plat shall be reviewed for conformity with the Comprehensive Land Use
Plan, these Subdivision Regulations and any other applicable ordinance according to the
procedures established for "Processing Preliminary Plats" as contained in Section 3.14 of
these Subdivision Regulations.
Section 5.10 Grading of Site Prior to Final Plat Approval
Subsequent to Preliminary Plat approval, the developer may request written approval from
the Director of Public Works to commence construction to the grades and elevations
required by the construction plans.
W:\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01/28/03) Page 32
11
~
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
' p
~
~
~
I
CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBMITTAL OF A FINAL PLAT
Section 6.1 Final Plat Approval Required
All applicants seeking approval of a Final Plat shall comply with the requirements of this
Chapter. Every Final Plat shall require approval of the City Council, but only after approval
has been previously obtained from the Planning and Zoning Commission. The City
Manager may approve Minor Plats and Amending Plats.
Section 6.2 Conformity With Preliminary Plat
The Final Plat and accompanying data shall substantially conform to the Preliminary Plat,
as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, incorporating any and all changes,
modifications, alterations, corrections and stipulations imposed by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Any submittals of a Final Plat which do not constitute a full phase as shown
on the Preliminary Plat must be consistent with the Preliminary Plat in design and layout.
Additional review time may be required where a Final Plat does not constitute a full phase
as shown on the Preliminary Plat.
Section 6.3 Final Plat Documents Required
The application packet shall include all documents listed below and no Final Plat will be
reviewed by the City until all required documents are submitted in a completed format and
all fees have been paid.
Final Plat Application (See Section 6.4)
Final Plat Drawing (Section 6.5)
Drainage Study (See Section 6.6)
Engineering/Construction Drawings (See Section 6.7)
Taxes and Liens Paid Certificates (See Section 6.8)
Developer Agreement (See Appendix A)
Section 6.4 Final Plat Application
The applicant shall submit a written Final Plat Application to the Planning and Zoning
Coordinator not less than thirty-five (35) days prior to the regular meeting of the Planning
and Zoning Commission for which approval is being sought.
Section 6.5 Final Plat Drawing
The applicant shall submit the required number of copies of the Final Plat Drawing as
indicated on the Final Plat Application. The Final Plat Drawing shall contain, at a minimum,
all the information listed in the "Requirements for All Plat Drawings" contained in Section
11.1 and include all the information listed as "Additional Requirements for Final Plat
Drawings" contained in Section 11.3 of these regulations.
W:\EVERMAN\O<dinanceslSubd1visoon wpd (01128103) Page 33
n
~
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
' p
' ~
~
'
Section 6.6 Drainage Study
When the Preliminary Drainage Analysis has determined that drainage facilities and related
improvements are required, the applicant shall submit a Drainage Study with engineering
drawings which shall conform to the technical specifications contained in the Design
Manual. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not recommend for approval any Final
Plat which does not provide adequate facilities to accommodate storm or flood water runoff.
Section 6.7 Engineering I Construction Drawings
When the City has determined that public improvements are required, the applicant, or his
engineer, shall submit construction plans for all public improvements along with the Final
Plat for approval by the City. The engineering drawings shall conform to the requirements
of the Design Manual and shall be prepared and sealed by a Registered Professional
Engineer, licensed to practice in the State of Texas.
Section 6.8 Truces and Liens Paid Certificates
The applicant shall submit a certificate, available from the Planning and Zoning
Coordinator, indicating that any delinquent taxes or liens due the City have been paid.
Section 6.9 Review, Processing and Approval of Final Plat
Every Final Plat shall be reviewed for conformity to the Comprehensive Land Use Plan,
these regulations and any other applicable ordinances according to the procedures
established for "Processing Final Plats, Amending Plats, Minor Plats, or Replats" as
contained in Section 3.16 of this Ordinance.
W:'E\/CRMllJll'>Ordinances\Subdivision. wpd (01128/03) Page 34
---
==
a=-
e
CHAPTER 7
REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBMITTAL OF A REPLAT
Section 7.1 Replat Approval Required
A. All applicants seeking approval of a Replat shall comply with the
requirements of this Chapter. Every Replat, other than Minor Plats or
Amending Plats, shall require approval of the City Council, but only after a
recommendation has been obtained from the Planning and Zoning
Commission. A Replat is required when a previously approved subdivision,
or portion thereof, is proposed to be subdivided into smaller lots or, to
combine existing smaller lots into a development with larger lots, and the
proposed changes do not meet the criteria of Amending Plats or Minor Plats.
The procedures contained in this Chapter shall be used when the tract being
proposed for redevelopment, or portion thereof, is currently platted into lots
and blocks, and filed for record in the Tarrant County Clerk's Office as a
platted subdivision of record, and the owner is requesting to redevelop the
property into a new configuration.
B. Minor Plats and Amending Plats may be approved by the City Manager as
provided in Texas Local Government Code, Sections 212.0065 and 212.016.
Section 7.2 Replat Documents Required
The application packet shall include all documents listed below and no Replat will be
reviewed by the City until all documents are submitted in a completed format and all fees
have been paid.
Re plat Application (See Section 7 .3)
Replat Drawing (See Section 7.4)
Taxes and Liens Paid Certificates (See Section 7.5)
Prel iminary Drainage Analysis or Drainage Study (See Section 7.6)
Utility Layout or Engineering Drawings (See Section 7. 7)
Section 7 .3 Re plat Application
The applicant shall submit a written Rep/at Application to the Planning and Zoning
Coordinator not less than thirty-five (35) days prior to the regular meeting of the Planning
and Zoning Commission fbr which approval is being sought.
Section 7 .4 Rep lat Drawing
The applicant shall submit the required number of copies of the Replat Drawing as
indicated by the Replat Application. The drawing shall contain, at a minimum, all the
information listed in the "Requirements for All Plat Drawings" contained in Section 11 .1 and
include all the information listed as "Additional Requirements for Replats, Minor Plats,
Amending Plats, and Final Plat Drawings" contained in Section 11 .3 of these Subdivision
W:'.EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdiv1s1on.wpd (01/28/03) Page 35
I
t
:
Regulations. No Replat may be approved which does not contain the signatures of the
owners of the property being replatted.
Section 7.5 Taxes and Liens Paid Certificates
The applicant shall submit a certificate, available from the Planning and Zoning
Coordinator, indicating that any taxes or liens due the City have been paid.
Section 7.6 Preliminary Drainage Analysis or Drainage Study
Due to the variable conditions of a Replat, the Director of Public Works will review the
submittal and may require the applicant to submit a Preliminary Drainage Analysis or a
Drainage Study of the subdivision area, which shall conform to the technical specifications
contained in the Design Manual. The applicant may be exempt from this requirement when
the Director is satisfied that no drainage facilities are necessary or where a Drainage Study
for the area has been approved within the previous four year period.
Section 7.7 Utility Layout or Engineering Drawings
The applicant shall submit a Utility Layout to show the location and sizes of all existing and
proposed public utilities to verify easement requirements. However, when the Director of
Public Works has determined that the proposed redevelopment of the subdivision will
require public improvements, the applicant or his engineer, shall submit engineering plans
for all public improvements for approval by the City as a prerequisite to the approval of the
Replat by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Furthermore, when a Replat results in the
reconfiguration of lots so as to impact the location of any existing water or sewer tap
locations, the developer shall submit sufficient information regarding the location of the
existing taps and provide for any utility adjustments so as to assure the availability of utility
services to each lot. Any engineering drawings associated with a Replat shall conform to
the requirements of the Design Manual.
Section 7.8 Review, Processing and Approval of Replats
Every Replat shall be reviewed for conformity with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan,
these requirements and any other applicable ordinance in accordance with the procedures
established for "Processing Final Plats, Amending Plats, Minor Plats, or Replats" in Section
3.16 of these Subdivision Regulations. Replats may not amend or remove any recorded
covenants or restrictions. If the proposed replat requires a variance and is protested in
accordance with Section 212.015 of the Texas Local Government Code, in order to be
approved, the proposed replat must receive the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of
the members present of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council.
Section 7.9 Replat Public Hearing Requirements
Certain replats are required to comply with the public hearing regulations contained in
Section 212.014 and Section 212.015 of the Texas Local Government Code. The required
public hearing for Replats under State law shall be held by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. An additional public hearing will be held by the City Council as provided in
Section 3.16.
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdiv1sion wpd (0 1/28/03) Page 36
e
a
;
!!
a=
•·
CHAPTER 8
REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBMITTAL OF A MINOR PLAT
Section 8.1 Minor Plat Approval Required
All applicants seeking approval of a Minor Plat shall comply with the requirements of this
Chapter. Every Minor Plat shall require approval of the City Manager. The City Manager,
in his discretion, may forward any Minor Plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission and
City Council for review and approval in lieu of granting approval.
Section 8.2 Minor Plat Prerequisites
The procedures contained in this Chapter apply to a plat containing four or fewer lots
fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the
extension of municipal utilities.
Section 8.3 Minor Plat Documents Required
The application packet shall include all documents listed below and no Minor Plat will be
reviewed by the City until all required documents are submitted in a completed format and
all fees have been paid.
Minor Plat Application (See Section 8.4)
Final Plat Drawing (See Section 8.5)
Preliminary Drainage Analysis (See Section 8.6)
Tax and Liens Paid Certificates (See Section 8.7)
Section 8.4 Minor Plat Application
The applicant shall submit a written Minor Plat Application to the Planning and Zoning
Coordinator not less tha·n fourteen (14) days prior to the regular meeting of the Planning
and Zoning Commission for which approval is being sought.
Section 8.5 Minor Plat Drawing
The applicant shall submit the required number of copies of the Minor Plat Drawing as
indicated by the Minor Plat Application. The Minor Plat Drawing s·hall contain, at a
minimum, all the information listed in the "Requirements for All Plat Drawings" contained
in Section 11.1 and all the·information listed as "Additional Requirements for Replats, Minor
Plat, Amending Plats, and Final Plat Drawings" contained in Section 11.3.
Section 8.6 Preliminary Drainage Analysis
The Director of Public Works will review each request for a Minor Plat and determine
whether the applicant shall be required to submit a Drainage Analysis or Drainage Study.
When required, the Drainage Analysis or Drainage Study shall conform to the technical
specifications contained in the Design Manual. The applicant may be exempt from this
requirement when the Director is satisfied that no drainage facilities are necessary.
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01 /28/03) Page 37
n
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
' ~
~
I
Section 8.7 Taxes and Liens Paid Certificates
The applicant shall submit a certificate available from the Planning and Zoning Coordinator
indicating that any taxes or liens due the City have been paid.
Section 8.8 Review and Processing of Minor Plats
Every Minor Plat shall be reviewed for conformity with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan,
these regulations, and any other applicable ordinance according to the procedures
established for "Processing Final Plats, Amending Plats, Minor Plats, or Replats" in Section
3.16 hereof. If the City Manager declines to approve the proposed plat, the Minor Plat shall
be placed on the agenda for the next regular meeting of the Planning and Zoning
Commission for their consideration and forwarding to the City Council.
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01/28/03) Page 38
r1
'
'
'
'
'
CHAPTER 9
REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBMITTAL OF AN AMENDING PLAT
Section 9.1 Amending Plat Approval Required
All applicants seeking approval of an Amending Plat shall comply with the requirements of
this Chapter. An Amending Plat may be approved by the City Manager. The City Manager,
in his discretion, may forward the Amending Plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission
and City Council for review and approval in lieu of granting approval. The procedures
contained in this Chapter shall be used to correct, or modify, a subdivision plat which has
been previously filed in the Tarrant County Clerk's Office.
Section 9.2 Amending Plat Prerequisites
An Amending Plat submittal may be submitted on a property when it conforms to the
requirements of Section 212.016 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Section 9.3 Amending Plat Documents Required
The application packet shall include all documents listed below and no Amending Plat will
be reviewed by the City until all required documents are submitted in a completed format
and all fees have been paid.
Amending Plat Application (See Section 9.4)
Taxes and Liens Paid Certificates (See Section 9.5)
Final Plat Drawing (See Section 9.6)
Section 9.4 Amending Plat Application
The applicant shall submit a written Amending Plat Application to the Planning and Zoning
Coordinator at least fourteen (14) days prior to the regular meeting of the Planning and
Zoning Commission for which approval is being sought.
Section 9.5 Taxes and Liens Paid Certificates
The applicant shall submit a certificate available from the Planning and Zoning Coordinator
indicating that any taxes or liens due the City of Everman have been paid.
Section 9.6 Final Plat Drawing
The applicant shall submit the required number of copies of the Amending Plat Drawing as
shown on the Amending Plat Application. The Amending Plat Drawing shall contain, at a
minimum, all the information listed in the "Requirements for All Plat Drawings" contained
in Section 11.1 and include all the information listed as "Additional Requirements for
Replats, Minor Plats, Amending Plats and Final Plat Drawings" contained in Section 11.3.
Section 9.7 Review, Processing and Approval of Amending Plat
Every Amending Plat shall be reviewed for conformity to the regulations contained in
Section 212.016 of the Texas Local Government Code. If the City Manager declines to
approve the proposed plat, the Amending Plat shall be placed on the agenda for the next
regular meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission for their consideration and
W:\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdiv1sion.wpd (01128103) Page 39
forwarding to the City Council.
W:\EVERMANIOrdinanceslSubdivis1on.wpd (01/28/03) Page 40
CHAPTER 10
REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBMITTAL OF A DEVELOPMENT PLAT
Section 10.1 Development Plat Approval Required
All applicants seeking approval of a Development Plat shall comply with the requirements
of this Chapter.
Section 10.2 Development Plat Prerequisites
A Development Plat submittal may be submitted when property is proposed to be
developed in conformity to the requirements of Subchapter B of Chapter 212 of the Texas
Local Government Code.
Section 10.3 Development Plat Documents Required
The Planning and Zoning Coordinator shall determine whether the proposed development
conforms to the requirements of a Preliminary/Final Plat, a Replat, a Minor Plat or an
Amending Plat. Based upon this determination, the application packet for a Development
Plat shall include those documents required to be submitted for that type of plat. No
development plat will be reviewed by the City until all required documents are submitted
in a completed format and all fees have been paid.
Section 10.4 Review of Development Plat
The Development Plat shall be processed and reviewed according to applicable procedures
set forth for the type of Development Plat submitted.
W:\EVERMANIOrdinanceslSubdivision. wpd (01 /28/03) Page 41
n
"
"
"
' I
'
' I
...-CHAPTER 11
TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS FOR PLAT DRAWINGS
Section 11.1 Requirements for all Plat Drawings
-
Every plat drawing shall include the information contained in this Chapter 11.
A.
B.
c.
D.
E.
Adjacent Properties - All property lines, streets and easements on lands
immediately adjacent to and contiguous with the perimeter of the proposed
subdivision shall be shown for an area extending one hundred (100) feet of
the perimeter with the names of the owners as shown in the most current Tax
Assessor's files. If the adjacent properties are platted, the names of adjoining
subdivisions and the names of adjoining streets are to be shown.
City Limit Lines - The location of the Corporate Limit boundaries of the City
or any adjacent city shall be shown on the plat drawing where applicable.
Date - The date on which the drawing was prepared shall be shown on the
plat drawing.
Easements - The location and dimension of all existing or proposed
easements shall be shown on the prat drawing indicating whether such
easement is for any specific puroose. Utility easements for the use of public
utilities of not less than . te VI (_ I 0) . feet in width shall be
provided along each side of all rear properry lines or on the contained side
of perimeter lots. If necessary for the extension of water or sewer mains,
storm drainage or other utilities, easements of greater width may be required,
or additional easements may be required, along lot lines or across lots. In all
cases, easements shall connect with easements already established in
adjoining properties or extend to connect with a public right-of-way. No lot
shall be shown with an easement which prevents proper development and
full utilization of the lot as a suitable building site for the intended zoning
district.
Lot and Block Numbering - All lots and blocks shall be consecutively
numbered, or lettered in alphabetical order. The blocks in subdivisions
bearing the same name shall be numbered or lettered consecutively through
the several sections or phases. Lettering for blocks shall be la(ger and bolder
than lot numbers or circled to make identification clear. Any lot or block which
is planned as an 'out-parcel' shall be numbered and designated on the plat
with notation regarding any development restrictions.
F. Map Sheet Size - Map sheets shall be st.i..ttJ.t-VJ.. -:Z.'f.",x.. ~e;.." shufs
~ c.l...,,..( <Add; f, o.1r:il h..~I/: ~, z.e p>i.:..P1<;. wi.i.'1- "1 .i. re3..,.1r_~ct
F.0 .~ ; ., 5-p e,.:..l1v.,. . .. .
a binding margin of not less than one and one-half inches on the left side
of the sheets. Sheets shall be numbered in sequence if more than one (1)
sheet is used and an index sheet provided with match lines.
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdiv1s1on. wpd (01128103) Page 42
n
~
~
'~
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
' ,
'
'
' ~
I
G. North Arrow - A north arrow indicating the approximate true north shall be
predominantly placed near the scale.
H. Ownership/Developer - The name, address, and telephone number of the
current legal owner, and the name, address, and telephone number of the
developer, if other than the owner, shall be shown on the plat drawing.
I. Plat Notes and Conditions - When appropriate, the drawing shall contain a
listing of any Plat Notes and Plat Conditions in a readily identifiable location
with each note numbered consecutively.
J. Public Use Areas - The location and dimensions of all property proposed to
be set aside for park use, or other public or common reservation shall be
shown on the plat drawing, with designation of the purpose thereof, and
conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation.
Scale - The drawing shall be prepared at a numerical scale on ~ (.I )
11lC.M el'""""'J 2.v, '-11:.l Q.- ~o Fee-+- h .... ~.·z_of\+c-1.~ 0..1\.J
O" 'l. Ct) ; 11 i:h ei ;...vi z. '-'l c- ,- S" Fe~ t ve..-t; c..~I
graphic scale symbol shall be placed on the drawing.
A
L Street Names - All existing and proposed street names shall be shown on the
plat drawing. New street names shall be sufficiently different in sound and
in spelling from other road names in the City so as to not cause confusion.
A road which is, or is planned as a continuation of, an existing road shall bear
the same name.
M_ Street Right-of-Way - The width of all existing and proposed public street
rights-of-way shall be shown on the plat drawing and be consistent with the
minimum requirements contained in the Design Manual and the Master
Thoroughfare Plan. Dimensions shall be shown for all curves. The distance
from the centerline of any existing roadway of a boundary street to the
proposed subdivision shall be shown to determine the adequate of right-ofway
along the route and to determine if additional right-of-way is necessary
to accommodate the proposed street. Sufficient iron pins shall be found or
set and shown on the drawing together with dimensions to adequately
describe all perimeter streets.
N. Subdivision Boundary - The proposed subdivision boundarj lines shall be
shown in heavy lines so as to provide a differentiation with the internal
features of the area being proposed for platting. The location and dimensions
of all boundary lines of the property shall be expressed to the nearest
hundredth foot.
0. Subdivision Name - The name of the proposed subdivision with
predominantly larger letters than those used elsewhere shall be shown on the
drawing, within the Title Block. The proposed name of the subdivision shall
not be a duplication of any existing subdivision name, whether by spelling or
W:~.Qrdinances.Subd1v1s1on.wpd (01128i03J Page 43
n
~
~
~
' '
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
' ~
~
I
pronunciation, or similar to any other subdivision within the City unless the
proposed subdivision is contiguous with a subsequent filing or a replat of an
existing subdivision. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have final
authority to require a change in the proposed name of the subdivision.
P. Title Block - In addition to the name of the subdivision shall be an entry
indicating whether the plat is a Preliminary Plat, Final Plat, Replat, Minor Plat,
Amending Plat, or Development Plat.
Q. Vicinity Location Map - A small vicinity location map shall be shown on the
plat drawing. The vicinity location map shall be drawn at an approximate
scale of 1 "= 2000' and show sufficient streets, Collector and Arterial Street
names, and major features of the surrounding area to locate the area being
subdivided.
R. Surveyor's Certification - Every final plat drawing shall contain a Surveyor's
Certification of Compliance by a Professional Land Surveyor registered in the
State of Texas. The Certification of Compliance shall not be less than one
and one-half inches high and four inches wide and contain the following
information:
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS
That I, , a Registered Professional Land Surveyor
licensed in the State of Texas, do hereby certify that this Plat is true and
correct and was prepared from an actual survey made under my
supervision on the ground.
Signature Date
Phone Number: ------ (Affix Seal)
Section 11.2 Additional Requirements for Preliminary Plat Drawings
In addition to the minimum information required of all plat drawings contained in Section
11.1 of these Subdivision Regulations, every Preliminary Plat Drawing shall include the
information contained in this section.
A. Permanent and Temporary Structures - The location and general outline of
any existing permanent or temporary structures with sufficient dimensions to
determine building line encroachments shall be shown on the plat drawing.
8. Sectionalizing or Phasing of Plats - The plat drawing shall indicate any
sectionalizing or phasing of the proposed subdivision. Thereafter, plats of
subsequent units of such subdivision shall conform to the approved overall
layout and phasing, unless a new Preliminary Plat is submitted. However, a
subsequent reduction of a phase may be considered provided that it
conforms to the original street arrangement.
W:\EVERMAN\Ord1nances\Subd1v1sion wpd (01128103)
,
,
,~
,
,
r ..•
~
~
,!
'!
,~
,
,
,~
~
~
C. Zoning Classification - The plat drawing shall indicate the current zoning
classification of the proposed subdivision and all adjacent properties.
D. Lot Dimensions - The approximate dimensions of all proposed or existing lots
with sufficient detail to verify compliance with the specific requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance shall be shown on the plat drawing.
E. Flood Plain Features - The location of the 100-year flood limits, if applicable,
shall be shown on the Preliminary Plat drawing. If the subdivision or a portion
thereof is located in a 100 year flood-prone area, the developer will be
required to comply with the Design Manual and the Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance.
F. Certificate of Approvaf - Every Preliminary Plat Drawing shall contain a
Certificate of Approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The
Certtficate of Approval shall not be less than one and one-half inches high
and four inches wide and contain the following information:
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Everman, Texas voted
affirmatively on this __ day of , 20_, to approve this
Preliminary Plat.
Attest:
Secretary, Planning and Zoning Commission
Section 11.3 Additional Requirements for Replats, Minor Plats, Amending Plats,
and Final Plat Drawings
Every Replat, Minor Plat. Amending Plat, or Final Plat drawing shall include the following
information in addition to the minimum infonnation required of all plat drawings contained
in Section 11.1 of these regulations.
A. Metes and Bounds Description - A written metes and bounds description of
thi~ property shall be shown on the plat drawing that will readily determine the
location, bearing and length of all perimeter boundary lines, and be capable
of reproducing such lines upon the ground with a closure error of less than
1 :25,000. The Legal Description shall include reference to an original survey
or subdivision corner, and the Texas NAD83 State Plane Coordinate System.
The Legal Description shall include the acreage of the total area of the
proposed subdivision and be consistent with the subdivision boundary, and
information to show the fast instrument conveying title to each parcel of
property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving grantee and land
W:\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01128103) Page45
,
f
~-
f
t
t
t
t
'
8.
C.
D.
E.
records references. The Legal Description will also be shown in its entirety
on a separate 8 1/2 x 11 or 8 1/2 x 14 inch sheet of qond paper to meet the
filing requirements of the Tarrant County Clerk.
Lot Dimensions - The exact dimensions of alt proposed or existing lots and
the perimeter boundary of the subdivision shall be shown on the plat drawing.
Lot Areas - The area for each lot expressed in square feet shall be shown on
the plat drawing. (This information may be shown in tabular form on the plat
or on a separate sheet.)
Irregular Side Lot Lines - Side lot lines which are not perpendicular to the
street right-of-way shall be indicated with bearing and distance.
Permanent Structure Encroachments - Any permanent structures which
encroach any building set-back lines and will remain after completion of the
development shall be shown on the drawing with appropriate dimensions.
F. Drainage Easements- The location of any drainage easements, if applicable,
shall be shown on the plat drawing. If the subdivision or a portion thereof is
located in the 100 year flood-prone area, the developer will be required to
comply with the provisions of the Design Manual and the Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance.
G. Planning and Zoning Commission Approval Certification - Every Rep/at or
Final Plat shall contain a Certificate of Approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission as will Amending and Minor Plats when appropriate. The
Certificate of Approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall not be
less than two inches high and four and one-half inches wide and contain the
·following information:
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Everman, Texas voted
affirmatively on this _ day of , 20_, to recommend
approval of this Plat by the City Council.
Chairman, Planning and Zoning Commission
Attest:
Secretary, Planning and Zoning Commission
H. Tarrant County Certification - Any Certification block required by the Tarrant
County Clerk's Office for filing shall be shown on the plat drawing.
I. Dedication Certificate - Every Rep/at, Amending Plat, Minor Plat, or Final Plat
shall contain an Owner's Certificate of Dedication as follows:
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision. wpd (01 /28/03) Page 46
~ I
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'I
KNOW ALL ME BY THESE PRESENTS:
That I, (owners name) do hereby certify that I am the legal owner of the above
described tract of land and do hereby convey to the public or public use, the
streets, alleys, rights-of-way, easements, and any other public areas shown on this
plat.
Signature of Owner
ST ATE OF TEXAS §
COUNTY OF TARRANT §
Before me, the undersigned Notary Public in and for said county and State on this
day personally appeared , known to me to be the person whose
name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument and acknowledged to me that he
executed the same for the purpose and considerations therein expressed, and in
the capacity therein stated.
Given under my hand and seal of office this __ day of _______ _
20
Notary Public in and for Tarrant County
Printed Name
My commission expires: _____ _
J. City Council Approval Certification - Every Replat or Final Plat shall contain
a Certificate of Approval by the City Council as will Amending and Minor Plats
when approved by the City Council. The Certificate of Approval by the City
Council shaH not be less than two inches high and four inches wide and
contain the information shown below. A similar certificate wittiout the voting
statement will be provided for the City Manager approval of Amending and
Minor Plats when appropriate.
W:'EVERMAN'.Ordinances\Subd1v1s1on. wpd (01128/03) Page 47
n
i
I
I
' I
I
I
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
' ~
~
I
The City Council of the City of Everman, Texas voted affirmatively on this __ day
of , 20 _ , to approve of this Plat for filing of record.
Mayor, City of Everman
ATIEST:
City Secretary
Section 11.4 Additional Requirements for Development Plats
In addition to other requirements set forth in these Subdivision Regulations, every
Development Plat shall be prepared as a boundary survey showing:
A. each existing or proposed building, structure, or improvement or proposed
modification of the external configuration of the building, structure, or
improvement involving a change of the building, structure, or improvement;
B. each easement and right-of-way within or abutting the boundary of the
surveyed property; and
C. the dimensions of each street, sidewalk, alley, square, park, or other part of
the property intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of
purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the street, sidewalk,
alley, square, park, or other part.
W:IEVERMAN'.Ordinances\Subd1v1sion.wpd (01/28/03) Page 48
,
'
' '
'
'
'
'
'
'
' 'I
CHAPTER 12
SUBDIVISION DESIGN CRITERIA
Section 12.1 General Design Criteria
Every Subdivision Plat shall be reviewed by the City for conformance with the design
criteria contained in this Chapter. The City recognizes that suitability characteristics vary
from site to site and the Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide oversight in their
interpretation, application and enforcement of these criteria.
A. Access from Major Thoroughfares - Where a residential subdivision borders
or contains an existing or proposed thoroughfare, as shown on the Master
Thoroughfare Plan, residential lots shall not in general, where possible, have
frontage onto or derive access directly from an existing or proposed Collector
Street, or larger. Non-residential lots which have frontage onto or derive
access directly from an existing or proposed Collector Street, as shown on
the Master Thoroughfare Plan, shall have driveway locations which comply
with the spacing requirements contained in the Design Manual.
B. Block Depths - Blocks should have sufficient depth to provide for two (2) rows
of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block depth may
be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads, waterways or city
limit lines. The use of a public alley shall be limited to non-residential
subdivisions.
C. Block Lengths - Block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed fifteen
(15) times the minimum lot width required in the zoning district or 1,000 feet
{whichever is less) long without an intersection with another street. Blocks
designed for industrial uses may be of such length and width as determined
and appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Commission for the prospective
use. In long blocks, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require the
reservation of an easement through the block to accommodate utilities,
drainage facilities, fire apparatus access, or pedestrian traffic. When such an
easement is required, additional width shall be included in the adjacent lots.
D. Buildable Area - Every residential lot proposed for development shall contain
a buildable area which contains, at a minimum, 125 percent of the minimum
structure square footage required for the applicable zoning district. The
buildable area shall be situated out of the 100 Year Special Flood Hazard
Area and drainage easements or drainage rights-of-way.
E. Character of the Land - Land which the Planning and Zoning Commission
finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due to flooding,
improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations
or topography, utility easements, or other features which will reasonably be
harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the present or future
inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be
subdivided or developed until adequate methods are formulated by the
developer and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission to solve
W:\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01/28/03) Page 49
the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions.
F. Conformity With Comprehensive Land Use Plan- Every subdivision plat shall
conform to the City's Comprehensive Land Use Plan, Zoning Ordinance,
Subdivision Ordinance, and other applicable City standards .
G. Corner Lots -Additional lot width should be considered for corner lots to allow
for one full size and one half size front yard set-back areas.
H. Cul-de-sac Length - No street may be designed to be dead-ended without the
installation of a cul-de-sac with a fifty (50) foot right-of-way radius and a forty
(40) foot pavement radius fa.c:.e.. +... F.:i:"ce.of curb. No cul-de-sac street may
exceed six hundred (600) feet in length, as measured along the street
centerline from the projected curb intersection to the farthest curb location
and no cul-de-sac shall exceed five hundred (500) feet unless the water main
is looped.
I. Double Frontage Lots - Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be
avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential
development from Collector or Arterial Streets or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography and orientation. The Planning and Zoning
Commission may require that a restriction be placed on the plat to limit the
facing of main structures or limit driveway access from any Collector or
Arterial Street.
J. Drainage Easements - The City will advise the developer when to utilize
either a drainage easement or a drainage right-of-way to accommodate
drainage facilities in the subdivision. When a drainage easement is utilized,
lot lines shall normally be drawn to the center of the drainage easement and
the drainage easement shown with a dashed line. Areas within drainage
easements and drainage rights-of-way shall not be included within the
required buildable area that is, at a minimum, 125 percent of the minimum
square footage required for the proposed structure in the applicable zoning
district.
K. Grading and Lot Drainage - Residential lot grading shall be conducted in a
manner which will not allow runoff to cross more than two lots, including the
lot on which the drainage originates, before it enters a street or drainage
easement. If this is not possible, then a drainage easement must be provided
and any necessary facilities shall be constructed and installed by the
developer. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from
all buildings. Individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general
storm drainage pattern for the area. Grading which will result in the need for
earth restraining structures greater in height than four ( 4) feet will require
installation of an engineered retaining wall constructed in accordance with the
current building code.
L. Intersection Angles - Spacing of intersections along major streets shall
conform to the Design Manual. Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect
at any one point unless specifically approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street
W :\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivis1on. wpd (01128103) Page 50
~
~
' I
'
'
'I
shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existinq intersections on the
opposite side of such street.
1. Apropos rsection of two (2) new streets at an angle of less than
seventy-five (75) e shall not be acceptable. An oblique street
intersection or curved street a ching an intersection should be
approximately at right angles for at
intersection.
Stree J · h center-line offsets of less than one hundred and
seventy-five (175) II not be permitted, except where the
intersected street has separate ·ves without median breaks at
either intersection.
M. Lot Dimensions - Lot dimensions shall be consistent with the minimum
standards of the Zoning Ordinance. Conventional design practices for
subdivision planning requires that side lot lines be at right angles to street
lines or as a radial. However, lot lines which are not at right angles to street
lines, or shown as a radial, shall contain a bearing notation. Dimensions of
comer lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of buildings, observing
the minimum front and side-yard setback from both streets. Depth and width
of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial
purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading
facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as
established in the Zoning Ordinance.
N. Masonry Screening Walls - For residential subdivisions and the rear property
line of non-residential subdivisions, masonry screening walls shall be
constructed adjacent to any street designated as Thoroughfare, or larger, on
the Master Thoroughfare Plan. No screening wall shall be constructed within
the street right-of-way.
0. Multiple Entrance and Exit Locations - The use of two or more entrance and
exit locations is required when the subdivision contains forty (40) or more
lots. However, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend a
waiver of this requirement when alternative proposals are determined to be
practical and sound planning principles have been considered.
'
P. Rights-of-Way - Right-of-way widths shall be consistent with those shown on
the Master Thoroughfare Plan. Right-of-Way widths in excess of the
standards designated on the Master Thoroughfare Plan shall be required
whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide
adequate earth slopes. Furthermore, street right-of-way widths in
commercial, industrial and similar high intensity land use areas shall be
appropriate forthe type of development being proposed, but no street in such
area shall be less than the minimum required for a Collector Street.
Q. Water bodies - If a tract being subdivided contains a water body, or portion
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01128103) Page 51
,1
,
12.2
thereof, lot lines shall be drawn so as to distribute the entire ownership of the
water body among adjacent lots. The Planning and Zoning Commission may
approve an alternative plan whereby the ownership of and responsibility for
safe maintenance of the water body is so placed that it wi!! net beCQme a
local government responsibility. If a water body is intended to be srtuated on
its own lot, the lot shall be numbered according to the numbering sequence
of the subdivision. Furthermore, any lot intended to be used as a b-.A:1ab:e
lot which includes a water body shall contain a buildable area that is. a; a
minimum, 125 percent of the minimum square footage required fQ:" appS::::at'e
zoning district.
Application to Development Plats
Recognizing that Development Plats are routinely utilized in connection ~ the
development of properties that have been previously created or recorded and are~
of limited size or dimensions, the design criteria set forth in Section 12.1 are ger.eolly
intended to be applicable to subdivision plats only. However, to the extent that compiance
would not create an unnecessary hardship on the development of a Development P.at tne
above design criteria shall apply.
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01128/03) Page 52
,
' I
' I
'
I
I
'
'
' t
'
'
'I
CHAPTER 13
STREET AND EASEMENT VACATIONS
13.1 In General
A. A petition requesting the proposed closing or vacation must be presented to the
Planning and Zoning Coordinator together with the appropriate filing fee. Such
petition must contain the names, addresses, phone numbers, and signatures of all
property owners owning property adjacent to the portion of the street or easement
which is proposed to be vacated. The applicant must submit a metes and bounds
legal description and a graphic exhibit of the portion of the right-of-way to be
abandoned which must be signed and sealed by a Registered Professional Land
Surveyor. In addition, a Standard Form of Vacation Acknowledgment shall be
completed and submitted for each utility currently located within the right-of-way or
easement.
B.
C.
The Planning and Zoning Coordinator will set a public hearing regarding the
proposed closing before the Planning and Zoning Commission at a regularly
scheduled meeting. Public notices will be mailed to all property owners
affected by the proposed closing or vacation at least fifteen (15) days prior
to the scheduled meeting.
The City staff will perform the following:
1. Secure an appraisal of the value of the physical property involved in
the closure. The appraisal may be performed by an employee of the
City who is knowledgeable of property values, or by an independent
appraiser hired by the City.
2. Prepare and submit for City Council approval, recommendations for
the proposed sale and or lease based upon the estimated value and
the best interests of the City and owners of the adjacent property.
3. Prepare an ordinance and appropriate documents for transfer or lease
of the property involved in the vacation or closure.
4. The Planning and Zoning Commission will conduct a public hearing
allowing the opportunity for interested parties to address their opinions
of the proposed closing or vacation. At the close of the fublic Hearing
the Commission will make a recommendation to the City Council as
to the advisability of approving the proposed closing or vacation.
D. The proposed closing or vacation will then be set for public hearing before
the City Council by the following notices:
1. The hearing will be advertised by the publishing of a legal notice in the
official newspaper of the City at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
scheduled hearing.
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01/28/03) Page 53
f
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'
'I
2.
3.
Adjacent property owners will be notified by mail of the proposed
public hearing at least fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled hearing.
Notice of the proposed hearing before the City Council will be posted
in a public place within the City at seventy-two (72) hours prior to the
scheduled hearing.
E. The City Council will conduct the public hearing on the proposed closing or
vacation allowing the opportunity for all interested parties to express their
opinions on the matter. At the close of the public hearing, the City Council will
make a determination as to whether the evidence presented at the hearing
together with the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission
provide sufficient justification for proceeding with the closure or vacation.
The closure or vacation of street right-of-way shall be approved by ordinance.
W:\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01128103) Page 54


CHAPTER 14
INSTALLATION OF PERMANENT FIELD MONUMENTS
Section 14.1 General
The applicant shall place permanent reference monuments in the subdivision or
development as required herein and under the direction of a Registered Land Surveyor or
Professional Engineer. All such monuments shall be set flush with or below the ground and
planted in such a manner that they will not be generally disturbed.
Section 14.2 Subdivision Boundaries
The external boundaries of a subdivision shall be documented in the field by monuments
of not less than four (4) inches square or five (5) inches in diameter, and marked on top
with a cross, brass plug, iron rod, or other durable material securely embedded; or by iron
rods or pipes not less than eighteen (18) inches in length and one-half ('h) inch in diameter.
These monuments shall be placed at all corners of the subdivision boundary, at each end
of all curves, at the point where a curve changes its radius, at all angle points in any line,
and at all angle points along a meandering line.
Section 14.3 Internal Block Corners
All internal block corners. intersections, street angle points and curves tangents shall
receive permanent monuments in the field by iron rods or pipes at least eighteen (18)
inches long and one-half ('h) inch in diameter.
Section 14.4 Lot Comers
All comers of all lots shall receive monuments in the field by iron rods eighteen (18) inches
long and one-half ('h) inch in diameter.
W:\EVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01/28/03) Page 55

Exhibit "A" to Subdivision Ordinance
DESIGN MANUAL
W:IEVERMAN\Ordinances\Subdivision.wpd (01128103) Page 56