7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/665
Town of Fairview
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 7
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through
Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 3/6/18.
HOME RULE
CHARTER*
CHAPTER ONE
INCORPORATION AND BOUNDARIES
SECTION 1.01 PREAMBLE
We the people of the Town of Fairview, under the authority granted by the constitution and laws of the State of
Texas, in order to secure the benefits of self-government and to provide for an effective, responsive, and
responsible local government, do hereby adopt this home rule charter as the basic foundation of our Town
government.
SECTION 1.02 INCORPORATION
All inhabitants of the Town of Fairview, Collin County, Texas, as the boundaries and limits of said Town have
heretofore been established and now exist, or may hereafter be established, shall constitute a municipal body
politic incorporated under and known by the name “Town of Fairview” with such powers, rights duties,
privileges, and immunities as are herein provided.
SECTION 1.03 BOUNDARIES AND LIMITS
The boundaries and limits of the Town of Fairview shall be those as established and described in ordinances
duly passed by the Town Council of the Town of Fairview in accordance with state law. The Town Secretary
shall at all times keep a correct map of the boundaries and limits of the Town.
State law references–Municipal boundaries and annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 41 et seq.
SECTION 1.04 ANNEXATIONS AND DISANNEXATIONS
The Town may from time to time alter its boundaries by annexing any territory adjoining its present or future
boundaries in any size or shape desired in any manner provided by state law, with or without consent of the
owners of such territory or the inhabitants thereof. The Town may from time to time alter its boundaries by
disannexing any territory adjoining its present or future boundaries by passage of an ordinance describing the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/665
territory being disannexed. Any additional territory annexed to the Town shall be a part of the Town for all
purposes, and the property situated herein shall bear its pro rata part of the taxes levied by the Town as provided
by state law. The inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all rights and privileges of all citizens and shall be bound
by the acts, ordinances, and resolutions of the Town.
State law references–Municipal boundaries and annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 41 et seq.; municipal annexation,
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 43; authority of home-rule municipality to annex area, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
43.021; annexation of property during tax year, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 26.14.
CHAPTER TWO
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
SECTION 2.01 FORM OF GOVERNMENT
Municipal government for the Town of Fairview shall be a “council-manager government.” Except as otherwise
provided by this Charter and the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, all powers conferred on the Town
shall be exercised by a Town Council to be composed of a Mayor and six (6) Council Members in Seats 1, 2, 3,
4, 5 & 6 elected by qualified voters for a term of two (2) years.
SECTION 2.02 POWERS OF THE TOWN
The Town of Fairview shall be a Home Rule Town under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas and
shall have all powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every kind and nature granted to a Home
Rule Town under Article XI, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Texas, known as the Home Rule
Amendment, and all other laws passed by the Legislature of the State of Texas relating thereto, or which may
hereafter be passed by said Legislature in relation to such matters including, but not limited to the following
powers:
(1) To assess, levy, and collect taxes for general and special purposes.
(2) To contract and be contracted with, to buy, sell, lease, lease-purchase, mortgage, manage, and
control such property, within or without its boundaries or within boundaries of other municipalities,
as its interests require.
(3) To fix and regulate the rates, tolls, or charges and the kind of service of all public utilities of
every kind, unless otherwise required by state law.
(4) To pass such ordinances as may be expedient to protect the peace, lives, health, and property of
such inhabitants.
(5) To have the exclusive right to erect, own, maintain, acquire, and operate a waterworks system
for the use of said Town and its inhabitants.
(6) To lay out, open, close, establish, alter, widen, lower, extend, grade, supervise, maintain, and
improve streets, alleys, and parks.
(7) To appropriate the money of the Town for all lawful purposes to create, provide for, construct,
regulate and maintain public improvements and to furnish municipal services.
State law references–Powers of home-rule municipality, V.T.C.S. art. 1175; general powers of home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A.,
Local Government Code, sec. 51.071 et seq.; authority of local self-government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 51.072.
SECTION 2.03 POWERS - GENERAL
The enumeration of particular powers in the Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition
to the powers enumerated herein, implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the Town shall have and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/665
may exercise all other powers which under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas it would be competent
for the Charter specifically to enumerate.
CHAPTER THREE
TOWN COUNCIL
SECTION 3.01 MAYOR
The person elected Mayor shall be the governmental and ceremonial head of the Town government and be able
to vote on all matters coming before the Town Council.
SECTION 3.02 QUALIFICATIONS
Each candidate for election to the Town Council or office of Mayor shall be a qualified voter of the Town, shall
be not less than twenty-one (21) years of age, shall have resided in the Town not less than twelve (12) months
immediately preceding election day and shall meet the requirements of the Texas Election Code. Each Council
Member and the Mayor must continually reside within the Town during his/her term of office, and any removal
of his/her residence from the Town during his/her term of office shall constitute a vacation of his/her office, and
such vacancy shall be filled as provided in Section 3.05.
SECTION 3.03 LIMITATION ON SUCCESSIVE TERMS
No person shall serve as Mayor for more than three (3) successive terms, and no person shall serve as Council
Member for more than three (3) successive terms. A term of office shall be for a period of two (2) years or any
portion thereof. This provision shall apply to all elections held subsequent to the adoption of this Charter.
SECTION 3.04 COMPENSATION
Members of the Town Council shall serve without compensation, except that Council Members shall be entitled
to reimbursement of all necessary and reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their official Town
Council duties, upon approval of such expenses by the Town Council.
SECTION 3.05 VACANCIES IN THE TOWN COUNCIL; FILLING OF VACANCIES
A. The office of a Council Member or office of the Mayor shall become vacant upon his/her death,
resignation, or removal from office in any manner authorized by law, removal of his/her residence from the
Town of Fairview or forfeiture of his/her office.
B. A Council Member or the Mayor shall forfeit his/her office if he/she lacks at any time during his/her term
of office any qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or by State law, or if he/she fails to attend
three (3) consecutive regular Town Council meetings without being excused by the Town Council. The Town
Council shall be the final judge in matters involving forfeiture of office by a Council Member.
C. If for any reason a vacancy exists on the Town Council, the remaining members of the Council shall select
a person qualified for the position, as described in the Charter, within thirty (30) days of the occurrence of the
vacancy. Once appointed, the person shall serve until the position can be filled at the next regular town election.
State law reference–Special election to fill vacancy generally, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 201.051 et seq.
SECTION 3.06 MEETINGS/QUORUM
Regular meetings of the Town Council shall be held at such times as may be prescribed from time to time by
resolution of the Town Council. Special meetings shall be called by the Town Secretary upon the written request
of the Mayor, the Town Manager or two (2) Members of the Town Council. Notice of any regular or special
meetings of the Town Council shall state the subject(s) to be considered at the meeting. All official meetings of
the Council and of all committees thereof shall be open to the public as provided by state law. Those meetings
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/665
involving an attorney and client relationship need not be open to the public. A quorum shall consist of four (4)
Members, one of whom may be the Mayor. The Council shall determine its own rules of procedure, may punish
its Members for misconduct and may compel the attendance of absent members.
State law reference–Open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 551.
SECTION 3.07 MAYOR PRO TEM
The Town Council shall elect one of its members as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall perform the duties of Mayor in
the case of the absence or inability of the Mayor to perform the duties of his/her office, and who shall, during
that time, be vested with all the powers belonging to the Mayor.
CHAPTER FOUR
TOWN MANAGER
SECTION 4.01 TOWN MANAGER QUALIFICATIONS, APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL;
DUTIES; COMPENSATION
The Town Manager shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the Town. The Town Manager is
appointed by and serves at the will of the Town Council. The Town Manager shall be appointed solely on the
basis of his/her administrative ability, experience, and training. The Town Manager shall administer the business
of the Town, and the Town Council shall ensure that such administration is efficient. The Town Council may by
ordinance delegate to the Town Manager any additional powers or duties it considers proper for the efficient
administration of Town affairs. The Town Manager shall execute a bond conditioned that he/she will faithfully
perform the duties of Town Manager. The amount of such bond shall be as prescribed by ordinance adopted by
the Town Council. The Town Council shall be authorized to enter into a Contract of Employment with the Town
Manager and to prescribe such compensation therein as it may fix. The action of the Town Council in
suspending or removing the Town Manager shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest all
authority and responsibility for such suspension or removal in the Town Council.
SECTION 4.02 DIRECTION AND SUPERVISION OF EMPLOYEES, NON-INTERFERENCE BY
COUNCIL, APPOINTMENTS AND REMOVALS OF DEPARTMENT HEADS
Neither the Mayor nor any Town Council member shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any
Town administrative officer or employee whom the Town Manager or any or his subordinates are empowered to
appoint; but the Mayor and Town Council members may express their views and fully and freely discuss with
the Town Manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees.
Except for the purpose of inquiries and for investigations, the Mayor or Town Council members shall deal with
Town officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the Town Manager solely
through the Town Manager, and neither the Mayor nor Town Council members shall give orders to such officers
or employees either publicly or privately.
If the Town Manager is temporarily unable to perform appointed duties, the Town Council or Town Manager
may designate an alternate.
SECTION 4.03 SPECIFIC POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TOWN MANAGER
The Town Manager shall be responsible to the Town Council for the proper administration of the affairs of the
Town and shall have the power and duty to:
(1) Exercise control over all departments and subdivisions thereof created by this Charter or by
ordinance.
(2) Prepare and recommend items for inclusion in the official agenda of all Town Council meetings
and meetings of the Boards and Commissions as established by this Charter or ordinance.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/665
(3) Prepare and submit to the Town Council the annual budget and capital program, and administer
the budget as adopted by the Town Council.
(4) Be responsible for the proper administration of all Town affairs entrusted to his/her authority.
(5) See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Town or its inhabitants in any public
utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed.
(6) See that all laws and ordinances are enforced.
(7) Keep the Town Council at all time fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the
Town, and prepare and submit to the Town Council an annual report on the finances and
administrative activities of the Town, including the report of the annual audit required by state law.
(8) Appoint, suspend, and or remove employees not otherwise provided for in this Charter.
(9) Attend all Town Council meetings and take part in the discussion of any Town business.
(10) Recommend to the Town Council for adoption such measures as he/she deems necessary or
expedient; to execute deeds, deeds of trust, easements, releases, contracts, and all other legal
instruments on behalf of the Town when authorized by ordinance or resolution of the Town Council,
and approved as to form by the Town Attorney.
(11) Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or as required by the Town Council
by ordinance or resolution, not inconsistent with this Charter.
CHAPTER FIVE
TOWN DEPARTMENTS/FISCAL ADMINISTRATION*
SECTION 5.01 ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
There shall be such administrative departments as are established by this Charter and such other administrative
departments as may be deemed necessary by the Town Council and as are established by ordinance, all of which
shall be under the control and direction of the Town Manager.
SECTION 5.02 TAX ADMINISTRATION
A. There shall be a Department of Taxation to assess and collect taxes, the Director of which shall be the
Town Tax Assessor and Collector who shall be appointed by the Town Council; however, in the alternative, the
Town Council may provide for such services by contract.
B. The Town Council shall have the power, and is hereby authorized, to levy, assess, and collect annual taxes
not to exceed the maximum limit set by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, as they now exist or as
they may be amended, on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) assessed valuation of all property having a
location within the corporate limits of the Town and not exempt from taxation by the Constitution and laws of
the State of Texas.
C. All taxes due the Town shall be payable at the office of the Town Assessor and Collector and may be paid
at any time after the tax rolls for the year have been completed and approved, which completion and approval
shall be not later than October 1st. Taxes shall be paid before February 1st of each year succeeding the year for
which the taxes are levied. All such taxes not paid prior to such date shall be deemed delinquent and shall be
subject to such penalty and interest as may be provided by law. Failure to levy and assess taxes through omission
in preparation of the approved tax rolls shall not relieve the person, firm or corporation so omitted from the
obligation to pay such current or past due taxes shown to be payable by recheck of the rolls and receipts for the
years in question, unless otherwise provided by law.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/665
D. All property having its location in the Town on January 1st of each year shall stand charged with a lien in
favor of the Town from said date for the taxes due thereon. The lien provided hereby shall be superior to all
other liens except other tax liens, regardless of when such other liens were created. All persons purchasing any
of said property on or after January 1st in any year shall take the property subject to the lien herein provided. In
addition to the lien herein provided on January 1st of any year, the owner of property subject to taxation by the
Town shall be personally liable for the taxes due thereon for such year. The Town shall have the power to sue for
and recover personal judgment for taxes without foreclosure, or to foreclose its lien or liens, or to recover both
personal judgment and foreclosure. In such suit where it appears that the description of any property in the Town
assessment rolls is insufficient to identify such property, the Town shall have the right to plead a good
description of the property to be assessed, to prove the same, and to have its judgment foreclosing the tax lien
and/or for personal judgment against the owner for such taxes as such ownership and property appears on the
certified tax roll.
State law references–Texas Property Tax Code supersedes municipal charter, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 1.02; tax liens and personal
liability, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, ch. 32; local taxation, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, ch. 301 et seq.; property taxes authorized, V.T.C.A., Tax Code,
sec. 302.001; occupation taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 302.101; tax collection powers, V.T.C.A, Tax Code, sec. 302.102.
SECTION 5.03 FISCAL YEAR
The fiscal year of the Town shall begin on October 1st and end on the following September 30th of each year,
but the fiscal year may be changed by the Town Council by ordinance.
State law references–General fiscal power to establish fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 101.022; city fiscal year,
V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 1.05.
SECTION 5.04 ANNUAL BUDGET
It shall be the duty of the Town Manager to submit an annual budget not later than thirty (30) days prior to the
end of the current fiscal year to the Town Council for its review, consideration and revision. The Town Council
shall call a public hearing or hearings on the budget. The Town Council may adopt a budget with or without
amendments. The Town Council may increase or decrease amounts or programs and may delete any programs or
amounts except expenditures required by law or for a debt service, provided that no amendment shall increase
the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total of the estimated income for the current fiscal year
plus funds available from prior years. At the close of each fiscal year, the unencumbered balance of each
appropriation shall revert to the fund from which it was appropriated and shall be subject to future
appropriations, but appropriations may be made in furtherance of improvements or other objects of work of the
Town that will not be completed within the current year.
State law reference–Municipal budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 102.
SECTION 5.05 FAILURE TO ADOPT ANNUAL BUDGET
If the Town Council fails to adopt the budget by September 30th, the amounts appropriated for the current fiscal
year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month to month basis with all items in it prorated
accordingly until such time as the Town Council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The levy of property
tax will be set to equal the total current fiscal year tax receipts, unless the ensuing fiscal year budget is approved
by September 30th of the current fiscal year.
SECTION 5.06 BONDS AND OTHER EVIDENCES OF INDEBTEDNESS
The Town shall have the power to borrow money on the faith and credit of the Town. The Town shall also have
the authority to issue or sell bonds, warrants, certificates of obligation, notes or other securities authorized by the
laws of the State of Texas for permanent public improvements or for any other public purpose not prohibited by
the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/665
other evidences of indebtedness of the Town previously issued. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity
with the laws of the State of Texas.
The Town shall further have the power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, acquiring, improving,
extending or repairing of public utilities, recreational facilities or any other self-liquidating municipal function
not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue revenue bonds to evidence the
obligations created thereby. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable from the properties, or interest
therein pledged, or the income there from, or both. The holders of the revenue bonds of the Town shall not have
the right to demand payment thereof out of monies raised or to be raised by taxation. All such bonds shall be
issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas. The Town shall have the power to borrow money for
public improvements in any other manner provided by law, including certificates of obligation as authorized by
Chapter 271 of the Texas Local Government Code. All bonds and evidences of indebtedness of the Town having
been approved by the Attorney General and registered by the Comptroller of Public Accounts shall thereafter be
incontestable in any court or other forum for any reason, and shall be valid and binding obligations of the Town
in accordance with their terms for all purposes.
State law references–Public Security Procedures Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 1201; refunding bonds, V.T.C.A., Government
Code, ch. 1207; bond elections generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 1251; municipal bonds, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch.
1331; authority of municipality to issue bonds for public improvements, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 1331.052.
CHAPTER SIX
TOWN SECRETARY
SECTION 6.01 APPOINTMENT, REMOVAL AND COMPENSATION
The Town Secretary shall be appointed by the Town Manager, with the advice and consent of the Town Council.
The Town Secretary shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the Town Council. If the Town
Secretary is temporarily unable to perform appointed duties, the Town Secretary or Town Manager may
designate an alternate.
SECTION 6.02 DUTIES OF THE TOWN SECRETARY
The Town Secretary shall:
(1) Attend all meetings of the Town Council and keep accurate records of all actions taken by the
council.
(2) Maintain the official records and files of the Town.
(3) Administer oaths required by law.
(4) Attest contracts, assessment certificates, ordinances, resolutions, and other legal instruments
when executed by the authorized officers of the Town.
(5) Serve as the election official for all Town elections.
(6) Hold and maintain the Town seal and affix it to all appropriate documents as required.
(7) Perform such other duties as may be required by the Town Manager, this Charter, or the laws of
the State of Texas.
CHAPTER SEVEN
TOWN ATTORNEY
SECTION 7.01 APPOINTMENT
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/665
The Town Council shall appoint a competent licensed attorney of recognized ability and he/she shall be known
as the Town Attorney, who shall report to the Town Council.
SECTION 7.02 COMPENSATION
The Town Attorney shall receive for his/her services such compensation as may be fixed by the Town Council.
SECTION 7.03 DUTIES OF TOWN ATTORNEY
The Town Attorney shall be the legal adviser of, and attorney for, all of the offices and departments of the Town,
and shall represent the Town in all litigation and legal proceedings. The Town Council may retain special
counsel at any time it deems appropriate and necessary. He/she shall review and approve as to form all
documents, contracts, resolutions, ordinances, and legal instruments in which the Town may have an interest.
The Town Attorney shall perform other duties prescribed by the Charter, by ordinance or by resolution of the
Town Council.
CHAPTER EIGHT
MUNICIPAL COURT
SECTION 8.01 CREATION
The Town Council shall, by ordinance, create and provide for a Municipal Court to be known as the Municipal
Court of the Town of Fairview, Texas, and may appoint one or more Municipal Judges to serve in such Court.
The Court shall have all the powers and duties as are now or as may hereafter be prescribed by the laws of the
State of Texas in connection with the trial of misdemeanor offenses within its jurisdiction.
SECTION 8.02 MUNICIPAL COURT JUDGE
The Judge of the Municipal Court, and all alternates, shall be competent, duly qualified, and licensed attorneys
in the State of Texas. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall be appointed to a term of two (2) years and may be
appointed to additional and consecutive terms at the will and pleasure of the Town Council. The Judge shall
receive such compensation as may be determined by the Town Council. This compensation shall be fixed and
commensurate with the duties performed by the Judge.
SECTION 8.03 CLERK OF THE COURT
There shall be a Clerk of the Municipal Court appointed by the Town Manager. The Clerk of the Court and any
Deputies appointed by the Town Manager shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make
certificates, affix the seal of said court as necessary and as required by law, and in general do and perform any
and all acts usual and necessary to be performed by clerks and deputy clerks of municipal courts of the State of
Texas.
SECTION 8.04 JURISDICTION, POWER AND FINES
The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction:
(1) Over the forfeiture and collection of bonds given in proceedings therein, to order the forfeiture
of cash appearance bonds upon the failure of the defendant to appear, and to accept the same in lieu
of a fine.
(2) Concurrent with the appropriate State court, of all criminal cases arising under the criminal
laws of the State of Texas, where the offense is committed within the Town limits and the penalty
does not exceed that which is established for municipal courts by State law.
(3) Over all criminal cases arising under the ordinances of the Town within the Town limits and
outside the Town limits to the extent authorized by State law.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/665
(4) To punish for contempt, admit to bail, and forfeit bonds under such circumstances as provided
by law.
(5) To enforce all process of the courts in accordance with State law and Town ordinances, punish
witnesses for failing to obey subpoenas, and compel their attendance by process of attachment.
SECTION 8.05 COSTS, FINES AND PENALTIES
All costs, fines, and penalties imposed by the municipal court shall be paid into the Town treasury for the use
and benefit of the Town, as may be consistent with present and future State laws.
CHAPTER NINE
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
SECTION 9.01 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
The Town Council shall create a Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Fairview and shall appoint
seven (7) members, each of whom shall be a citizen of the Town of Fairview. Members shall be appointed for
two (2) year staggered terms. Such appointees shall serve without compensation and may not hold any elective
office of the State of Texas or any other political subdivision thereof during their terms. A vacancy in an unexpired
term shall be filled by the Town Council for the remainder of the term. The majority of the appointed
members shall constitute a quorum, and decisions may only be made with the affirmative vote of a majority of
those members present and voting. The Town Council shall select from any of the Commission members a
Chairperson and the Commission shall select a Vice Chairperson.
SECTION 9.02 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
The Town Council shall appoint a Board of Adjustment comprised of five (5) regular members and four (4)
alternate members for two (2) year staggered terms, all of whom shall be citizens of the Town of Fairview. Such
appointees shall serve without compensation. The Board of Adjustment shall be governed by Chapter 211, Texas
Local Government Code, and have such additional duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or applicable State
law. A vacancy on the board shall be filled by the Town Council for the un-expired term. The Board shall select
from any of its members a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.
SECTION 9.03 OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
The Town Council shall have the power and is hereby authorized to create, abolish, establish, and appoint such
other boards, commissions and committees, as it deems necessary to carry out the functions of the Town, and to
prescribe the purpose, composition, functions, and tenure of each board, commission, or committee.
CHAPTER TEN
ORDINANCES*
SECTION 10.01 VALIDATION OF ORDINANCES
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, contracts, and regulations of the Town heretofore ordained, passed, adopted,
or enacted, that are in force at the time this Charter becomes effective, and which are not in conflict with such
Charter, shall remain in full force until altered, amended, or repealed by the Council after such Charter takes
effect.
SECTION 10.02 PROCEDURE FOR PASSING ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
The Town Council shall evidence its official actions by written ordinances, resolutions, or oral motions. The
style of all ordinances shall be: “Be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Fairview, Texas” and the
style of all resolutions shall be “Be it resolved by the Town Council of the Town of Fairview, Texas.” Each
proposed ordinance shall not be amended or repealed except by adoption of another ordinance. All ordinances
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/665
and resolutions passed by the Town Council shall become effective immediately from and after passage except
where publication of a caption is required or where the ordinance, State law, or other provisions of this Charter
provide otherwise, in which case the effective date shall be as prescribed in the ordinance.
SECTION 10.03 PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES
The descriptive caption or title of each ordinance containing a penalty shall be published at least once in the
official newspaper of the Town, unless otherwise provided by State law or this Charter.
State law reference–Publication of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 52.013.
SECTION 10.04 CODE OF ORDINANCES
The Town Council shall have the power to cause the ordinances of the Town to be printed, in code form, and
shall have the same arranged and digested as often as the Council may deem advisable, provided that failure to
print the ordinances as herein provided shall not affect the validity of the same.
State law reference–Code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 53.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
ELECTIONS
SECTION 11.01 TOWN ELECTIONS
Beginning on the 2nd Saturday in May, 2007, each qualified voter shall be entitled to vote for the office of
Mayor and Council Member for Seats 1, 3 and 5 for a term of two years. On the 2nd Saturday in May 2008,
Council Members for Seats 2, 4 and 6 shall be elected for a term of two years. Thereafter, the Mayor and
Council Members shall be elected for a term of two years. Candidates for each seat, including the Mayor, shall
be elected at large. If a candidate for Mayor or Council Member fails to receive a majority of the votes cast at
the regular election, the Town Council shall order a run-off election to be held between the two (2) candidates
receiving the most votes, to be held on a date as prescribed by the Texas Election Code.
State law references–Election dates, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 41; runoff election, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 2.021 et seq.
SECTION 11.02 SPECIAL ELECTIONS
The Town Council by ordinance or resolution, may call such special elections as are authorized by State law or
this Charter, fix the time and place of holding the same, and provide all means for holding such special elections.
Every special election shall be called and held as nearly as practicable, according to the provisions governing
regular elections.
SECTION 11.03 REGULATION OF ELECTIONS
All Town elections shall be conducted in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Texas Election Code.
The Town Council shall appoint the clerks, judges and other election officials and shall provide for their
compensation and other expenses incurred in holding said election.
State law references–Applicability of Election Code, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 1.002.
SECTION 11.04 CANDIDATES; FILING FOR OFFICE
Any qualified person as prescribed by Section 3.02 of this Charter may make application to have his/her name
placed on the official ballot for the position of Council Member or Mayor. The application shall be made in
accordance with all applicable laws and shall state that the candidate agrees to serve if qualified and elected.
Each candidate shall execute such oath and other official form or affidavit as required by the Texas Election
Code. The Town Secretary shall review the application and notify the candidate whether or not the application
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/665
satisfies the requirements of this Charter and the Texas Election Code. If an application is insufficient, the Town
Secretary shall return it immediately to the candidate with a statement of such insufficiency. The candidate may
file a new application within the regular time for filing applications. The Town Secretary shall keep on file all
applications found sufficient at least until the expiration of the term of office for which such candidates filed.
State law references–Eligibility for public office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 141.001 et seq.; age and residence requirements for
home-rule city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 141.003; candidates for city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 143; candidate's
application for home-rule city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 143.005.
SECTION 11.05 OFFICIAL BALLOT
The order of the names of the candidates on the ballot shall be determined by the Town Secretary in accordance
with the procedures set out in the Texas Election Code. The name of each candidate seeking an elective office,
except those who have withdrawn, died, or become ineligible prior to the time permitted for withdrawal, shall be
printed on the official ballot in the name designated by the candidate in accordance with the Texas Election
Code. Early voting shall be conducted pursuant to the Texas Election Code.
State law reference–Ballot form, content and preparation, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 52.
SECTION 11.06 CANVASSING AND ELECTION RESULTS
Returns of every municipal election shall be delivered forthwith by the election judges to the Town Secretary,
with a copy of the returns being sent to the Mayor. The Town Council shall canvass the returns and declare the
official results of the election as provided by the Texas Election Code.
State law reference–Canvassing elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 67.
CHAPTER TWELVE
INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
SECTION 12.01 POWER OF INITIATIVE
The people of the Town reserve the power to direct legislation by initiative and, in the exercise of such power,
may propose any ordinance not in conflict with this Charter or State law, except state law prohibits initiative for
an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes, an ordinance amending an ordinance
appropriating money or levying taxes, or an ordinance repealing an ordinance appropriating money or levying
taxes. Any initiated ordinance may be submitted by a petition signed by registered voters of the Town equal in
number to at least thirty (30) percent of the number of registered voters residing in the Town at the time of the
last regular Town election. Said petition shall be filed with the Town Secretary no later than sixty (60) days after
the filing of an affidavit with the Secretary indicating an intention to circulate a petition.
SECTION 12.02 POWER OF REFERENDUM
The people of the Town reserve the power to approve or reject at the polls any legislation enacted by the Town
Council, which is subject to the initiative process under this Charter. Within thirty (30) days after the final
adoption or publication, whichever date is later, of any ordinance which is subject to referendum, a petition,
signed by registered voters of the Town equal in number to at least thirty (30) percent of the number of
registered voters residing in the Town at the time of the last regular Town election, may be filed with the Town
Secretary requesting that any such ordinance be either repealed or submitted to a vote of the people. Said
petition shall be filed with the Town Secretary no later than sixty (60) days after the filing of an affidavit with
the Secretary indicating an intention to circulate a petition. When such a petition has been certified as sufficient
by the Town Secretary, the ordinance so specified in the petition shall not go into effect, or further action shall be
suspended if it shall have gone into effect, until and unless it is approved by the voters as herein provided.
SECTION 12.03 FORM OF PETITION FOR INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/665
All petition papers circulated for the purpose of an initiative or referendum shall be uniform in size and style,
and in accordance with the petition requirements of the Texas Election Code.
SECTION 12.04 FILING, EXAMINATION AND CERTIFICATION OF PETITIONS
All papers comprising a petition for initiative or referendum shall be assembled and filed with the Town
Secretary as one instrument. Within thirty (30) days after the petition is filed, the Town Secretary shall determine
whether each paper of the petition has a proper statement of the circulator and whether the petition has been
signed by a sufficient number of qualified electors and shall hold any petition paper entirely invalid which does
not have attached thereto the statement signed by the circulator thereof. The Town Secretary shall certify the
result of this examination to the Town Council at its next regular meeting. If the Town Secretary shall certify that
the petition is insufficient, the certificate shall specify the particulars in which it is defective and [the Town
Secretary] shall at once notify in writing the person filing the petition of this finding. A petition may be amended
at any time within ten (10) days after a notice of insufficiency has been sent by the Town Secretary, by filing a
supplementary petition. In such event, the same procedures shall then be followed by the Town Secretary and
Town Council as in the case of the original petition for the same purpose.
SECTION 12.05 COUNCIL CONSIDERATION AND SUBMISSION TO VOTERS
When the Town Council receives an authorized initiative petition, certified by the Town Secretary to be
sufficient, the Town Council shall either (a) pass the initiated ordinance without amendment within twenty (20)
days after the date of the certification to the Town Council; or (b) submit the initiated ordinance without
amendment to a vote of the qualified voters of the Town at a regular or special election to be held on a uniform
election date of the State of Texas, but not less than ninety (90) days from the date that the Town Secretary
certifies the submission to the Town Council.
When the Town Council receives an authorized referendum petition, certified by the Town Secretary to be
sufficient, the Town Council shall reconsider the referred ordinance. If, upon such reconsideration, such
ordinance is not repealed, it shall be submitted to the voters of the Town at a regular or special election to be
held on a uniform election date of the State of Texas, but not less than ninety (90) days from the date that the
Town Secretary certifies the submission to the Town Council.
Special elections on initiated or referred ordinances shall not be held more frequently than once each six (6)
months, and no ordinance on the same subject as an initiated ordinance which has been defeated at any election
may be initiated by the voters within two (2) years from the date of such election.
SECTION 12.06 BALLOT FORM AND RESULTS OF ELECTION
Ordinances submitted to the electors in accordance with the initiative and referendum provisions of this Charter
shall be submitted by ballot title, which shall contain a clear, concise statement, without argument, of the
substance of such ordinance. The ballot used shall have below the ballot title the following proposition, one
above the other in the order indicated: “FOR THE ORDINANCE” and “AGAINST THE ORDINANCE.” Any
number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election and may be submitted on the same ballot.
If a majority of electors voting on a proposed initiated ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon
become an ordinance of the Town. A referred ordinance which is not approved by a majority of the electors
voting thereon shall thereupon be deemed repealed. If conflicting ordinances are approved by the electors at the
same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such
conflict.
SECTION 12.07 POWER OF RECALL
The people of the Town reserve the power to recall the Mayor or any other member of the Town Council and
may exercise such power by filing with the Town Secretary a petition, signed by qualified voters of the Town
equal in number to at least thirty (30) percent of the number of registered voters residing in the Town at the time
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/665
of the last regular municipal election of the Town demanding the removal of the Mayor or other member of the
Town Council. The petition shall be signed and verified in the manner and within the time restrictions required
for an initiative petition, shall contain a general statement of the grounds upon which the removal is sought and
one of the signers of each petition paper shall make an affidavit that the statements made therein are true.
SECTION 12.08 RECALL ELECTION
All papers comprising a recall petition shall be assembled and filed with the Town Secretary. Within thirty (30)
days after the petition is filed, the Town Secretary shall determine its sufficiency and, if found to be sufficient,
shall certify this fact to the Town Council at its next regular meeting. If a recall petition is found to be
insufficient, it may be amended within ten (10) days after notice of such insufficiency by the Town Secretary, by
filing a supplementary petition. In that event, the same procedures shall then be followed by the Town Secretary
and the Town Council as in the case of an original petition. The finding of insufficiency of a recall petition shall
not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
The Town Council Member whose removal is sought by a recall petition may, within five (5) days after such
petition has been certified and presented to the Town Council, request in writing that a public hearing be held to
permit him to present facts pertinent to the charges specified in the petition. In this event, the Town Council shall
order such public hearing to be held not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after receiving
such request for a public hearing.
If the Town Council Member whose removal is sought does not resign, the Town Council shall order a recall
election and fix a date for such election, the date of which shall not be less than ninety (90) days from the date
the petition was submitted to the Town Council or from the date of the public hearing if one was held, whichever
is later, or at the earliest date thereafter permitted by the Texas Election Code.
SECTION 12.09 RECALL BALLOT
Ballots used in recall elections shall read as follows: “SHALL (name of person or persons) BE REMOVED
FROM THE TOWN COUNCIL BY RECALL?” Below such question there shall be printed the following as to
each person named:
“FOR THE REMOVAL OF (name of person.)”
“AGAINST THE REMOVAL OF (name of person.)”
SECTION 12.10 RESULTS OF A RECALL ELECTION
If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election is against removal of a Council Member named on the ballot,
that member shall continue in office. If a majority of the votes cast at such election are for the removal of the
Town Council Member named on the ballot, the Town Council shall immediately declare the office vacant and
such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. A Town Council Member thus
removed shall not be a candidate to succeed himself in an election called to fill the vacancy created.
SECTION 12.11 LIMITATIONS ON RECALL
No recall petition shall be filed against the Mayor or any other Council Member within six (6) months after he
first takes office, or within six (6) months after an election for his recall, nor within six (6) months of the end of
his term.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
FRANCHISES*
SECTION 13.01 POWER TO GRANT FRANCHISE
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/665
The Town Council shall have the power, subject to the provisions hereof, by ordinance to confer upon any
person, firm, corporation or other legal entity the franchise or right to use the public property of the Town for the
purpose of furnishing to the public any general public service or benefit, including, but not limited to, heat, light,
power, telephone service, transportation, or other telecommunication providers for compensation or hire. The
Town shall have the power by ordinance to grant, renew, and extend all franchises of all public utilities of every
character operating within the Town. No such franchise shall be granted until after a public hearing shall have
been called and held and until such ordinance shall have been passed and accepted by the franchisee.
SECTION 13.02 TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE
No public utility or other franchise shall be transferable except with the approval of the Town Council expressed
by ordinance.
SECTION 13.03 OWNERSHIP, USE AND CONTROL OF STREETS
No franchise or easement involving the right to use the streets, alleys, highways, parks, and public ways shall be
valid unless granted in compliance with the terms of this chapter. No granting of a franchise by ordinance
pursuant to this chapter shall convey any ownership or interest in any property of the Town other than the right
to use the public property for purposes of such franchisee's operations as expressed in the ordinance granting
such franchise.
SECTION 13.04 RIGHT OF REGULATION
In granting, amending, renewing and extending public service and utility franchises, the Town shall retain the
right to:
(1) Repeal such franchise by ordinance for failure to comply with the terms thereof, such power to
be exercised only after due notice and hearing;
(2) Require an adequate extension of plant and service as is necessary to provide adequate service
to the public and require maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of
efficiency, based upon applicable state and federal regulations;
(3) Establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust
discrimination in service or rates;
(4) Impose regulations to ensure safe, efficient and continuous service to the public. The franchise
holder in opening and refilling all earth openings shall re-lay the pavement and do all other work
necessary to complete restoration of streets, sidewalks or grounds to a condition equally as good as or
better than when disturbed; and
(5) Upon notice to franchisee and a reasonable opportunity to be heard, to regulate, locate, or
prohibit the erection of any and all poles, wires, or other utility equipment, conveyance, or structure,
on the streets, alleys and public places of said Town, and to cause the same to be changed, removed,
altered, increased, diminished, placed underground, or be supported by poles of such material, kind,
quality and class as may be determined by the Town Council whether the same be telegraph,
telephone, electric, cable television, or otherwise, and to enforce the provisions hereof by appropriate
action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
SECTION 13.05 COMPENSATION FOR FRANCHISE
All persons, corporations, or association of persons, to whom a franchise or privilege may hereafter be granted
shall pay to the Town for such privilege such compensation as may be fixed by the Town Council in the grant of
such franchise or privilege. Such compensation as fixed by contract or provided by State law(s) shall become
due and payable at such time as the Town Council shall fix in the granting of such franchise or privilege. The
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/665
failure of any franchisee to pay said compensation when due may result in forfeiture of the franchise or
privilege.
SECTION 13.06 COUNCIL TO FIX AND REGULATE CHARGES, FARES OR RATES
If applicable State law so provides, the Town Council shall determine, fix, and regulate the charges, fares or
rates of any person, firm, or corporation enjoying a franchise or privilege granted under the provisions of this
chapter, and shall prescribe the kind of service to be furnished to the public by such person, firm, or corporation,
and the manner in which it shall be rendered and may from time to time alter or change such rules, regulations,
and compensation after reasonable notice and public hearing. The rates, charges and fares so fixed shall at all
times be reasonable and permit the franchisee a reasonable opportunity to earn a reasonable return on the
franchisee's invested capital used and useful in providing service to the public in excess of its reasonable and
necessary operating expenses. In this connection, the Town Council may require any utility or franchise holder
to furnish such financial reports and information as the Town Council may request including reports of actual
operating costs and the financial conditions of its operations within the Town. The Town Council may employ, at
the expense of such franchisee, necessary outside experts to examine and audit the accounts and records of the
franchisee to determine the reasonableness of such charges, fares, and rates.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
GENERAL AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 14.01 CONTINUATION OF PRESENT OFFICES
All persons holding elective offices that are retained under this Charter will continue to fill those offices for the
terms to which they were elected and shall be elected prospectively in accordance with Section 2.01, “Form of
Government”.
All persons holding administrative offices at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue in office and in the
performance of their duties in the capacities to which they have been appointed until provisions shall have been
made in accordance with the terms of this Charter for the performance of such duties or the discontinuance of
such office, if any. The powers conferred and the duties imposed upon any office, department or agency of the
Town by the laws of the State shall, if such office, department or agency be abolished by this Charter or under its
authority, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the office, department or agency designated by the Town
Council, unless otherwise provided herein.
SECTION 14.02 ETHICS
The proper operation of democratic local government requires that Town officials are independent, impartial,
and responsible only to the residents of the town; all governmental decisions and policies are made using the
proper procedures of the governmental structure; no Town official has any personal financial interest that is in
conflict with the proper discharge of his/her duties in the public interest; public office shall not be used for
personal financial gain; the Town Council shall be maintained as a nonpartisan body; and Town officials fully
comply with all federal and state statutes, laws, and regulations concerning conflicts of interest.
SECTION 14.03 CONFLICT OF INTEREST
No member of the Town Council, the Mayor, or any other officer, whether elected, appointed, paid or unpaid,
who exercises responsibilities beyond those that are advisory in nature, shall participate in a vote or decision on
a matter involving a business entity or real property in which such officer has a substantial interest
distinguishable from the public generally if it is reasonably foreseeable that an action on the matter would have
an economic effect on the business entity or on the value of the property.
No member of the Town Council, the Mayor, or any other officer, whether elected, appointed, paid or unpaid,
who exercises responsibilities beyond those that are advisory in nature, shall have a financial interest, direct or
indirect, in any contract with the Town, or shall be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/665
Town of any land, materials, supplies or service. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute
malfeasance in office, and any officer or employee violating this section shall forfeit his office or position. Any
violation of this section, with the knowledge expressed or implied of a person or corporation contracting with
the Town, shall render the contract involved voidable by the Town Council. For a period of twenty-four (24)
months after leaving office, no member of the Town Council or the Mayor may conduct any type of personal
business with the Town that would have been prohibited by state law or this Charter if that officer were still in
office.
For a period of twelve (12) months after leaving office, no member of the Town Council or the Mayor may be
employed by the Town as a paid employee.
State law references–Conflicts of interest of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 171; public disclosure, V.T.C.A.,
Government Code, ch. 553.
SECTION 14.04 NEPOTISM
No officer of the Town of Fairview shall appoint, vote for, or confirm the appointment to any paid office,
position, clerkship, employment or duty, of any person related within the second degree by affinity or within the
third degree by consanguinity to any member of the Town Council, Mayor or Town Manager, when the salary,
fees, or compensation of such appointee is to be paid for, directly or indirectly, out of or from public funds or
fees of office of any kind or character whatsoever. This provision shall not prevent the appointment, voting for,
or confirmation of any person who shall have been continuously employed in any such office, position,
clerkship, employment or duty for at least thirty (30) days, if the officer is appointed, or at least six (6) months,
if the officer is elected. When a person is allowed to continue in any such position, the officer related shall not
participate in the deliberation or voting upon the appointment, reappointment, employment, confirmation, reemployment,
change in status, compensation, or dismissal of such person, unless such action is taken with
respect to a bona fide class or category of employees.
State law reference–Nepotism, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 573.
SECTION 14.05 OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER
The Town Council shall have the power to designate by resolution a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town as the Town's official newspaper. All ordinances, captions of ordinances, notices and other matters
required to be published by this Charter, by ordinance, or by State law, shall be published in the official
newspaper.
SECTION 14.06 JUDICIAL NOTICE
This Charter shall be recorded in the Town Secretary's office in a book kept for that purpose. As soon as
practicable after its adoption, an authenticated copy of the Charter shall be certified to the Secretary of State of
the State of Texas, at which time the Charter becomes a public act. Such Charter provisions may be read in
evidence without pleading or proof of their provision, and judicial notice shall be taken thereof in all courts and
places.
SECTION 14.07 PROPERTY NOT SUBJECT TO GARNISHMENT AND EXECUTION
No property owned or held by the Town shall be subject to any garnishment or execution of any kind or nature
except as specifically provided by State law.
Town shall also have the power to acquire property within or without its boundaries or within boundaries of
other municipalities for any public purpose, in fee simple or lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise,
lease, or eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this
Charter or by the Constitution and the laws of the State of Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/665
State law references–Authority to provide that municipal funds not subject to garnishment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
101.023; authority relating to property, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 51.076; eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Property Code, ch.
21; municipal right of eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 251.
SECTION 14.08 PUBLIC MEETINGS AND RECORDS
All meetings of the Town Council and all boards, commissions and committees appointed by the Town Council
shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 551, Texas Government Code and any amendments thereto with
regard to the posting of agenda and the holding of public meetings. All public records of every officer,
department or agency of the Town shall be open to inspection by any citizen at all reasonable business hours,
provided that records excepted from public disclosure by Chapter 552, Texas Government Code and any
amendments thereto shall be closed to the public and not considered public record for the purpose of this section.
SECTION 14.09 INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS
The Town Council shall, by appropriate ordinance, provide for the indemnification and defense of the officers
and employees of the Town, including the members of the Town Council, or any board, commission, or
committee, including volunteers, against any loss, cost, or expense, including court costs and attorney's fees, to
the extent allowed by law, arising out of the claim, suit, or judgment or settlement thereof, resulting from any
alleged negligent act or omission of such officer, employee, member, or volunteer during the discharge of his
duties and within the scope of his office, employment, membership, or assigned voluntary position with the
Town, or in any other case where the Town is directed or authorized by law to do so. Such indemnification will
not be provided for any act arising out of the intentional or knowing violation of any penal statute or ordinance
or arising out of any conduct determined by final judgment to be an act of fraud or to have been taken with the
intent to deceive or defraud, or for any personal or private business of such officer, employee, member, or
volunteer, or for the gross negligence or official misconduct, or willful or intentionally wrongful act, or omission
of such officer, employee, member, or volunteer.
SECTION 14.10 AMENDMENT OF THIS CHARTER
Amendments of this Charter may be submitted by the Town Council to the qualified voters of the Town for their
approval at an election, no more often than once every two (2) years, held in accordance with Chapter 9, Texas
Local Government Code.
State constitution reference–Adoption or amendment of charter, Texas Constitution, art. 11, sec. 5.
State law reference–Adoption or amendment of charter, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 9.001 et seq.
SECTION 14.11 BOND OR SECURITY NOT REQUIRED
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the Town is a party, for any bond,
undertaking, or security to be executed on behalf of said Town. All such actions, suits, appeals, or proceedings
shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking, or security had been given, and said Town
shall be liable as if such obligation had been duly given and executed.
State law reference–Cities exempt from security for court costs, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, sec. 6.002.
SECTION 14.12 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
If any chapter, section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Charter shall be held unconstitutional or
invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this
Charter nor the context in which such provision so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire
chapter, section, paragraph, or sentence may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the provision
to which such holding shall apply directly.
SECTION 14.13 MEANING OF WORDS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/665
The provision[s] of this Charter shall be liberally construed for the purpose of effecting the objects and ends
thereof. Unless some other meaning is manifest, the word “Town” shall be construed to mean the “Town of
Fairview,” and the word “and” may be read “or” or the [word] “or” may be read “and” if the sense requires.
Words in the present tense include future tense and, except when a more constrictive meaning is manifest,
singular may mean plural. The word “Council” shall be construed to mean the Town Council of the Town of
Fairview. The gender of the wording as contained in the Charter shall always be interpreted to mean either sex.
SECTION 14.14 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Charter shall take effect immediately following adoption by the voters and entry of the official order by the
Town Council declaring the same adopted as soon as practicable. After adoption, the Mayor shall certify to the
Secretary of State an authenticated copy of the Charter under the Town's seal showing approval by the voters.
The Town Secretary shall record the Charter in a book kept for that purpose and keep and maintain the same as
the official record of the Town.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
ADOPTION OF CHARTER
SECTION 15.01 SUBMISSION AND ELECTION
This Charter shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the Town of Fairview for adoption or rejection on the
13th day of May, 2006, at which election, if a majority of the qualified voters voting in such election shall vote
in favor of the adoption of this Charter, it shall then immediately become the governing law of the Town of
Fairview, Texas, until amended or repealed.
It being impracticable to submit this Charter so that each subject may be voted on separately, it is hereby
prescribed that the form of ballot to be used in such election shall be as follows to wit:
“FOR” ADOPTION OF A CHARTER
“AGAINST” ADOPTION OF A CHARTER
This Home Rule Charter for the Town of Fairview, Texas, is respectfully submitted to the Town Council of the
Town of Fairview for the purpose of calling an election on the question of adoption of the Home Rule Charter
this 2nd day of March, 2006. This proposed Charter represents the recommendation of the members of the Home
Rule Charter Commission, whose membership and signatures are evidenced below.
Bob Bieschke
Gene Byrne
Brayton Campbell
Pat Cunningham
Paul Hendricks
Sim Israeloff
Ron Kasian
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/665
Fred Carvajal
Anton Mattli
L. Michael Mints
Mary Price
Carolyn Sommers
Keith E. Steiner
Kelly Towery
Bill Wells
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Fairview, Texas, as compiled, edited and
published by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, Town of Fairview, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the town council, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the town
council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/665
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time
before any proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any
period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “town council” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the town council
of the Town of Fairview, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 21.002.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Collin, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or
employee of the town to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or
employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the
provision specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the
words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time, as may be in current use in the town.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/665
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.016.
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships,
organizations, business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks,
alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
Town and city. Each means the Town of Fairview, Texas.
Town manager, town secretary, chief of police or other town officers. The term “town manager,” “town
secretary,” “chief of police” or other town officer or department shall be construed to mean the town manager,
town secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officer or department, respectively, of the Town of
Fairview, Texas.
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes
Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/665
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the town council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the town council without the incorporation in the code of
any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive
any ordinance which has been previously repealed. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or
presented to the town council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or
additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter,
article and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of
such ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the town council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances passed by the town council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the
code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/665
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
material inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the town an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of not exceeding
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning
or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
(c) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is
punishable by a fine that does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental
state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically
stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five
hundred dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(d) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the
laws of the state.
(e) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(f) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such
nuisance may be summarily abated by the town. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may
pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor,
V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
Sec. 1.01.010 Responsibility for violations by corporation
In case any provision of this code or other ordinance of the town is violated by a corporation, the president,
secretary or treasurer of such corporation, or any manager, agent or employee of such corporation, shall be
deemed severally responsible for such violation and the penalty provided therefor. (1998 Code, sec. 10.20)
Sec. 1.01.011 Interpretation of ordinances
Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition,
and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law. The
first source of construction shall be the following specific rules of construction, in sequence:
(1) All language of an ordinance is presumed to have been intended, and meaningful. Words used
are presumed to have been intended to be given their common meaning, unless specifically indicated
by context or definition to have another meaning.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/665
(2) If a general provision conflicts with a more specific provision, the provisions of both shall be
construed, if possible, so that each is given effect.
(3) If a conflict between a general provision and a more specific provision is irreconcilable, the
specific provision shall prevail as an exception to the general provision, unless the general provision
was enacted later and there is a manifest intent that the general provision prevail.
(4) In the case of equally general, but conflicting, provisions of an ordinance, the later adopted
provision is controlling.
(5) To determine which provision of an ordinance is later adopted, the effective dates of ordinances
shall be compared; in the absence of an enacted effective date, the date of adoption shall be presumed
to have been the intended effective date.
(6) These rules are specifically supplemented by nonconflicting portions of Tex. Gov't Code,
chapter 311.
(1998 Code, sec. 10.02)
Sec. 1.01.012 Effective date of ordinances
All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from and after the due
publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect
from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided. (1998 Code, sec. 10.15)
Sec. 1.01.013 Reasonable time
In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to
be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice. (1998 Code, sec. 10.12(A))
ARTICLE 1.02 ADMINISTRATION*
Sec. 1.02.001 Clean fleet vehicle policy
(a) Vehicle acquisition.
(1) Vehicle acquisitions for fleet expansion or replacement of model year 2004 or newer shall be
newest model year or engine standard only.
(2) Vehicle acquisitions to replace model year 2003 or older vehicles must show at least a 25%
reduction in nitrogen oxides (NOx) emissions rate compared to the vehicle being replaced. (Waivers
are possible when new technologies or achievements of the required emission reduction are not
possible.)
(3) Aftermarket technologies and conversions are acceptable for fleet expansion and fleet
replacements. Aftermarket technologies and conversions must be Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) and/or CARB verified or certified or technology equivalent or better, as determined by the
North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG) staff. Conversions must comply with the
provisions of EPA Memorandum 1A and Addendum Revision (June 25, 1974, and June 1, 1998).
(b) Vehicle operation.
(1) Vehicle idling is allowed only for safety, emergency response, vehicle maintenance, equipment
activity, warm-up/operations in cold temperature, and manufacturer recommended minimum
idle/warm-up times.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/665
(2) Vehicles with the lowest NOx emissions that are capable of performing the required operational
demands shall drive the most miles.
(3) The fleet manager shall abide by latest refueling time/season guidance published by NCTCOG
air quality planning.
(4) Nonemergency vehicles shall drive no more than the posted speed limit and avoid rapid
acceleration.
(5) All drivers shall be trained on air quality appropriate operational requirements.
(c) Maintenance standards.
(1) The town shall perform annual emission and safety inspections for all vehicles, even for
vehicles with no state-mandated inspection requirement.
(2) All vehicles with over 100,000 miles must have emission inspections every 25,000 miles
thereafter.
(3) The town shall perform manufacturer's recommended maintenance.
(4) The town shall participate in any diesel or other state commission on environmental quality or
NCTCOG inspection/maintenance program, including applicable test or pilot programs.
(d) Compliance verification. The town shall provide NCTCOG with an annual update of fleet size and activity
in a format established by NCTCOG.
(Ordinance 2006-033, secs. 1–4, adopted 12/5/06)
ARTICLE 1.03 TOWN COUNCIL*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.03.001–1.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Meetings†
Sec. 1.03.031 Frequency; special meetings
The town council shall hold one regular meeting each month at such time as is fixed by resolution of the council.
(1998 Code, sec. 30.15; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.03.032 Quorum
A majority of the councilmembers shall constitute a quorum of the council for the transaction of business, except
at called meetings or meetings for the imposition of taxes, when two-thirds of the councilmembers shall be
required. (1998 Code, sec. 30.16)
Sec. 1.03.033 Order of business
The order of business at all regular sessions of the council shall be as follows:
(1) Readings of the minutes of the previous meeting and intervening special meetings and
corrections thereof when necessary.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/665
(2) Receiving reports and petitions.
(3) Unfinished business.
(4) New business.
(5) Passing upon bills and accounts.
(1998 Code, sec. 30.17)
Sec. 1.03.034 Deciding questions of order
All questions of order at council meetings shall be decided by the mayor, subject to an appeal to the council, a
majority of the members of which may reverse his decision. (1998 Code, sec. 30.18)
Sec. 1.03.035 Opportunity to discuss and amend motions
All motions at council meetings which have been seconded shall be opened for discussion and amendment
before they are put to a vote. (1998 Code, sec. 30.19)
Sec. 1.03.036 Calling for vote
In voting by the town council upon any pending question, any member may call for the ayes and noes, and, upon
such call being made, it shall be entered upon the journals. (1998 Code, sec. 30.20)
Sec. 1.03.037 Adjournment
A council meeting may be adjourned upon declaration by the chair or upon motion of a councilmember and a
majority vote. (1998 Code, sec. 30.21)
ARTICLE 1.04 TOWN OFFICERS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.04.001–1.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Town Manager†
Sec. 1.04.031 Purchasing authority
The town council hereby confers upon the town manager authority to contract for expenditures for the town,
without further approval from the town council, for all budgeted items not exceeding the sum of $500.00 or,
with approval of the mayor, not to exceed the sum of $1,000.00. (1998 Code, sec. 31.05)
Secs. 1.04.032–1.04.060 Reserved
Division 3. Town Secretary**
Sec. 1.04.061 Compensation; bond
The town secretary shall receive such compensation as the town council shall fix from time to time by ordinance
or resolution, and shall furnish such surety bond as may be required by the town council by ordinance or
resolution, the premium to be paid by the town. (1998 Code, sec. 31.17)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/665
State law reference–Official bonds, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 604.
ARTICLE 1.05 DEPARTMENTS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.05.001–1.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Department of Public Works
Sec. 1.05.031 Created; composition
There is hereby established the department of public works, an executive department of the town. It shall consist
of the director of public works, who shall be the head of the department and who shall report directly to the town
manager. All employees of the department shall perform their duties subject to the supervision of the director.
The director shall have the power to hire, discipline, replace, and terminate all employees necessary for the
proper operation of the department, subject to the budget of the department as adopted and amended from time
to time by the town council. (1998 Code, sec. 32.020)
Sec. 1.05.032 Duties
The department of public works shall have the duty and responsibility for the care, maintenance, and
construction of all municipal buildings, streets, roads, and drainageways of the town, and the construction,
operation, and maintenance of the town's water system. The department may perform its duties and
responsibilities with personnel and equipment of the department or by the use of independent contractors. All
physical properties of the town, including the water distribution system, not assigned to any other department,
shall be and are hereby assigned to and are the responsibility of the department. (1998 Code, sec. 32.021;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.05.033 Compensation of director and employees
The town manager shall, from time to time, set the compensation of the director of public works commensurate
with the director's qualifications, hours devoted to the department, and the budget of the town. The director of
the department shall set the compensation for all employees of the department commensurate with the
employees' qualifications, work history, and performance, subject to the town's budget as adopted by the town
council. (1998 Code, sec. 32.022)
Sec. 1.05.034 Appointment, supervision and duties of director
The office of the director of public works is hereby created by the town. The director of public works shall be
appointed by and report directly to the town manager or his/her designee. The director's duties shall include but
are not limited to the planning and coordination of all new public works projects of the town. (1998 Code, sec.
32.023; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 1.05.035–1.05.060 Reserved
Division 3. Department of Police
Sec. 1.05.061 Composition
The police department shall consist of the police chief and may consist of an authorized strength. (1998 Code,
sec. 31.41(A); Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.05.062 Duties
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/665
It shall be the duty of the police department to see to the enforcement of all ordinances of the town and the laws
of the state and the United States, to preserve order, and to prevent infractions of the law, and to arrest violators
of the law within the boundaries of the town. (1998 Code, sec. 31.41(B); Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.05.063 Appointment and supervision of chief
The town manager shall appoint the police chief. The police chief will be responsible to the town manager.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.41(D); Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.05.064 Appointment of officers
The police chief shall make recommendation to the council for the appointment of and dismissal of officers of
the department. (1998 Code, sec. 31.41(E); Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 1.06 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.06.001–1.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Planning and Zoning Commission†
Sec. 1.06.031 Created
There is hereby created and established a planning and zoning commission for the town. (1998 Code, sec.
32.001)
Sec. 1.06.032 Powers and duties
The planning and zoning commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty to make, and recommend for
adoption, a master plan, as a whole or in parts, for the future development and redevelopment of the
municipality and its environs and shall have power and it shall be its duty to prepare a comprehensive plan and
zoning and subdivision control ordinances for regulation of developments in the town in accordance with the
Texas Local Government Code. The commission shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by
ordinance or state law. (1998 Code, sec. 32.007)
Sec. 1.06.033 Rules, regulations and bylaws
(a) The planning and zoning commission shall have the power to make rules, regulations and bylaws for its
own government, which shall conform as nearly as possible with those governing the town council, and the same
shall be subject to approval by the council.
(b) Such bylaws shall include, among other items, provisions for:
(1) Regular and special meetings open to the public.
(2) Records of its proceedings, to be open for inspection by the public.
(3) Reporting to the council and the public, from time to time and annually.
(4) The holding of public hearings as required by law.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.008)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/665
Sec. 1.06.034 Removal of members
Members of the planning and zoning commission may be removed by the mayor, with the consent of the
council, after public hearing and for cause assigned in writing. (1998 Code, sec. 32.009)
Secs. 1.06.035–1.06.060 Reserved
Division 3. Board of Adjustment*
Sec. 1.06.061 Membership; organization; duties of secretary
(a) The town manager or his/her designee shall be an ex officio member of the board of adjustment without
power of vote and as an ex officio member of such board shall act as secretary of the board of adjustment and
shall set up and maintain a separate file for each application for appeal and variance received and shall record
therein the names and addresses of all persons, firms and corporations to whom notices are mailed, including the
date of mailings and the person by whom such notices were delivered to the mailing clerk, post office or mailbox
and further keep a record of all notices published as required herein. All records and files herein provided for
shall be permanent and official files and records of the town.
(b) The secretary of the board shall forthwith notify in writing the town council, the planning and zoning
commission and the town building inspector of each decision, interpretation and variance granted under the
provisions of this division.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.035; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.06.062 Meetings; procedures
(a) The board shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings, provided, however, that such rules are not
inconsistent with this division or state law. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and
at such other times as the board or town manager may determine. The chairperson, or, in his/her absence, the
acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.(1998 Code, sec. 32.036;
Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the
office of the board and shall be a public record.
(c) The appellant must file with the board and the official from whom the appeal is taken a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds for the appeal. The appeal must be filed within a reasonable time as determined by the
rules of the board. On receiving the notice, the official from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit
to the board all the papers constituting the record of the action that is appealed.
(d) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies in writing to the board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with
him, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be
granted by the board or a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken
and on due cause shown.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.036)
(e) Upon notice of appeal being given and before such appeal shall be construed as having been perfected, the
applicant must file with such notice of appeal to the board an amount of money estimated by the board secretary
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/665
to be sufficient to mail and publish all notices required herein, such amount in no case to be less than that
established in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.(1998 Code, sec. 32.036; Ordinance adopting Code)
(f) No appeal to the board for the same or related variance on the same piece of property shall be allowed
prior to the expiration of six months from the previous ruling by the board on any appeal to such body unless
other property in the immediate vicinity has, within said six-month period, been changed or acted on by the
board or town council so as to alter the facts and conditions on which the previous board action was based. Such
change of circumstances shall permit the rehearing of an appeal by the board prior to the expiration of six-month
period, but such conditions shall in no wise have any force in law to compel the board, after a hearing, to grant a
subsequent appeal. Such subsequent appeal shall be considered entirely on its merits and the peculiar and
specific conditions related to the property on which the appeal is brought.
(g) At a public hearing relative to any appeal, any interested party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to establish the necessary facts to warrant favorable
action of the board on any appeal. Any variance granted or authorized by the board under the provisions of this
division shall authorize the issuance of a building permit or a certificate of occupancy, as the case may be, for a
period of 180 days from the date of the favorable action of the board, unless said board shall have in its action
approved a longer period of time and has so shown such specific longer period of time in the minutes of its
action. If the building permit and/or certificate of occupancy shall not have been applied for within said 180-day
period or such extended period as the board may have specifically granted, then the variance shall be deemed to
have been waived and all rights thereunder terminated. Such termination and waiver shall be without prejudice
to a subsequent appeal and such subsequent appeal shall be subject to the same regulations and requirements for
hearing as herein specified for the original appeal.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.036)
Sec. 1.06.063 Actions
(a) In exercising its powers, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of the statutes of the state as
existing or hereafter amended, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from and make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought
to be made, and shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The board shall have the
power to impose reasonable conditions to be complied with by the applicant.
(b) The concurring vote of 75% of the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant
on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this division or to effect any variance under this division.
(c) Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board, or any taxpayer, or any
officer, department or board of the municipality, may present to a court of record (district court) a petition, duly
verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality. Such
petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board
and not thereafter.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.037)
Sec. 1.06.064 Notice of hearing
The board shall hold a public hearing on all appeals made to it, and written notice of such public hearing shall be
sent to the applicant and all other persons who are owners of real property lying within 500 feet of the property
on which the appeal is made. Such notice shall be given not less than ten days nor more than 30 days before the
date set for hearing to all such owners who have rendered their said property for town taxes as the ownership
appears on the last town tax roll. Such notice may be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and
postage paid, in the United States post office. Notice shall be given by publishing the same in the official
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/665
publication of the town at least ten days nor more than 30 days prior to the date set for hearing, which shall state
the time and place of such hearing. (1998 Code, sec. 32.038)
Sec. 1.06.065 Jurisdiction; variances
(a) A variance is an authorization by the board granting relief and doing substantial justice in the use of the
applicant's property by a property owner where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship.
(b) When, in its judgment, the public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate
use of the neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently injured, the board may, in specific
cases, after public notice and public hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize the
following variances to the regulations herein established and take action relative to the continuance or
discontinuance of a nonconforming use.
(c) Variances.
(1) A variance may be granted an applicant when the board finds:
(A) That there are special circumstances or conditions applying to the land or building for
which the variance is sought, which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land or
building and do not apply generally to lands or buildings in the same district or neighborhood,
and that said circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of
the ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of such land or building;
(B) That the granting of such variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to the property or improvements in such zone or neighborhood in which the property
is located;
(C) That the granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the land or
building and that the variance as granted by the board is the minimum variance that will
accomplish this purpose; and
(D) That the literal enforcement and strict application of the provisions of the ordinance will
result in an unnecessary hardship inconsistent with the general provisions and intent of the
ordinance and that in granting such variance the spirit of the ordinance will be preserved and
substantial justice done.
(2) The board may, after public notice and hearing and subject to the conditions and safeguards
herein contained, vary or adapt the strict application of any of the terms of this code under the power
and authority herein granted.
(3) In granting any variance under the provisions of this code, the board may designate such
conditions in connection therewith which, in its opinion, will secure substantially the purpose and
intent of this code.
(4) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by the town in the enforcement of this code.
(5) Interpret the intent of the zoning map where uncertainty exists because the physical features on
the ground vary from those on the zoning map and none of the rules set forth herein apply.
(6) Initiate on its motion, or cause to be presented by interested property owners, action to bring
about the discontinuance of a nonconforming structure or use under any plan whereby full value of
the structure can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/665
character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the regulations of this
code.
(7) Permit the change of occupancy from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use
when the extent of the second nonconforming use is found to be less detrimental to the environment
than the first.
(8) Permit the enlargement of a nonconforming use only when the enlargement will not prolong
the life of the nonconforming use. A specific period of time for the return to conformity can be
required.
(9) Permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming structure or building on the lot or tract occupied
by such building, provided such reconstruction does not, in the judgment of the board, prevent the
return of such property to a conforming use or increase the nonconformity of a nonconforming
structure.
(10) Require the vacation and demolition of a nonconforming structure which is deemed to be
obsolete, dilapidated, or substandard.
(11) Permit such variance of the front yard, side yard, rear yard, lot width, lot depth, coverage,
minimum setback standards, off-street parking or off-street loading regulations where the literal
enforcement of the provisions of this code would result in an unnecessary hardship, and where such
variance is necessary to permit a specific parcel of land which differs from other parcels of land in
the same district by being of such restricted area, shape or slope that it cannot be developed in a
manner commensurate with the development permitted upon other parcels of land in the same
district. A modification of the standard established by this code shall not be granted to relieve a selfcreated
or personal hardship, nor for financial reason only, nor shall such modification be granted to
permit any person a privilege in developing a parcel of land not permitted by this code to other
parcels of land in the district.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.039)
Sec. 1.06.066 Responsibilities of board and town council
(a) It is the intent of the town that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be presented to the
board in writing, and that recourse from the decision of the board shall be to the courts as provided by law.
(b) It is further the intent of the town that the duties of the town council in connection with this division shall
not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation that may arise. The procedures for deciding such
questions are stated herein.
(c) Under this division, the town council shall have only the duties of:
(1) Considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal of this division, as
provided by law;
(2) Establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated herein;
(3) Appointing members of a board; and
(4) Hearing appeals on and approving or rejecting specific use permits.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.040)
Sec. 1.06.067 Fees, charges and expenses
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/665
(a) The town council shall establish from time to time by resolution a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses
and a collection procedure for building permits, certificates of compliance, appeals and other such matters
pertaining to this code. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the town secretary and may be
altered or amended only by the town council.
(b) Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any
application or appeal.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.041)
Secs. 1.06.068–1.06.090 Reserved
Division 4. Technology Advisory Committee
Sec. 1.06.091 Purpose and functions
(a) A technology advisory committee shall be appointed by the council for the purpose of investigating
opportunities to provide more efficient and effective technology opportunities for the town and its citizens.
(b) Membership shall include seven persons appointed by the town council to alternating two-year terms with
no maximum number of years or terms.
(c) A vacancy on the board shall be filled by the town council as expeditiously as practical after the date of the
vacancy. Members appointed shall serve at the will of the council.
(d) A chairman shall be appointed by the town council.
(e) The committee shall meet a minimum of four times per year.
(f) In order to achieve its purpose, the committee shall conduct periodic meetings, all of which shall be open
to the public as provided by state law.
(g) The committee shall be responsible for contacting vendors and service providers, acquiring and analyzing
relevant data, and researching leading-edge technology opportunities.
(h) The committee shall report back to the council at least once per year for the purpose of updating the
council on its work and progress, and shall make additional periodic progress reports thereafter.
(i) The committee may divide itself into subcommittees as necessary, and may select officers from among its
membership, except the chair, who shall be appointed by the town council.
(j) The committee shall be advisory in nature.
(k) The committee shall develop reports to the council as appropriate. Said reports shall include
recommendations that the town should undertake, estimates of costs and timelines involved in implementing
those recommendations, and any and all other suggestions or information that might be of use to the council and
town staff.
(Ordinance 2012-7-3A adopted 7/3/12)
Secs. 1.06.092–1.06.120 Reserved
Division 5. Environmental Management Advisory Committee
Sec. 1.06.121 Purpose and functions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/665
(a) An environmental management advisory committee shall be appointed by the council for the purpose of
investigating opportunities to promote responsible environmental plans, projects, regulations, guidelines, and
other activities that serve to promote and protect the natural environment of the community and surrounding
areas.
(b) Membership shall include seven persons appointed by the town council to alternating two-year terms with
no maximum number of years or terms.
(c) A vacancy on the board shall be filled by the town council as expeditiously as practical after the date of the
vacancy. Members appointed shall serve at the will of the council.
(d) A chairman shall be appointed by the town council.
(e) The committee shall meet a minimum of four times per year.
(f) In order to achieve its purpose, the committee shall conduct periodic meetings, all of which shall be open
to the public as provided by state law.
(g) The committee shall be responsible for acquiring and analyzing relevant data, contacting vendors and
service providers, and researching leading-edge technology and regulatory opportunities.
(h) The committee shall report back to the council at least once per year for the purpose of updating the
council on its work and progress, and providing periodic recommendations on ordinances, projects, activities,
etc.
(i) The committee may divide itself into subcommittees as necessary, and may select officers from among its
membership, except the chair, who shall be appointed by the town council.
(j) The committee shall be strictly advisory in nature.
(k) The committee shall develop reports to the council as appropriate. Said reports shall include
recommendations that the town should undertake, estimates of costs and timelines involved in implementing
those recommendations, and any and all other suggestions or information that might be of use to the council and
town staff.
(Ordinance 2012-7-3B adopted 7/3/12)
ARTICLE 1.07 FINANCES*
Sec. 1.07.001 Special accounts established
(a) Pursuant to, and in connection with, the town's budget process, the town manager is hereby authorized to
establish three special bank accounts with the town's official depository, to wit:
(1) An account from the town's surplus funds with an initial balance of $150,000 for capital
expenditures;
(2) An account from the town's surplus funds with an initial balance of $100,000 for professional
fee expenditures; and
(3) An account from the town's surplus funds with an initial balance of $50,000 for park expenses.
(b) The town manager is hereby authorized to pay from said accounts expenses which shall require approval
of the town manager in addition to the council.
(1998 Code, sec. 38.01; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/665
Sec. 1.07.003 Collection of aged and small accounts
(a) Upon presentation to and approval by the town manager, any account over two years old may be written
off as uncollectible.
(b) The town manager may write off any account under $100.00.
(c) Any account over 90 days old may be turned over to a collection agency, if the amount due is sufficient to
warrant the expense of such collection.
(1998 Code, sec. 38.02)
Sec. 1.07.004 Credit card processing fees
(a) Payment of fee or charge by credit card and or electronic mean. Any municipal officer collecting payment
for amounts required to be paid to the town for any fee, charge, permit, deposit, inspection, service, work,
installation, license, registration, or any other required remuneration is hereby authorized to accept payment by
credit card for same and to collect a fee for processing the payment by credit card.
(b) Processing or handling fee. Any municipal officer is hereby authorized and directed to assess a processing
fee of three percent (3%) of the amount of any fee, charge, permit, deposit, inspection, service, work,
installation, license, registration, or any other required remuneration being paid by the use of a credit card, as an
amount reasonably necessary and related to the expense incurred by the town, as authorized by section
132.003(b), Texas Local Government Code.
(c) Service charge. If for any reason a payment by credit card is not honored by the credit card company on
which the funds are drawn, the municipal officer shall collect a service charge from the person who owes the
required amount to the town. The service charge is in addition to the original amount owed and is for the
collection of that original amount. The amount of the service charge shall be the same amount as the fee charged
for the collection of a check drawn on an account with nonsufficient funds, as authorized by section 132.004,
Texas Local Government Code, and as said fee is set forth in appendix A to this code [sic].
(d) Encumbrance of credit cards. The town is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with companies
which issue credit cards to collect and seize credit cards issued by the company that are outdated or otherwise
unauthorized and the town is further authorized to charge the company a fee for the return of said credit cards, as
authorized by section 132.005, Texas Local Government Code.
(e) Disposition of fees and charges. Processing fees and service charges collected pursuant to this section shall
be deposited in the general fund of the town, as provided by section 132.006(b), Texas Local Government Code.
(Ordinance 2013-10-1F, sec. 1, adopted 10/1/13)
ARTICLE 1.08 RECORDS MANAGEMENT†
Sec. 1.08.001 Adoption of records management program
The governing body of the town does hereby establish and adopt a management program for the orderly and
efficient retention, retrieval and destruction of the records of the town as follows in this article. (1998 Code, sec.
36.01)
Sec. 1.08.002 Title
This article shall be known and may be cited as the records management program of the town, providing for the
proper and efficient management of the municipal records of the town. (1998 Code, sec. 36.02)
Sec. 1.08.003 Purpose
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/665
Since the citizens of the town have a right to expect efficient and cost-effective government, and recognizing the
importance of local government records in the lives of all citizens, the efficient management of town records is
necessary to the effective and economic operation of the town, the preservation of records of permanent value is
necessary to provide the people of the state with resources concerning their history and to document their rights
of citizenship and property, and the establishment of uniform standards and procedures for the maintenance,
preservation or other disposition of town records is necessary to fulfill the high public purpose. (1998 Code, sec.
36.03)
Sec. 1.08.004 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the town to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all town records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their
ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act, being Tex.
Local Gov't Code section 201.001 et seq., and accepted records management practice. (1998 Code, sec. 36.04)
Sec. 1.08.005 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Commission. The state library and archives commission.
(1998 Code, sec. 36.05)
Custodian. The appointed or elected public officer who by the state constitution, state law, ordinance or
administrative policy is in charge of the office that creates or receives local government records. For the purpose
of this article, a custodian is a department head, under the administration of the town manager, who is
responsible for all records in his or her department.(1998 Code, sec. 36.05; Ordinance adopting Code)
Director and librarian. The executive and administrative officer of the state library and archives commission.
Essential records. Any local government record necessary to the resumption or continuation of government
operations in an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the town, or to the
protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Governing body. The town council.
Local government record. Any documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings,
microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information-recording media, regardless of physical form or
characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state,
created or received by local town government offices or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law,
including an ordinance, or in the transaction of public business, are hereby declared to be records of the town
and shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article and the
provisions of the Texas Local Government Records Act. This term does not include:
(1) Extra identical copies of documents created only for convenience of reference or research by
officers or employees of the town.
(2) Notes, journals, diaries, and similar documents created by an officer or employee of the town
for the employee's personal convenience.
(3) Blank forms.
(4) Stocks of publications.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/665
(5) Library and museum materials acquired solely for the purposes of reference or display.
(6) Copies of documents in any media furnished to members of the public to which they are
entitled under Tex. Gov't Code section 552.001 et seq.
Office. Any office, department, division, program, commission, bureau, board, committee, or similar entity of
the town.
Record. A record of the town.
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of a records management officer
listing the records maintained by the town, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that
the records management program in the town or state law may require.
Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention,
preservation, and disposal of records for the purpose of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and
information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and spaceeffective
storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence, and the management of electronic and other record storage systems.
Records retention schedule. A document issued by the commission establishing mandatory retention periods for
local government records.
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the
fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(1998 Code, sec. 36.05)
Sec. 1.08.006 Town records declared public property
All town records as defined in section 1.08.005 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the town.
No town official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records
even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files,
or use of such records is prohibited. (1998 Code, sec. 36.06)
Sec. 1.08.007 Designation of records management officer
The town secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the
town. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director
and librarian of the state library within 30 days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable.
(1998 Code, sec. 36.07)
Sec. 1.08.008 Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan
(a) The records management officer will implement, but is not limited to, a program to encompass such areas
of records management as are required to preserve and keep in order all books, papers, documents, records and
files of the town council and of the executive departments to achieve the following goals:
(1) Release space and reduce the need for storage and filing equipment;
(2) Establish an efficient retrieval operation for both active and inactive municipal records;
(3) Provide for routine disposition of paperwork;
(4) Maintain total security over municipal records;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/665
(5) Communicate the need of an effective records management program;
(6) Secure a central records storage facility which can be operated and maintained by records
management staff.
(b) Once approved by the town council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices,
departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the town and
the records shall be created, maintained, stored, or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a custodian do not
exempt the custodian or the records in the custodian's care from the application of this article and the records
management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the custodian as a basis for refusal to participate in
the records management program of the town.
(1998 Code, sec. 36.08)
Sec. 1.08.009 Duties of records management officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to custodians in its
implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures;
(3) In cooperation with custodians, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each
town office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish
operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of
the town;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the town;
(7) Provide records management advice and assistance to all town departments by preparation of a
manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation;
(8) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and
archives commission to determine if the records management program and the town's records control
schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
(9) Disseminate to the town and custodians information concerning state laws and administrative
rules relating to local government records;
(10) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, destruction or other disposition of the town
[records] is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management
program and the requirements of state law;
(11) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control
schedules, the volume of records stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as
the result of such disposal or disposition;
(12) Report annually to the town council on the implementation of the records management
program;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/665
(13) Bring to the attention of the town council noncompliance by custodians or other personnel
with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Texas Local Government
Records Act.
(1998 Code, sec. 36.09; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.08.010 Duties of custodians
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, custodians shall:
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures
established in the town for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out
the requirements of this article;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and
duties for which the custodian and his or her staff are responsible;
(3) Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, destruction or other
disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program
of the town and the requirements of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 36.10)
Sec. 1.08.011 Duties of town council
The town council shall:
(1) Establish, promote and support an active and continuing program for the efficient and
economical management of all town records;
(2) Cause policies and procedures to be developed for the administration of the program under the
direction of the records management officer;
(3) Facilitate the creation and maintenance of town records containing adequate and proper
documentation of the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures, and essential
transactions of the town and designed to furnish the information necessary to protect the legal and
financial rights of the town, the state and persons affected by the activities of town government;
(4) Facilitate the identification and preservation of town records that are of permanent value;
(5) Facilitate the identification and protection of essential town records;
(6) Cooperate with the commission in its conduct of statewide records management surveys;
(7) Review of a records control schedule or amended schedule by the officers of the town as it
considers necessary.
(1998 Code, sec. 36.11)
Sec. 1.08.012 Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with custodians, shall prepare records control schedules
listing all records created or received by the custodians and the retention period for each record. Records control
schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of the town records as the records
management plan may require.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/665
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management
officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state
and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records
management program of the town.
(c) Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director
and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to
make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the
director and librarian.
(1998 Code, sec. 36.12)
Sec. 1.08.013 Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted shall be implemented
according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an
open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit,
or the custodian requests in writing to the records management officer that the record be retained for an
additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the
destruction must be obtained from the commission by the records management officer.
(1998 Code, sec. 36.13)
Sec. 1.08.014 Destruction of unscheduled records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction
has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records
management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction
authorization request. (1998 Code, sec. 36.14)
Sec. 1.08.015 Electronic storage of records
(a) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Electronic storage. The maintenance of local government record data in the form of digital electronic signals on
a computer hard disk, magnetic tape, optical disk, or similar machine-readable medium.
Source document. The local government record from which local government record data is obtained for
electronic storage. The term does not include backup copies of the data in any media generated from electronic
storage.
(b) Any town record data may be stored electronically in addition to or instead of source documents in paper
or other media, subject to the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and rules adopted under
it.
(c) The town will be subject to rules established by the commission for standards and procedures for
electronic storage and will be subject to the provisions of Tex. Loc. Gov't Code section 205.001 et seq.
(1998 Code, sec. 36.15)
Sec. 1.08.016 Notification to state
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/665
Upon the adoption of this article, the town secretary is directed to file with the director and librarian within 30
days the name and office of the records management officer of the town and a copy of this article which
establishes the records management program of the town. (1998 Code, sec. 36.16)
ARTICLE 1.09 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.09.001 County emergency management plan adopted
The Collin County Emergency Management Plan, Basic Plan, dated September 1989, is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in full herein and to the extent that the same is applicable to the town. (1998 Code, sec.
37.01)
Sec. 1.09.002 National Incident Management System (NIMS) adopted
The National Incident Management System (NIMS), released on March 1, 2004, is hereby adopted by reference
as if set out in full herein. (1998 Code, sec. 37.02)
ARTICLE 1.10 AIRPORTS AND AVIATION†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.10.001 Noise-sensitive areas
(a) The incorporated town limits of the town, as amended from time to time, are hereby declared to be a noisesensitive
area.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an aircraft under 1,000 feet above the ground (AGL) over
noise-sensitive areas of the town, save and except in emergency situations or in connection with police and
public safety activities including flights by medical evacuation helicopters.
(c) Aircraft departing to the south from the Collin County Regional Airport shall follow a flight track on the
north side of Wilson Creek and shall avoid over-flying noise-sensitive areas of the town, save and except in
emergency situations or in connection with police and public safety activities including flights by medical
evacuation helicopters.
(d) In all other cases, aircraft are requested to voluntarily avoid over-flying noise-sensitive areas of the town
to the maximum extent possible, and to maintain a minimum altitude of at least 1,000 feet above ground level
(AGL) when they must over-fly noise-sensitive areas, consistent with the requirements of flight safety and any
specific instructions from FAA flight control personnel.
(1998 Code, sec. 90.01)
Sec. 1.10.002 Minimum altitude for helicopters
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a helicopter above the town limits to fly such craft at an altitude
where, in the event of a power failure, the pilot would not have sufficient airspace to make a safe auto-rotational
landing. (1998 Code, sec. 90.02)
Sec. 1.10.003 Takeoff or landing at location other than airport
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to take off or land any aircraft at a site within the limits of the town
other than at an airport or heliport approved by the town council and the United States Federal Aviation
Administration, except under the conditions set out in subsection (b) of this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/665
(b) On special and limited occasions and for the purpose of education, aircraft exhibits or advertising, the
town council may, at their discretion and judgment, authorize the issuance of a special permit to operate, land,
and take off an aircraft at a special location within the town limits upon the applicant complying with the
following conditions:
(1) Sign an application giving the following information:
(A) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(B) Furnish a plot plan showing the following:
(i) General area;
(ii) Specific place where aircraft are proposed to be utilized; and
(iii) Show and indicate all safety measures to be used.
(C) Type of aircraft.
(D) Date and time.
(E) Purpose of request.
(F) Name of pilot.
(2) Certify that the pilot is a licensed pilot operating under a license issued by the Federal Aviation
Administration of the United States.
(3) Certify that the aircraft has been rated or licensed by the Federal Aviation Administration of the
United States.
(4) Furnish a certificate, affidavit or letter from the United States Federal Aviation Administration
stating that the proposed site and plan meet all of the requirements of said agency.
(5) Furnish a certificate of insurance in an amount satisfactory to the town council to cover all risks
of accident and/or injury or damage that might grow out of the proposed operation, and listing the
town as a covered insured.
(6) The applicant for the permit shall sign a hold harmless and indemnification agreement
approved by the town attorney indemnifying and releasing the town from any damages, injuries or
causes of action that could arise from the operation of the aircraft.
(1998 Code, sec. 90.03)
Secs. 1.10.004–1.10.030 Reserved
Division 2. Joint Airport Zoning Board
Sec. 1.10.031 Created
There is hereby created a joint airport zoning board to be known as the McKinney, Fairview, Collin County Joint
Airport Zoning Board, investing such joint airport zoning board with the powers such boards are authorized to
exercise under the provisions of Tex. Local Gov't Code section 241.014. (1998 Code, sec. 32.055)
ARTICLE 1.11 PARKS*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/665
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.11.001–1.11.030 Reserved
Division 2. Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
Sec. 1.11.031 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Park. A park, reservation, playground, recreation center, greenbelt, open space or any other area in the town
owned or used by the town, and devoted to active or passive recreation, including but not limited to all planted
expressways, parkways, triangles and traffic circles maintained by the town, except the parkway strips between
the curb or edge of street pavement and sidewalks along the several streets and highways of the town.
Town manager. A person so designated and in charge of the park and recreational department.
Vehicle. Every device in or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public
highway, except devices moved only by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.070)
Sec. 1.11.032 Established; composition; officers
A parks and recreation advisory board consisting of seven active members is hereby established as follows:
(1) Members shall be qualified voters of the town and reside within the town.
(2) Members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses as
approved by the town council.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.071; Ordinance adopting Code)
(3) Members' terms shall be two years, with no maximum number of years or terms. A vacancy on
the board shall be filled by the town council as expeditiously as practical after the date of the
vacancy. (Ordinance 2011-8-2C adopted 8/2/11)
(4) If a replacement has not qualified upon the expiration of a member's term, then that member
shall continue his membership until replaced. (1998 Code, sec. 32.071; Ordinance adopting Code)
(5) A chairman shall be appointed by the town council. The parks and recreation board shall
annually elect a vice-chairman and secretary. (Ordinance 2011-8-2C adopted 8/2/11)
(A) Chairman. The chairman shall preside over meetings and shall be entitled to vote upon
each issue.
(B) Vice-chairman. The vice-chairman shall assist the chairman in directing the affairs of the
advisory board. In the absence of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall assume all duties of the
chairman.
(C) Secretary. The secretary shall keep the minutes of all meetings, and, in the secretary's
absence, the chairman shall designate another member to act as secretary. The secretary shall
submit a written report of all proceedings of the board to the town council no more than five
weeks following each meeting. The secretary shall read once a year, at the first regular meeting
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/665
following the appointment of officers, the parks and recreation ordinance. The secretary may
accept the assistance of town personnel in taking and transcribing minutes, when available, but
shall sign same officially before presenting same to the board for approval.
(6) The town manager shall be an ex officio member of the board, with the responsibility to
participate in discussions but without the right to vote.
(7) Absence from three consecutive regular meetings without explanation acceptable to a majority
of the board shall be deemed to constitute the retirement of that member and a vacancy on the board
shall thereby be created. The vacancy shall be filled by the town council within 60 days following the
date the vacancy was created.
(8) Members shall serve at the discretion of the town council and may be removed at the discretion
of the town council.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.071; Ordinance adopting Code)
(9) The board shall meet a minimum of four times per year. (Ordinance 2011-8-2C adopted 8/2/11)
Sec. 1.11.033 Powers and duties
The parks and recreation board shall have the following powers and perform the following duties:
(1) The board shall act solely in an advisory capacity to the town staff and the town council in all
matters pertaining to parks and recreation; shall acquaint itself with and make a continuous study and
review of the complete parks and recreation services of the town; and shall advise with the staff and
town council from time to time as to the present and future maintenance, operation, planning,
acquisition, development, enlargement, and use policies of the town park and recreation services.
(2) The board shall study and encourage the development of parks and recreation areas and study
and encourage the development of wholesome recreation for all residents of the town.
(3) The board shall advise the town council on problems with the development of areas, facilities,
programs, and improved recreation services.
(4) The board shall recommend the adoption of standards for areas, facilities, programs and
financial support.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.072)
(5) The members of the board shall study and review the master plan for parks and recreation and
become familiar with such plan and its relation to existing and proposed facilities and shall become
aware of any revision or updating thereof. (1998 Code, sec. 32.072; Ordinance adopting Code)
(6) The board shall advise and recommend to the town council on the development of long-range
capital improvement programs and, when in its opinion the need exists for additional park and
recreational facilities, grounds, or premises, it shall make appropriate recommendations to the town
council. It shall also recommend the acquisition of additional land for parks, as well as park and
recreational equipment and supplies.
(7) The board shall develop, for the town council's review and approval, the rules and regulations
as may be prescribed for the conduct of the board's business.
(8) The board shall develop, for the town council's review and approval, the rules and regulations
and policies governing the use of park and recreational facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/665
(9) The board shall make any other recommendations to the town council regarding park and
recreation matters that it considers advisable.
(10) The board may solicit, for the town, gifts, revenues, bequests, or endowments of money or
property as donations or grants from persons, firms or corporations, subject to the guidance,
approval, and acceptance by the town council.
(11) The board may, from time to time, recommend to the town council amendments or changes to
this division.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.072)
(12) The board, through its chairman, shall make both an oral and written report annually to the
town council concerning its activities during the past year and its proposals for the coming year.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.072; Ordinance adopting Code)
(13) The board's authority shall not extend to the direction, supervision, employment, or
termination of employees of the parks and recreation department. No supervisory power of the board
is created by this division.
(14) The board shall develop written policies and procedures for the town to follow in the conduct
of all recreational activities. All policies and procedures shall be approved by the town council.
(15) The board will review the proposed parks and recreation budget and make any
recommendations to the town council it deems necessary. However, the board is not authorized to
add, delete or change in any way the budget as prepared by the town staff and town council.
(16) The board will not have the power to obligate the town for any funds or expenditures or incur
any debt on behalf of the town.
(17) All powers and duties prescribed and delegated herein are delegated to the board as a unit and
all action hereunder shall be of the board acting as a whole. No action of an individual member is
authorized except through the board or town council.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.072)
Sec. 1.11.034 Meetings; procedures
The procedures of the parks and recreation board are as set out below:
(1) Meetings.
(A) Regular meetings. The parks and recreation board shall establish the regular meeting
place, which shall be a public place with public notice as prescribed by law.
(B) Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the chairman or by written request
sent to the chairman or vice-chairman by three members of the board.
(C) Meetings to be public. All meetings shall be open to the public in accordance with
applicable law.
(D) Quorum. A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum.
(2) Voting. All questions presented for vote of the parks and recreation board shall be decided by a
simple majority of those members present. Only those members present can vote.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/665
(1998 Code, sec. 32.073)
Secs. 1.11.035–1.11.060 Reserved
Division 3. Park Rules
Sec. 1.11.061 Penalty
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction be subject to a fine in accordance with the general provisions of the Code of
Ordinances. (1998 Code, sec. 98.99)
Sec. 1.11.062 Use regulations
The following use regulations shall be enforced in all town parks:
(1) Park hours shall be from dawn to dusk, every day of the year.
(2) Town officials shall close all or part of a park or park facility because of weather or unsafe
conditions that could endanger users or result in damage to the park or park facility.
(3) Overnight camping or sleeping shall be unlawful, unless authorized by a permit issued by the
town manager, or his or her designee.
(4) Bicycle and tricycle riding shall be governed by safe riding practices and consideration for use
of park areas by others.
(5) Fires shall be permitted only in enclosed fireplaces or grills provided for this purpose.
(6) It shall be unlawful to break glass and other dangerous objects in all park areas, recreation
areas, or swimming pools.
(7) It shall be unlawful to leave children under age seven unattended.
(8) The unauthorized sale of goods or services within the park is unlawful.
(9) It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any firearm, except those persons who are licensed
peace officers, as described in the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
(10) It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or discharge firearms (unless duly authorized),
fireworks, air guns, bows and arrows, slingshots or any device which would or could project any
object which could harm any person in a public park.
(11) Speed of vehicles. Unless otherwise posted, the rate of speed of vehicles in all public parks
shall not exceed 15 miles per hour. This requirement is waived regarding maintenance and/or police,
fire, and emergency vehicles, as the situation may require.
(12) Unless otherwise approved by the town manager, or his or her designee, it shall be unlawful to
use any town-owned park property for the flying of remote-controlled model aircraft.
(13) The consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited in all public parks
unless a private reserved permit is obtained from the town manager, or his or her designee.
(14) Unless indicated in a designated location(s), the hitting of golf balls shall be prohibited in all
public parks.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/665
(15) Unless indicated in a designated location(s), the use of motorized vehicles shall be prohibited
in all public parks.
(16) If animals defecate in public parks, the owner shall immediately remove such waste by using
an appropriate plastic bag, with disposal of said bag in a public receptacle in the park. Exceptions to
this ruling are animals in police service, or a “service animal” performing tasks assisting a person(s)
with disabilities.
(17) Unless so designated by the town manager, or his or her designee, native and other animals
and vegetative materials, and their associated habitats, shall be undisturbed in public parks.
(18) It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit trash, yard waste or solid waste of any
kind in any public park area, except in public receptacles.
(19) Parking of vehicles shall be limited to designated areas; exempted vehicles, as the situation(s)
may warrant, are maintenance, emergency, police, fire, and public and private utility vehicles.
(20) Polluting the water in any pond, water fountain, stream or lake shall be prohibited.
(21) Reservation for the private use of town park facilities shall require a permit from the town.
(1998 Code, sec. 98.01)
Sec. 1.11.063 Exclusion from parks
The town manager, or his or her designee, may exclude any person from the use of a park or parks if the
person(s):
(1) Engages in conduct that the town manager, or his or her designee, determines poses a
continuing threat to the safety of park users.
(2) Intentionally damages park property.
(3) Continually violates park rules or regulations.
(1998 Code, sec. 98.02)
ARTICLE 1.12 PUBLIC ART PROGRAM
Sec. 1.12.001 Public art defined; criteria
(a) Public art is defined as the services of, or work by, a professional artist generally recognized by critics and
peers as a professional of serious intent and recognized ability who produces art in any medium or material,
including, but not limited to, the visual, literary and media arts. The public art program should encompass the
broadest possible range of expression, media, and materials, and shall include but not necessarily be limited to:
sculpture, such as in the round, bas-relief, mobile, fountain, kinetic, electronic, or other, in any material or
combination of materials; painting, including all media; graphics and multimedia, including printmaking,
drawing, and photography; mosaics; crafts in clay, fiber and textiles, wood, metal, plastics, and other materials;
mixed media, including any combination of forms; and on-site art spaces or cultural facilities that include
gallery/exhibition spaces, resource libraries, visual arts slide registries, performances, artist studio spaces, and/or
art education facilities that are open and accessible to the public.
(b) The work must be original (if the total project budget is greater than $500,000) and may be permanent,
temporary, or functional. Specifically excluded are: super-graphics, signage, or color coding except where these
elements are integral parts of the overall concept of the artist commissioned for the project; art objects that are
mass produced such as fountains or statuary, unless as part of a project with a budget of $500,000 or less;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/665
reproductions, by mechanical or other means, of original works of art, except in cases of film, video,
photography, printmaking or other media arts; the architecture of the building or facility, or any portion thereof,
including decorative, ornamental, or functional elements, unless designed by an artist commissioned for this
design enhancement purpose; and landscape architecture and landscape gardening except where these elements
are designed by an artist commissioned for this design enhancement purpose.
(c) Public art must be located in a public place. A public place shall mean any area, either indoors or outdoors,
on public property or private, that is easily accessible and clearly visible to the public. If located on private
property, the area must be open to the general public and readily visible from a public right-of-way or other
public property.
(1998 Code, sec. 101.01)
Sec. 1.12.002 Funding
(a) Public art shall be included as a part of all town construction projects, except that such art shall not be
required to be a part of water and sewer utility construction, or of road and street construction projects.
(b) Any existing town-owned building or facility that is remodeled with a construction value equal to or
greater than 50% of the replacement cost of the building shall also be subject to the requirements of this article.
(c) Required public art must have a monetary value equal to or greater than one percent of the total cost of
construction of the project, including engineering, architectural, testing, and other related costs, but excluding
land acquisition, surveying, and filing costs. Eligible expenses to satisfy this requirement shall include artists'
design concepts, architect's fees where collaboration is involved, and [expenses] for the acquisition, purchase,
commissioning, fabrication, manufacture, erection, placement, installation, exhibition, repair and restoration of
public art.
(d) In lieu of acquisition, construction, and/or installation of public art, the town may pay a fee to the public
art fund. Said fee shall be equal to or greater than one percent of the total construction cost of the project, as
defined in subsection (c) of this section. Any funds so paid shall be kept separate from other municipal funds
and may only be used for the acquisition, construction, display, or maintenance of public art as defined in this
article, and for project administration, artist-selection-related costs, community education, insurance, curatorial
services, identifying plaques, documentation, publicity, and such other purposes as may be deemed appropriate
by the town council for the administration of the public art program.
(e) The public art fund shall also be authorized to receive grants and gifts received by the town for public art.
(1998 Code, sec. 101.02)
Sec. 1.12.003 Public art committee
(a) A public art committee is hereby established, which shall have the responsibility of administering the
town's public art program. Members of the committee shall not be required to be of any specific vocation, but
they must be knowledgeable about visual public art, and also be residents of the town.
(b) Membership shall include five persons appointed by the town council. Members' terms shall be two years,
with no maximum number of years or terms. A vacancy on the board shall be filled by the town council as
expeditiously as practical after the date of the vacancy. Members appointed shall serve at the will of the council.
(c) A chairman shall be appointed by the town council.
(d) On a project-by-project basis the public art committee shall select two persons representative of the
location where the public artwork is to be displayed to serve as ad hoc nonvoting members of the committee.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/665
(e) The committee shall be responsible for creation of a public arts plan, which shall be updated on an annual
basis. This plan shall include a prioritized list of public art projects and expenditures for the year, and shall be
approved by the town council.
(f) The committee shall review proposals for public art on public property, develop policies and procedures,
provide for artist selection processes and juries, process the commission and placement of artworks, undertake
community outreach and education, recommend budgets, and otherwise advise the town staff, town council, and
planning and zoning commission as to appropriateness and suitability.
(g) The committee shall conduct periodic surveys of the condition of the public art collection, and make
recommendations regarding maintenance and removal of artworks. Each survey should include a report on the
condition of all public art, prioritized recommendations for the restoration and/or repair of the art, and estimated
costs for that restoration or repair.
(h) The committee shall report annually to the town manager and to the town council regarding prior year
activities related to the public art program.
(i) The committee shall meet a minimum of four times per year.
(j) In order to achieve its purpose, the committee shall conduct periodic meetings, all of which shall be open
to the public as provided by state law.
(Ordinance 2012-7-3C adopted 7/3/12)
Sec. 1.12.004 Project review
(a) Each art project shall be reviewed by a subcommittee, or jury, which shall include at least two members of
the public art committee, at least one property owner within the neighborhood in which the project will be built,
the department director which shall be served by the project, and the town's planning director or his or her
designee.
(b) The jury shall review submittals and proposals, interview artists, etc., as directed by the public art
committee.
(c) A proposal for installation of public art shall generally include the following: landscape and site plans
indicating the location and orientation of the public art and/or the landscaping and architectural treatments
integrating the art into the overall project design; a sample, model, photograph, or drawings of the proposed art;
material samples and finishes, if appropriate; a resume of the artist if appropriate; photographs of previous work
by the artist; a maintenance plan for the art; and any additional information required to ensure an appropriate
review.
(d) A jury shall issue a recommendation on each project within 45 days of receiving any proposal. The
committee shall then have a maximum of 30 additional days to make its final recommendation to the town
council.
(1998 Code, sec. 101.04)
Sec. 1.12.005 Maintenance of public art
In order to provide for ongoing maintenance of public art, the upkeep and maintenance shall be the
responsibility of each department having jurisdiction over the associated facility or location. The cost of
maintaining public art shall constitute an operating expense of the associated facility or location and shall not be
paid for from the public art fund; however, the cost of periodic restoration and/or repair shall constitute an
eligible expense of funds from the public art fund. Therefore, projects in need of restoration and/or repair will be
considered annually for inclusion and funding in the public art plan. (1998 Code, sec. 101.05)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/665
ARTICLE 1.13 HISTORIC AND CULTURAL PRESERVATION*
Sec. 1.13.001 Penalty
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction be subject to a fine in accordance with the general provisions of the Code of
Ordinances. (1998 Code, sec. 32.999)
Sec. 1.13.002 Historic and cultural preservation commission
(a) A historic and cultural preservation commission shall be created, composed of three members, to be
appointed by the town council. All members shall have a demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in
the historic traditions of the town and a commitment to the preservation thereof. The town shall endeavor, to the
extent possible, to appoint persons to serve on the commission from the following categories:
(1) Architect, planner, or design professional.
(2) Historian.
(3) Attorney.
(4) Owner or resident of a landmark property.
(5) Archaeologist.
(6) Licensed real estate broker or appraiser.
(b) Commissioners shall serve for terms of two years each, their terms to be staggered. Initial terms shall be
one one-year term and two two-year terms.
(c) The commission shall include a member of the town planning and zoning commission as an ex officio
member, as well as the planning director for the town.
(d) The commission shall be authorized to do the following:
(1) Adopt rules and procedures.
(2) Adopt identification criteria and rules for preservation sites and areas.
(3) Conduct and administer historic resource surveys.
(4) Recommend designation of landmarks.
(5) Establish committees as needed.
(6) Develop public outreach and awareness programs.
(7) Approve/disapprove certificates of appropriateness.
(8) Provide design and other reasonable forms of advice to owners and tenants of historic
properties in the certificate of appropriateness review process.
(9) Recommend the acquisition of endangered resources to the town council when necessary.
(10) Recommend the acceptance/denial of donations and preservation easements.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/665
(11) Propose tax and/or other financial incentives to encourage preservation of historic and cultural
resources.
(12) Prepare and promote design guidelines for landmarks.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.085)
Sec. 1.13.003 Historic preservation officer
The council shall appoint a qualified staff person or appropriate resident of the municipality to serve as the
historic preservation officer. Said officer shall administer this article and advise the commission on matters
submitted to it. In addition to serving as the commission's representative, the officer is responsible for
coordinating the commission's and town's activities with those of state and federal agencies and nonprofit
organizations. (1998 Code, sec. 32.086)
Sec. 1.13.004 Procedure for designation of landmarks
(a) The town council is hereby authorized to designate sites, buildings, structures, landscapes, geographic
features, and objects as landmarks.
(b) Property owners of proposed landmarks shall be notified prior to the commission hearing on the
recommended designation. At the commission's public hearing on the matter, interested parties and technical
experts may present testimony or documentary evidence that will become part of a record regarding the historic,
architectural, or cultural importance of the proposed landmark.
(c) Upon recommendation of the commission, the proposed landmark shall be submitted to the planning and
zoning commission within 30 days from date of submittal of the designation request. The planning and zoning
commission shall give notice and conduct its hearing within 45 days of receipt of such recommendation from the
commission. Such hearing shall be in the same manner and according to the same procedures as specifically
provided in the town's general zoning ordinance (see article 14.02). The commission shall make its
recommendation to the town council within 45 days subsequent to its hearing on the proposed designation.
(d) The town council shall schedule a hearing on the commission's recommendation to be held within 45 days
of receipt of the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. The council shall give notice, follow
the publication procedure, hold its hearing, and make its determination in the same manner as provided in the
general zoning ordinance of the town (see article 14.02).
(1998 Code, sec. 32.087)
Sec. 1.13.005 Criteria for designation of landmarks
A landmark may be designated if it:
(1) Possesses significance in history, architecture, archaeology, geography, paleontology, and/or
culture.
(2) Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of
local, regional, state, or national history.
(3) Is associated with the lives of persons significant in the town's past.
(4) Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction.
(5) Represents the work of a master designer, builder, or craftsman.
(6) Represents an established and familiar visual feature of the town.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/665
(7) Has architectural value.
(8) Features very rare or unusual flora or fauna, and/or represents unique geographic forms.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.088)
Sec. 1.13.006 Certificate of appropriateness
(a) No person shall carry out any construction, reconstruction, restoration, rehabilitation, removal, or
relocation of any designated landmark, nor shall any person make any material change in the light fixtures,
signs, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving, or any other exterior elements visible from a public right-of-way or
easement that affect the appearance and cohesiveness of any landmark, without first obtaining a certificate of
appropriateness (CA) in accordance with this article.
(b) Prior to commencement of any work, the owner of a property shall file an application for a CA with the
town's planning director. The application must contain the following:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, and the address of affected property if
different.
(2) Detailed description of the proposed work.
(3) Current photographs of the property (and historic photos if available).
(4) Drawings of changes or new construction, and samples of materials, when appropriate.
(5) Other information deemed necessary by town staff for clarification of the project and its
impact.
(c) In considering applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall follow the United
States Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings. The commission shall
further consider the following:
(1) Every reasonable effort shall be made to adapt the property in a manner that requires minimal
alteration of the landmark and its environment.
(2) The distinguishing original qualities or characters of a landmark and its environment, as well as
distinctive stylistic features, should not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic
material or distinctive features should be avoided.
(3) All landmarks shall be recognized as products of their own times, and, as such, alterations that
have no historical basis shall be discouraged.
(4) Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather than replaced. If replacement is
unavoidable, the new material should reflect the material being replaced in composition, design,
color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair and replacement of missing features should be based
on as accurate a duplication as is possible based on the historic record and known comparable
construction.
(5) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archaeological resources affected
by, or adjacent to, any project.
(d) The commission shall conduct a duly noticed public hearing, and subsequently approve, deny, or approve
with conditions all CA requests within 30 days of receipt of completed applications, determining whether the
proposed work is consistent with the regulations contained in this article and all other applicable ordinances.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/665
(e) All decisions of the commission shall be in writing, and shall include reasons for denial or modification, if
applicable.
(f) If an applicant is dissatisfied or otherwise disagrees with the decision of the commission, the applicant may
appeal the decision to the town council, in writing, within 30 days.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.089)
Sec. 1.13.007 Ordinary maintenance
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and/or repair of any feature of a
landmark. Such ordinary maintenance and repair shall be defined as any work that does not involve a change in
design, material, color, or outward appearance, and includes in-kind replacement or repair. The town's planning
director shall be responsible for defining “ordinary maintenance” on a case-by-case basis. (1998 Code, sec.
32.090)
Sec. 1.13.008 Demolition permit
A demolition permit for a landmark structure shall not be issued until review and issuance of a completed
certificate of appropriateness application by the commission. The following information must be supplied by the
applicant prior to an application being considered complete: description of condition of the landmark, estimated
cost of restoration or repair, demonstration that adaptive reuse or restoration of the landmark has been seriously
evaluated, available historic records of the landmark, architectural drawings for any new proposed construction
that is intended to replace the landmark, any conditions that are proposed to be voluntarily placed on new
construction/development that would mitigate the loss of the landmark, and any other information upon which
the town staff finds it appropriate for the commission to render a decision on the application. (1998 Code, sec.
32.091)
Sec. 1.13.009 Hardship relief
(a) An applicant whose demolition CA is denied by the commission may apply for hardship relief. The
application must prove that the property is incapable of earning a reasonable return on the owner's investment,
the property cannot be adapted for another use that can earn a reasonable return, and efforts to find a purchaser
interested in acquiring the property and preserving it have failed.
(b) The commission shall conduct a public hearing, and subsequently approve or deny all applications for
hardship relief within 30 days of receipt of completed requests.
(c) All decisions of the commission shall be in writing, and shall include reasons for denial, if applicable.
(d) If an applicant is dissatisfied or otherwise disagrees with the decision of the commission, said applicant
may appeal the decision to the town council, in writing, within 30 days.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.092)
Sec. 1.13.010 Demolition by neglect
No owner or person with an interest in real property designated a landmark shall permit the property to fall into
a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the deterioration of any exterior feature that would, in the judgment
of the commission, produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the property or the life and character of the
landmark itself. (1998 Code, sec. 32.093)
Sec. 1.13.011 Enforcement
All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued under this article shall conform to any and
all requirements contained herein. It shall be the duty of the planning director to periodically inspect, or cause to
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/665
be inspected, any such work to ensure compliance. If failure to comply is found to occur, a stop-work order shall
be issued and held in effect until compliance is attained. (1998 Code, sec. 32.094)
ARTICLE 1.14 INTERNET WEBSITE AND SOCIAL MEDIA POLICY
Sec. 1.14.001 Purpose
The purpose of the town's internet website and social media policy (“policy”) is to establish regulations for the
development, operation, and administration of the town website and social media presence(s) (collectively,
“programs”), and to ensure that these programs remain as nonpublic forums subject to the town's exclusive use
and control. The purposes of the town's website are as follows:
(1) To provide a convenient and information-rich resource regarding the town for residents,
visitors, businesses, nonprofit organizations, schools, and other public agencies.
(2) To provide information and resources that contributes to the health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens of, and visitors to, the town.
(3) To contribute to the improvement of town services, foster economic development, and enhance
the sense of community within the town.
(4) To establish and strengthen long-term partnerships between the town and individuals and
entities in the public and private sectors where such partnerships further the public health, safety, and
welfare.
(5) To provide information about the town and local services in a manner that is as manageable,
efficient, and organized as possible.
(6) To provide an opportunity and means to supply businesses and individuals contemplating
locating or moving to the town with an opportunity to see and hear firsthand why persons who call
the town home enjoy living and/or working here.
(7) To provide an opportunity and means to create a personalized face for the town to display to
citizens, businesses, governmental agencies, or individuals who may have heard about the town or
are curious about the town but have yet to visit or meet anyone who calls the town home.
(8) To provide a visual repository of personalized observations of the town's history, present-day
community life and business environment.
(9) To encourage and help generate civic pride and foster a sense of community among the town's
residents.
(10) To provide a readily available image and/or video pool of real-world spokespersons for town
marketing and recruitment materials and purposes.
(11) To create awareness of and reinforce the town's unique municipal brand.
(12) To provide a convenient means by which the town can transmit information to the public atlarge.
(13) To establish awareness of and reinforce the town's unique municipal brand within various and
increasingly prevalent communication platforms.
(14) To establish an additional mechanism by which the town can disseminate important
information to the public during emergency situations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/665
(15) To complement and increase awareness of the town's website.
Sec. 1.14.002 Policy
The town shall operate and maintain the town website and engage in use of social media platforms as provided
in this policy.
Sec. 1.14.003 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply to this policy:
External link. A hyperlink from the town website or town social media content to an external website.
External website. A website maintained by a third party, and not by the town.
Security measures. Practices for protection of physical configuration and environment, software, informationhandling
processes, and user practices.
Social link. Any reference, group association, external link, or other social networking connection (including but
not limited to “friends lists,” “circles,” “follows,” “networks,” “likes/dislikes” etc.) that is accomplished by some
method within the control of a social media account holder.
Social media. The various electronic communication systems established for the purposes of mass
communications and/or social networking, including the third-party services of Twitter, Linkedln, Facebook, and
MySpace.
Social media account and social media presence. Includes the electronic data, user profile, login, or other similar
means of controlled access and designations of content authorship, which are associated with an individual or
entity in order to facilitate the use of a social media platform, website, computer software, mobile telephonic
device application, or other interface mechanism for mass communication.
Social media platform, social media software, social websites, and mass communication platforms. All mean the
websites, internet services, computer software, mobile telephonic device applications, and other electronic
interface mechanisms used to access and social media, and includes both those interfaces which are or may be
owned by the town and those which are owned and/or operated by any third party.
Town website. The official town website available at www.fairviewtexas.org, and any additional domain name(s)
that the town acquires for official town use.
User or users. An individual or individuals who access the town webpage through the internet or who access
town information provided through any social media platform.
Sec. 1.14.004 Emergency service requests
Requests for emergency services, such as those seeking assistance from police, firefighting, or EMS/ambulance
services should not be directed to the town website or any town social media presence. Persons needing
immediate help should contact 911 or request such emergency services by some other recognized and reliable
method.
Sec. 1.14.005 Nonpublic forum status
The town website and any social media account established by the town are nonpublic forums. While the town
encourages the public to use these mechanisms to access information and resources, the town expressly reserves
the right to impose certain restrictions on the use of the town's website and its social media accounts. The town
website is reserved for the exclusive control of the town for the purposes of one-way communication to users of
the town website. Neither the town website, nor any social media platform associated with an authorized town
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/665
social media account, shall be used to facilitate a general debate, public discourse or the free exchange of ideas;
all of these services are restricted to only those uses authorized by the town.
Sec. 1.14.006 Authority of town manager
(a) The town manager or his designee shall have the sole authority and responsibility for the implementation
of this policy. The town manager may also make interpretations on issues that are not clearly articulated or not
included in this policy, so long as the town manager's discretion is exercised in a manner consistent with the
stated purposes of this policy.
(b) Only the town manager, or the town manager's authorized designee, shall be authorized to perform any of
the following functions:
(1) Create, establish, register, or otherwise initiate any social media account on behalf of the town
or which appears to be established by the town, or to use any social media platform in such fashion;
(2) Modify the content of any town social media account;
(3) To set, remove, or otherwise modify any user-controlled settings associated with a townassociated
social media account;
(4) Publish any information on a social media platform on the town's behalf, or in any fashion
which could be attributable to the town;
(5) Create, destroy, or modify a social link to the social media account of any other person or
entity;
(6) Use any function of a social media platform which states (or implies) an opinion or position
held by the town regarding any person or entity; or
(7) Modify the town website or any town social media platform.
(c) This policy will be posted on the town website for review by the public at any time. If technologically
feasible, any social media account established by the town will include a copy of this policy or a link to this
policy published on the town website.
(d) Questions or comments regarding any subjects or issues addressed in this policy may be directed to:
Town of Fairview
Attn: Town Manager
372 Town Place
Fairview, Texas 75069
Sec. 1.14.007 Privacy
(a) The town is sensitive to the privacy interests of the users of the town website and that of users accessing
any town social media platform and believes that the protection of those interests is important. The town's goal
in collecting personal information online is to provide the user with the most personalized and effective service
possible. By understanding the user's needs and preferences, the town may provide users with improved service.
The town strives to protect online personal information in the same manner that the town protects citizen and
business information obtained through other means. The following information explains the town's policy
regarding any personal information supplied when using the town website or accessing town social media
content.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/665
(b) Town website privacy policy. When you visit the town's website, we use automated tools to log
information about each visit. We process this information in the aggregate to determine site performance issues,
such as popular pages, most frequently downloaded forms, and other site performance characteristics. This
information does not identify you personally. We do not track or record information about individuals and their
visits.
(c) Social media privacy policy. By their nature, social media platforms are accessible by a vast number of
persons and entities over which the town has no control. We may use automated tools to log information about
visitors to town social media accounts and associated websites. We process this information in the aggregate to
determine social media platform issues, such as popular posts or messages, links established with social media
accounts, tracking information which originated from a town social media account and is retransmitted by other
parties, and other usage information. However, we cannot guarantee that the information available to the town or
a third party through a particular mass communication platform will not identify you personally. To determine
whether or not personally identifiable information will be accessible to the town or a third party when
interfacing with a town social media account, you must refer to the privacy policies and terms of use applicable
to each social media platform. We will not track or record information about individuals and their visits, except
to the extent required by law.
(d) Sensitive communications. Visitors to the town website, and those interacting with or accessing the town's
social media presences, are hereby notified that any information provided to the town by either means may not
be maintained confidentially by the town. Information received by the town by any person through a social
media platform or the town website may be later shared with third parties, particularly when such information is
subject to disclosure under the Texas Public Information Act or other law. Any person wishing to communicate
confidentially with the town or any town official, officer, or employee should first contact the town to determine
the appropriate channel for such communication, prior to revealing any sensitive material that they do not wish
shared with third parties. Town employees are prohibited from using any town social media account to transmit
or otherwise allow access to any information to which the town employee has any special right or ability to
access or any information which is maintained confidentially by the town.
(e) Disclaimer. While every effort is made to keep information provided over the internet accurate and up-todate,
the town does not certify the authenticity or accuracy of such information. No warranties express or
implied, are provided for the content, records and/or mapping data herein, or for their use or interpretation by the
user.
(f) The town, its elected officials, officers, employees, and agents assume no legal responsibilities for the
information or accuracy contained in this data, including any action taken from reliance on any information
contained herein and shall have no liability for any damages, losses, costs, or expenses, including, but not
limited to attorney's fees, arising from the use or misuse of the information provided herein. The user's use
thereof shall constitute an agreement by the user to release the town, its elected officials, officers, employees and
agents from such liability.
(g) By accessing the town website or social media presence and using any information therein, the user is
stating that the above disclaimer has been read and that he/she has full understanding and is in agreement with
the contents.
Sec. 1.14.008 Security
The town website applies security measures to protect the loss, misuse and alteration of the information under
the town's control. From time to time, security measures may be upgraded or otherwise modified to meet
changing needs. While the town endeavors to keep secure all information it receives via the town website, the
town cannot guarantee the security of the information. The town may or may not have full control over security
measures associated with its social media accounts, and those security measures may be subject to control by
fully independent service providers. While the town endeavors to keep secure all information it receives via
social media, the town cannot guarantee the security of the information. Users should refer to the individual
social media platform's terms of use, privacy policy, and security policies for more information.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/665
Sec. 1.14.009 External links and social links
(a) The town has a legitimate interest in limiting persons or organizations that might be linked to the town
website or be associated with the town's social media presence(s). The town may exercise discretion to ensure
that the links to these services are consistent with the purpose of this policy, as set forth in section 1.14.001.
Neither the town website nor the external links listed on the town website constitute a forum for expressive
activity by members of the public. No town social media account, town social media presence, or any method of
displaying information associated with a town social media presence constitute a forum for expressive activity
by members of the public; nor do the town's use or nonuse of social links constitute a forum for any expressive
activity by members of the public. Information, social links, or external links may be excluded from the town
website or town social media presence where such additional material would create visual clutter,
disorganization, or otherwise interfere, as determined at the sole discretion of the town, with the town's intended
content.
(b) Each proposed external link on the town website or social link to a town social media account shall be
reviewed to determine its relevance and appropriateness to the purpose of the town website or social media
presence. The town manager or his or her designee shall review the merits of the proposed external link or
proposed social link based upon the stated purposes of this policy, as set forth above in section 1.14.001(5). A
proposal for an external link or proposed social link will not be denied based solely on the viewpoint espoused
by the individual, entity, or the content of the external website.
(c) The town website and town social media accounts will not provide external links to websites or create
social links with other persons or entities that:
(1) Promote or exhibit hateful ideas or content, unlawful discrimination, obscenity, pornography,
libel, or defamation;
(2) Have a primary purpose of furthering the agenda of a political organization or a candidate
running for office (regardless of the political viewpoint), or defeating any candidate for elective
office;
(3) Violate any of the town's equal opportunity policies or nondiscrimination policies;
(4) Consist of personal home pages operated by individuals; or
(5) Are used in whole or part as a public forum to facilitate a general debate, public discourse, or
the free exchange of ideas.
(d) The town may provide external links or social links to certain private commercial sites that maintain and
display government-related information which fulfills the purposes of the town website as set forth in section
1.14.001, and which is not generally available through a governmental agency due to the cost of compiling,
maintaining and/or displaying such information. To support the cost of compilation and maintenance of this
information, these private commercial sites may include advertising or promotional material in the information
display. Accordingly, external links or social links to such sites which contain this information, but also display
commercial advertising or promotional material, may be included within the town website or social media
presence when the town manager or his designee has made a good faith determination that:
(1) The town's independent replication of the information targeted for linkage is infeasible due to
financial or other considerations;
(2) No noncommercial site provides the information targeted for linkage; and
(3) The information targeted for linkage greatly enhances the usefulness of the town social media
presence or the town website and services it provides.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/665
(e) The town reserves the right to determine whether, how and where external links and/or social links will
appear on the town website.
Sec. 1.14.010 Application for external link or social link
To request the addition of an external link to the town website, or to create a social link between a town social
media account and a social media account of another person or entity, the applicant shall send the relevant URL,
address, website description and purpose, identity and contact information of the site owners and operators, a
brief statement as to how the proposed website or social media association fulfills the purpose of the town
website or social media presence as set forth in section 1.14.001. Contact information shall include name, phone
number and email address sent to:
Town of Fairview
Attn: Town Manager
372 Town Place
Fairview, Texas 75069
Sec. 1.14.011 Disclaimer of external links and external websites
(a) The information posted on the town website includes hypertext external links to information created and
maintained by other public and/or private organizations. The town's social media content may also include
hypertext external links or other information referring users to nontown content. The town provides these links
solely for the user's information and convenience.
(b) When the user selects an external link to an external website, the user leaves the town website or town
social media content and is subject to the privacy and security policies of the owners/sponsors of the external
website.
(c) The town does not control or guarantee the accuracy, relevance, timeliness or completeness of information
contained on an external website accessed through the town website or town social media content by external
link.
(d) The town does not endorse or recommend any third-party website, product, service, view, or opinion,
unless expressly noted.
(e) The town does not authorize the use of copyrighted materials contained on external websites.
(f) The town is not responsible for transmissions from external websites or social media accounts held by any
other person or entity.
Sec. 1.14.012 Final decision
The decision to post or not post content and/or links on the town website or via social media resides solely with
the town manager or his designee. The decision of the town manager or his designee is final and binding. Under
no circumstances will individuals or entities be entitled to compensation or damages in the event that the town
manager or his or her designee directs the town to include or exclude the content or link.
Sec. 1.14.013 Links to the town's website and social media accounts
(a) Advance permission to link to the town website or social media accounts is not necessary. However, the
town manager or his or her designee has complete discretion to accept or reject any social link, by use of a social
media platform feature or otherwise, between a town social media presence and any other social media account
or website. No person is entitled to have a proposed social link and the decision of the town manager (or his or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/665
her designee) whether or not to accept any proposed association is final. The decision by the town manager (or
his or her designee) to accept or reject a proposed association or social link shall not constitute any comment by
the town on any material, person, or entity referenced.
(b) Any party linking to the town website or social media account should be aware that the site construction
and subpages, whether maintained by the town or a service provider, may change at any time without notice.
Individuals and entities linking to the town website shall not capture pages within frames, present the town
website content as its own, or otherwise misrepresent the town website's content or misinform users about the
origin or ownership of its content. Any link to the town website should be a full forward link that passes the
user's browser to the town website unencumbered. The web browser's “back” button should return the user to the
originating site if the user wishes to back out.
Sec. 1.14.014 Posting of events
Information regarding community events may be posted on the town website or broadcast using social media, so
long as the posting of such information is consistent with the purposes set forth in section 1.14.001, and meets
any applicable criteria for external links, as set forth in section 1.14.009. While the town manager or his
designee may consider suggestions of events to post on the town website or to communicate to the public via
social media platforms, the decision of the town manager or his designee is final and binding.
Sec. 1.14.015 Accessibility
The town website is intended to be accessible to people with disabilities. Requests for reasonable
accommodations relating to equal access to communication, or other issues relating to town website or town
social media accessibility, should be directed to:
Town of Fairview
Attn: Town Manager
372 Town Place
Fairview, Texas 75069
Sec. 1.14.016 No warranty or representation
The town's web server(s) are maintained to provide public access to town information via the internet. The
town's web services and the content of its web servers and databases are updated on a regular basis. While the
town attempts to maintain the information contained within the town website and associated with its social
media presences as accurate and timely, the town does not warrant or make representations or endorsements as
to the quality, content, accuracy, or completeness of the information, text, graphics, hyperlinks, and other items
within social media content or its website, whether contained on its server or any other server. Materials on the
town website or published through social media platforms have been compiled from a variety of sources, and are
subject to change without notice from the town as a result of updates, corrections, and third-party provider
modifications. The town may decide at any time to withdraw content from its website or terminate one or all of
the social media accounts it might establish under this policy, and should it choose to do so, that content or
information may not be readily available by other means. Any user seeking up-to-the-moment information,
including but not limited to the content of this code, should contact the town secretary.
Sec. 1.14.017 Brands; service marks; trademarks and copyright
To the extent allowed by the Public Information Act and otherwise legally permissible, commercial use of web
materials is prohibited without the written permission of the town. All brands, service marks, trademarks, and
copyrighted material shown or referenced herein are the property of their respective owners. The town retains
copyright on the town's brand, logo, trademark, seal, all text, graphic images, and other content, unless otherwise
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/665
noted. No person or entity may use the town brand, logo, trademark, seal, or copyrighted material without
approval of the town council. No person or entity shall engage in any of the following conduct without written
permission from the town manager or his designee:
(1) Modify and or use the text, images or other town website content from a web server;
(2) Distribute the town's web content; and
(3) “Mirror” the town's information on a nontown server.
Sec. 1.14.018 Notice to the town
Communications through the town website, by e-mail or otherwise, or communications employing social media
shall in no way be deemed to constitute legal notice to the town or any of its agencies, officers, employees,
agents, or representatives, with respect to any existing or potential claim or cause of action against the town or
any of its agencies, officers, employees, agents, or representatives. No communication through the town website
or by means of social media shall be deemed to constitute legal or official notice for any purpose.
Sec. 1.14.019 Errors; omissions; warranty; damages
The town is neither responsible nor liable for any viruses or other corruption or contamination of a user's system
due to access of the town website or social media platforms used by the town, nor for any delays, inaccuracies,
errors or omissions arising out of the user's access to said services or with respect to the material contained on
the town website or social media accounts, including without limitation, any material posted on the town website
or within a town mass communication. The town social media presence, the town website, and all materials
associated with either or both are distributed and transmitted “as is” without warranties of any kind, either
express or implied, including without limitation, warranties of title or implied warranties of merchantability or
fitness for a particular purpose. The town is not responsible for any special, indirect, incidental or consequential
damages that may arise from the use of, or the inability to use, any social media platform or access mechanism
or the town website and/or the materials contained on the town website, whether the materials contained on the
town website or social media platform are provided by the town or a third party.
Sec. 1.14.020 Indemnification
To the extent permitted by applicable law, by using the town website and/or accessing or interfacing with town
social media accounts, the user agrees to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the town, its agencies, officers,
employees, representatives, and agents from and against all claims and expenses, including but not limited to
attorney's fees, arising out of the user's use of social media, or associated with or attributed to the town or use of
the town website or materials and information contained on the town website or social media platforms.
(Ordinance 2012-6-5A adopted 6/5/12)
ARTICLE 1.15 PUBLIC INFORMATION
Sec. 1.15.001 Authority; purpose
This article is adopted under the authority of Texas Government Code, chapter 552, to establish regulations relative to
requests made to the town for public information.
Sec. 1.15.002 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them by this section, or if
not defined in this section, shall have that meaning customarily attributed to them.
Judicial record. A record made or maintained by or for a court or judicial agency, including a municipal court, in its
regular course of business but not pertaining to its adjudicative function, regardless of whether that function relates to a
specific case. A record of any nature created, produced, or filed in specific relation to any adjudicative matter that is or has
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/665
been before a court is not a judicial record. A record is a document, paper, letter, map, book, tape, photograph, film,
recording, or other material, regardless of electronic or physical form, characteristics, or means of transmission.
Labor charge. The statutorily-limited charge, as listed in appendix A, for locating, compiling, manipulating data, and
reproducing public information as to all responses to a request for public information that:
(1) Exceeds 50 pages;
(2) Requires the provision of documents from two or more separate buildings that are not
physically connected with each other; or
(3) Requires the provision of documents from a remote storage facility.
Nonstandard copy or oversized copy. Any copy of public information that is made available to a requestor in any
format other than a standard paper copy. Microfiche, microfilm, diskettes, magnetic tapes, CD-ROM are examples of
nonstandard copies. Paper copies larger than 8-1/2 by 14 inches (legal size) are also considered nonstandard copies.
Overhead charge. A charge that covers such costs as depreciation of capital asset, rent, maintenance and repair, utilities,
and administrative overhead. The overhead charge shall be computed at 20% of the charge made to cover any labor charge
associated with a particular public information request.
Personnel. Town employees.
Personnel charge. The actual cost to the town of personnel time - to the extent such time exceeds the monthly or annual
limits under section 1.15.004 of this article - expended for locating, compiling, manipulating data, and reproducing public
information association with a particular public information request, said actual cost being calculated by reducing to an
hourly rate an employee's annual salary and the value of all other compensation in the form of benefits received by said
employee and multiplying said hourly rate by the time actually spent.
Program processing. The execution of a sequence of coded instructions by a computer producing a result.
Programming labor charge. A charge for any services of a programmer required in the processing of a public information
request while executing an existing program or in creating a new program so that requested information may be accessed
and copied.
Public information request a/k/a open records request. A request for information made in accordance with Texas
Government Code, chapter 552 and in accordance with this article, as amended.
Requestor. A person who submits a request to a governmental body for inspection or copies of public information.
Standard paper copy. A copy of public information that is a printed impression on one side of a piece of paper that
measures up to 8-1/2 by 14 inches (legal size). Each side of a piece of paper on which information is recorded is counted as
a single copy. A piece of paper that has information recorded on both sides is counted as two copies.
Town. The Town of Fairview, Texas.
Sec. 1.15.003 Officer for public information
The town manager serves as the officer for public information (or “public information officer”) for the town. Unless
otherwise specified by subsequent policy promulgated by the town manager, the town secretary is the sole designee of the
public information officer responsible for receiving and processing public information requests. If the town secretary is or
will be unavailable due to vacancy, vacation/sick leave, emergency, or other special circumstance authorized by the town
manager, the town manager may temporarily designate an acting public information officer. Any designation of an acting
public information officer shall expire immediately upon the town secretary's return to duty, in absence of any special
instructions which may be established by the town manager.
Sec. 1.15.004 Personnel time
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/665
(a) Personnel charges shall apply and be imposed on requestors for time spent by personnel in locating,
compiling, manipulating data, and reproducing public information for inspection or duplication by a requestor or
providing copies of public information to a requestor that is in excess of 15 cumulative hours during a onemonth
period, or in excess of 36 cumulative hours during a 12-month period corresponding with the fiscal year
of the town. All requests from an individual requestor shall be aggregated for purposes of this section.
(b) Public information request by a minor. In determining whether the time limit established under subsection
(a) above applies, any time spent complying with a request for public information submitted in the name of a
minor, as defined by section 101.003(a), Texas Family Code, is to be included in the calculation of the
cumulative amount of time spent complying with a request for public information by a parent, guardian, or other
person who has control of the minor under a court order and with whom the minor resides, unless that parent,
guardian, or other person establishes that another person submitted that request in the name of the minor.
(c) This section does not apply if the requestor is an individual who, for a substantial portion of the
individual's livelihood or for substantial financial gain, gathers, compiles, prepares, collects, photographs,
records, writes, edits, reports, investigates, processes, or publishes news or information for and is seeking the
information for:
(1) Dissemination by a news medium (as defined by Tex. Gov't Code section 552.275(m)(2)) or
communications service provider (as defined by section 22.021, Tex. Civ. Prac. & Rem. Code);
including:
(A) An individual who supervises or assists in gathering, preparing, and disseminating the
news or information; or
(B) An individual who is or was a journalist, scholar, or researcher employed by an
institution of higher education at the time the person made the request for information; or
(2) Creation or maintenance of an abstract plant described by section 2501.004, Texas Insurance
Code; or
(3) A publicly funded legal services organization that is exempt from federal income taxation
under section 501(a), Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, by being listed as an exempt
entity under section 501(c)(3) of that code.
(d) This section does not apply if the requestor is an elected official of the United States, this state, or a
political subdivision of this state.
Sec. 1.15.005 Statement of time spent
Each time the town complies with a request for public information, the town shall provide the requestor with a written
statement of the amount of personnel time spent complying with that request and the cumulative amount of time spent
complying with requests for public information from that requestor during the applicable monthly or 12-month period.
(The amount of time spent preparing the written statement may not be included in the amount of time included in the
statement provided to the requestor under this subsection.)
Sec. 1.15.006 Statement of estimated costs - estimate required
(a) Before complying with a public information request, the town shall provide a statement of estimated costs
if:
(1) The town intends to impose a personnel charge;
(2) Copies made to comply with the request will exceed 50 pages;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/665
(3) The public information request requires the provision of documents from two or more separate
buildings that are not physically connected with each other;
(4) The public information request requires the provision of documents from a remote storage
facility; or
(5) The estimated charges for complying with a public information request exceed $40.00.
(b) If the town intends to seek payment from a requestor for a personnel charge, a statement of estimated costs
for such personnel charge(s) shall be provided to the requestor on or before the 10th day after the date on which
the public information request was received by the town. If the town does not intend to seek payment from a
requestor for a personnel charge, the town shall endeavor to provide a requestor a statement of estimated costs
otherwise required under this section as soon as reasonably practical, but in no event shall the town charge a
requestor in excess of $40.00 if the town does not provide an estimate of costs.
Sec. 1.15.007 Content of statement of estimated costs
(a) A statement of estimated costs provided under this article must include:
(1) An itemized estimate of charges, including any allowable charges for labor, overhead, copies,
personnel time, programming time, etc.;
(2) Whether a less costly or no-cost way of viewing the information is available;
(3) A statement that the requestor must provide the town with mailing, facsimile transmission, or
electronic mail address to receive the itemized statement and that it is the requestor's choice as to
which type of address to provide; and
(4) Statement that the requestor must respond in writing by mail, in person, by facsimile, or by
electronic mail to the town secretary in response to the statement of estimated costs.
(b) A statement of estimated costs provided under this section must also include as an attachment a copy of
the current version of Texas Government Code sec. 552.2615. A copy of sec. 552.2615, current at the time of
adoption of this article, is attached to Ordinance 2017-27 and incorporated herein as if set forth in full.
Sec. 1.15.008 Procedures for certain charges and methodology of calculations
(a) Labor charges.
(1) Labor charges will be applied to any public information request that:
(A) Exceeds 50 pages in length;
(B) Requires the provision of documents from two or more separate buildings that are not
physically connected with each other; or
(C) Requires the provision of documents from a remote storage facility.
(2) Labor charges are assessed as listed in appendix A, unless the town has been granted an
exemption providing for a higher rate from the Texas Attorney General's office. Details are available
from the town secretary.
(3) Labor charges may not be charged to the requestor for any time spent by an attorney, legal
assistant, or any other person who reviews the requested information:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/665
(A) To determine whether the town will raise any exceptions to disclosure of the requested
information under the Texas Government Code, subchapter C, chapter 552; or
(B) To research or prepare a request for a ruling by the Attorney General's office pursuant to
sec. 552.301 of the Texas Government Code.
(4) When confidential information pursuant to a mandatory exception of the Public Information
Act is mixed with public information in the same page, a labor charge may be recovered for time
spent to redact, blackout, or otherwise obscure confidential information in order to release the public
information. A labor charge shall not be made for redacting confidential information for requests of
50 or fewer pages, unless the request also qualifies for a labor charge pursuant to Texas Government
Code, sec. 552.261(a)(1) or (2).
(b) Programming labor charges. If a public information request requires the services of a programmer in order
to execute an existing program or to create a new program so that requested information may be accessed and
copied, the town may charge for the programmer's time as a programming labor charge in accordance with state
law and the rules of the Attorney General.
(c) Personnel charges. Personnel charges are calculated at an hourly rate for time spent by personnel in
locating, compiling, manipulating data, and reproducing public information for inspection or duplication by a
requestor or providing copies of public information to a requestor that is in excess of the 15 cumulative monthly
hours or 36 cumulative hours in a 12-month period, said period to correspond to the fiscal year of the town.
When personnel charges are applicable, the charge is calculated by determining the sum total of the actual cost
of all employees' time spent on a public information request. Whenever personnel charges are imposed, labor
charges may not be imposed.
Sec. 1.15.009 Charges for copies, nonstandard copies, and other materials
(a) In addition to charging $0.10 per paper copy for standard copies, the charges for nonstandard copies shall
apply with regard to all public information requests, as listed in appendix A.
(b) Charges for nonstandard copies or oversized copies are applicable to all public information requests,
regardless of the number of pages requested or the time involved in responding to the public information
request.
(c) Microfiche and microfilm charge.
(1) If the town already has information that exists on microfiche or microfilm and has copies
available for sale or distribution, the charge for a copy must not exceed the cost of its reproduction. If
no copies of the requested microfiche or microfilm are available and the information on the
microfiche or microfilm can be released in its entirety, the town may make a copy of the microfiche
or microfilm. The charge for a copy shall not exceed the cost of its reproduction.
(2) If only a master copy of the information in microfilm is maintained, the charge is $0.10 per
page for standard paper copies, plus any applicable labor and overhead charge(s) for more than 50
copies.
(d) Remote document retrieval. If the town has a contract with a commercial records storage company,
whereby the private company charges a fee to locate, retrieve, deliver, and return to storage the needed record(s),
no additional labor charge shall be factored in for time spent locating documents at the storage location by the
private company's personnel. If after delivery to the town, the materials must still be searched for records that
are responsive to the request, the town may charge for such search in accordance with this article.
(e) Computer resource charge. As listed in appendix A.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/665
(f) Miscellaneous supplies. The actual cost of miscellaneous supplies, such as labels, boxes, and other supplies
used to produce the requested information, may be added to the total charge for public information.
(g) Postal and shipping charges. The town may add any related postal or shipping expenses that are necessary
to transmit the reproduced information to the requesting party.
(h) Miscellaneous charges. If the town accepts payment by credit card for copies of public information and is
charged a “transaction fee” by the credit card company, the town may recover that fee from the requestor.
Cross reference–Appendix A, article A8.000.
Sec. 1.15.010 Requirements for submitting a public information request
(a) In order to be considered valid and treated as a public information request, a communication to the town
must:
(1) Be addressed conspicuously to the attention of and delivered only to the officer for public
information at a mailing address, physical address, email address, or facsimile number provided by
the officer for public information;
(2) Be in writing, state that it is a request for public information, and state the requestor's name,
mailing address, telephone number, and all additional information necessary to allow a response to be
sent to a particular place or address; and
(3) Include a description of the information requested that is sufficiently specific to enable the
town to accurately identify any information that may be responsive to the request.
(b) A public information request may be delivered by hand, mail, facsimile, email, or private courier or
commercial delivery service.
(c) Any email of facsimile submission addressed or delivered to any person other than the public information
officer or the officer's designee shall not be considered a public information request.
Sec. 1.15.011 Implementation
The public information officer, or a person designated by the officer, shall implement the provisions of this article.
Sec. 1.15.012 Judicial records not covered under this article
Judicial records are not covered by the Public Information Act or the public information regulations enacted by the town.
Judicial records shall not be disclosed in response to a request for public information. A public information request for
judicial records shall be returned to the requestor. A request for judicial records may be sent to the municipal court that
maintains such record and such requests shall be governed by the regulations adopted by such court.
(Ordinance 2017-27 adopted 12/5/17)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/665
Sec. 2.01.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Animal. Any living creature, including but not limited to dogs, cats, horses, birds, fish, mammals, reptiles,
insects, fowl and livestock, but specifically excluding human beings.
Animal control. The animal control function of the town.
Animal control officer. Any person or agency designated by the local health authority to be an enforcement
officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Cat. Any live or dead cat (Felis catus).
(1998 Code, sec. 91.01)
Currently vaccinated. Vaccinated and satisfying the following criteria:
(1) The animal must have been at least 16 weeks of age at the time of vaccination.
(2) The veterinarian who administered the initial vaccination has discretion as to when the
subsequent vaccination will be scheduled.
(3) No more than three years have elapsed since the most recent vaccination.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.01; Ordinance adopting Code)
Dog. Any live or dead dog (Canis familiaris).
Domestic animals. All species of animals commonly accepted as being domesticated.
Harboring. The act of keeping or caring for an animal or of providing premises to which the animal returns for
food, shelter, or care.
Large livestock. Horses or any member of the domesticated horse family, including, but not limited to, mules,
donkeys and ponies; and all types and varieties of cattle.
Local health authority. The person or entity designated by the town council to enforce and supervise animal
control within the town.
Owner. Any person, firm, or corporation having title to any animal; or a person who has, harbors, keeps, or
causes or permits to be harbored or kept any animal in his care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about
his premises.
Pet animal. Dogs, cats, rabbits, rodents, birds, reptiles, and any other species of animal that is sold or retained as
a household pet, but shall not include skunks, nonhuman primates, and any other species of wild, exotic, or
carnivorous animal that may be further restricted in this law.
Running at large. An animal that is not restrained in a fenced yard or an enclosed structure, or restrained by
leash, or by holding the animal in the hands, or by having direct supervision and control of the animal.
Small livestock. All types of domesticated swine, sheep and goats.
Stray animal. Any animal for which there is no identifiable owner or harborer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/665
Vaccinated. Properly injected with a rabies vaccine licensed for use in that species by the United States
Department of Agriculture and administered by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the state.
Vicious animal. Any individual animal or any species that has on one previous occasion, without provocation,
attacked or bitten any person or other animal, or any individual animal that the local health authority or
supervisor of animal control has reason to believe has a dangerous disposition, or any species of animal that the
local health authority or supervisor has reason to believe has a dangerous disposition likely to be harmful to
humans or other animals.
Wild animal. Any poisonous or dangerous reptile or any other species of animal that commonly exists in a
natural, unconfined state and is usually not domesticated, including, but not limited to, foxes, opossums,
raccoons, squirrels, leopards, panthers, tigers, lions, and lynx, unless certified for medical, biological,
herpetological, or other scientific research or study. This definition shall apply regardless of state or duration of
captivity.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.01)
Sec. 2.01.002 Enforcement; local health authority; animal control officers
(a) Pursuant to Tex. Health and Safety Code section 826.017, the town council shall designate a local health
authority who will, among other duties, enforce the animal control regulations of this chapter. Such local health
authority may be a municipal health officer, an animal control officer or an entity that the town council considers
appropriate. If the local health authority is to be a private entity, the town council may make such appointment
by entering into a contract to carry out the activities required by this chapter. The local health authority or one of
its animal control officers shall have full authority to enforce this chapter; however, such authority shall not be
construed to prevent any other person, citizen or town officer from filing and prosecuting a complaint in the
municipal court or any other court having jurisdiction over such matter.
(b) The local health authority and its animal control officers shall have the following duties:
(1) The local health authority and its animal control officers shall be the primary enforcement
authority of the provisions of this chapter and the animal control ordinances of the town.
(2) The local health authority or an animal control officer shall have the authority to issue citations
for any violation of this chapter. A citation is the official notice to a person that he or she is to appear
in the municipal court to answer a violation. The citation is similar to the traffic ticket issued for a
traffic violation; however, it does not have to be on any specific form; its only purpose is to give
notice of the filing of the violation in the court.
(3) If the person being cited is not present, the local health authority or animal control officer may
send the citation to the alleged offender by registered or certified mail.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the local health authority or animal control
officer in the performance of duties. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection (b)(4) that the
interference alleged consisted of constitutionally protected speech only.
(5) The local health authority and any animal control officer are authorized to go onto any private
property within the town for the purpose of determining whether or not any provision of this chapter
has been violated and to impound any animal kept or harbored in violation of any terms of the
ordinances codified by this chapter.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.08)
State law reference–Appointment of rabies control authority by municipality, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.017.
Sec. 2.01.003 Wild or exotic animals
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/665
(a) No person shall harbor any wild or exotic animal within the corporate limits of the town without approval
of a special permit by the town council. (1998 Code, sec. 91.02)
(b) The keeping of dangerous wild animals shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A.,
Health and Safety Code, section 822.101 et seq. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Dangerous wild animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 822.101 et seq.
Sec. 2.01.004 Vicious animals
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor a vicious animal within the corporate limits of the town. (1998
Code, sec. 91.03)
Sec. 2.01.005 Running at large
(a) (1) A person who harbors a dog commits an offense, without regard to his mental state, if he
fails to restrain the dog in a fenced yard or an enclosed structure, or by leash, or by holding the dog in
the hands, or by having direct supervision and control of the animal.
(2) It shall be presumed that any dog that does damage to public or private property, or attacks a
person or other animal, or otherwise disrupts the lawful use of public or private property by third
parties, is not under the direct supervision and control of any person, even though the person is in the
presence of the animal.
(3) A person who harbors any animal other than a cat commits an offense, without regard to his
mental state, if he fails to restrain the animal in a fenced yard or an enclosed structure, or by leash, or
by holding the animal in the hands, or by having direct supervision and control of the animal.
(4) It shall be presumed that any animal that does damage to public or private property, or attacks a
person or other animal, or otherwise disrupts the lawful use of public or private property by third
parties, is not under the direct supervision and control of any person, even though the person is in the
presence of the animal.
(b) An animal control officer is authorized to impound such animal running at large, other than a cat, and may
impound a cat under conditions specified in article 2.05 of this chapter, or when he has received a complaint that
the cat has caused a nuisance or hazard to the health or welfare of the human or animal population.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.04)
State law reference–Restraint, impoundment and disposition of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.033.
Sec. 2.01.006 Sanitary conditions
(a) The owner or person in possession of animals shall keep yards, pens, and enclosures in which such animals
are confined in such a manner as not to give off odors offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities residing in
the vicinity or to breed or attract flies, mosquitoes, or other noxious insects, or in any manner to endanger the
public health or safety, or to create a public nuisance.
(b) All persons keeping such animals shall comply with the following regulations:
(1) Manure shall be removed from pens, stables, yards, cages, and other enclosures as necessary to
maintain sanitary conditions and handled or disposed of in such manner as to keep the premises free
of any nuisances.
(2) Mound storage of droppings or manure between such removals shall be permitted only under
such conditions as to protect against the breeding of flies and to prevent migration of fly larvae
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/665
(maggots) into the surrounding soil.
(3) Watering troughs or tanks shall be provided that are equipped with adequate facilities for
draining the overflow so as to prevent the breeding of flies, mosquitoes, and other insects.
(4) No putrescible material shall be allowed to accumulate on the premises, and all such material
used to feed that is unconsumed shall be removed and disposed of by burial or other sanitary means.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.05)
Sec. 2.01.007 Humane treatment
The following requirements are established for pet and animal care and are not intended to contravene with the
provisions for animal cruelty as provided in the Texas Penal Code:
(1) No owner shall fail to provide his animal(s) with sufficient good, wholesome food and water,
proper shelter, and protection from the weather, and veterinary care when needed to prevent
suffering, and with humane care and treatment.
(2) No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse an
animal, or cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between
animals or between animals and humans.
(3) No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
(4) Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal, shall stop at
once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death
to the animal's owner; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at
once report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
(5) The use of steel jaw traps shall be prohibited.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.06)
State law references–Cruelty to livestock animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.09; cruelty to nonlivestock animals, V.T.C.A., Penal
Code, sec. 42.092; disposition of cruelly treated animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 821.021 et seq.
Sec. 2.01.008 Adoption of animals from animal shelter
(a) Adoption of a dog or cat from the animal shelter may take place under the following conditions:
(1) The animal has been classified as adoptable by the local health authority;
(2) The prospective adopter can meet all of the adoption guidelines as set forth by the local health
authority;
(3) The prospective adopter obtains all necessary vaccination, registration, and sterilization; and
(4) The prospective adopter pays the current adoption fees.
(b) The local health authority shall refuse to allow a person to adopt a dog or cat from the animal shelter when
the local health authority has reason to believe that person would not be able to obtain a registration certificate
under this chapter, would not have proper facilities for care of
the animal, wants the animal for purposes of resale or purposes other than pet ownership, or would not be a
suitable owner within the sole discretion of the local health authority, or that the animal would be a hazard to
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/665
humans or other animals in the opinion of the local health authority.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.07)
State law reference–Sterilization of dog or cat released for adoption, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 828.
Sec. 2.01.009 Guard dogs
Every person having care, control, or custody of any guard dog must comply with V.T.C.A., Occupations Code,
chapter 1702. The owner or keeper of guard dogs shall be subject to the other provisions of this chapter. An ID
collar identifying the dog as a guard dog must be worn at all times and the dog must wear a muzzle out of
confinement. (1998 Code, sec. 91.47; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Private Security Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1702; licensing and duties of guard dog companies,
V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 1702.109 et seq.; qualifications for guard dog company license, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec.
1702.116.
Sec. 2.01.010 Dangerous dogs
Dangerous dogs, as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, section 822.041, shall be regulated in
accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, chapter 822, subchapter D, section 822.041
et seq. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.01.011 Number of dogs and cats restricted
It is unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor more than four (4) dogs or four (4) cats or any combination
thereof, over four (4) months of age, within the city. However, this section shall not apply to breeders, kennels,
groomers or a new litter of dogs or cats. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 2.02 RABIES CONTROL*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.02.001 Vaccination of dogs and cats required
Every owner of a dog or cat sixteen (16) weeks of age or older shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies.
All dogs or cats vaccinated at sixteen (16) weeks of age or older shall maintain a current vaccination at all times,
and in no case shall a vaccination be considered current any time after three years. Any person moving from a
location outside of the town shall comply with this section within 30 days after having moved into the town. If
the dog or cat has inflicted a bite on any person or another animal, the owner of said dog or cat shall
immediately report such fact to a veterinarian and the public works director, or his or her designee. No rabies
vaccine shall be administered until after the ten-day observation period. (1998 Code, sec. 91.20; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 2.02.002 Certificate of vaccination
(a) Upon vaccination, the veterinarian or the local health authority providing such service shall execute and
furnish to the owner of the dog or cat, as evidence thereof, a certificate upon a form furnished by the veterinarian
or local health authority. The veterinarian or local health authority shall retain a duplicate copy.
(b) Such certificate shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the vaccinated dog or cat;
(2) The date of vaccination;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/665
(3) The type of rabies vaccine used;
(4) The year and number of rabies tag; and
(5) The breed, age, color, and sex of the vaccinated dog or cat.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.21)
Sec. 2.02.003 Rabies tag; duplicate tag
(a) Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of vaccination referred to in section 2.02.002,
the owner of the dog or cat shall cause to be attached to the collar or harness of the vaccinated dog or cat a metal
tag, serially numbered to correspond with the vaccination certificate number, and bearing the year of issuance,
and the name of the issuing party and his address. The owner shall cause the collar or harness, with the attached
metal tag, to be worn by his dog or cat at all times.
(b) In the event of loss or destruction of the original tag provided for in this section, the owner of the dog or
cat shall obtain a duplicate tag. Vaccination certificates (and tags) shall be valid only for the animal for which
they were originally issued.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.22)
Sec. 2.02.004 Proof of vaccination
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or harbors a vaccinated dog or cat to fail or refuse to exhibit his
copy of the certificate of vaccination upon demand to any person charged with the enforcement of this chapter.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.23)
Sec. 2.02.005 Harboring unvaccinated animals
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor any dog or cat that has not been vaccinated against rabies as
provided herein, or that cannot be identified as having a current vaccination certificate. (1998 Code, sec. 91.24)
Sec. 2.02.006 Animals exposed to rabies
(a) Any person having knowledge of the existence of any animal known to have been or suspected of being
exposed to rabies must immediately report such knowledge to the local health authority, giving any information
that may be required.
(b) For any animal known to have been or suspected of being exposed to rabies, the following rules must
apply:
(1) Animals having a current vaccination must be revaccinated immediately and confined
according to the method prescribed by the local health authority for a period of not less than 90 days;
and
(2) Animals not having a current vaccination should be humanely destroyed. However, if the
owner of such an animal elects, he may, at his expense and in a manner prescribed by the local health
authority, confine said animal. Such animal must be vaccinated immediately following exposure and
quarantined for not less than six months. A revaccination shall be done one month prior to release
from quarantine.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.25)
Sec. 2.02.007 Reporting cases of humans bitten by animals
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/665
The following procedures shall apply to reporting cases of humans bitten by animals susceptible to rabies:
(1) Any person having knowledge of an animal bite to a human will report the incident to the town
secretary or local health authority as soon as possible, but not later than 24 hours from the time of the
incident.
(2) The owner of the biting animal will place that animal in quarantine under the supervision of the
local health authority as prescribed in division 2 of this article.
(3) Utilizing standardized reporting forms provided by the department of state health services, the
local health authority will investigate each bite incident.
(4) Bites to a human from rodents, rabbits, birds, and all cold-blooded animals are excluded from
the reporting requirements of this section.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.26)
Secs. 2.02.008–2.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Quarantine Procedure*
Sec. 2.02.031 Generally; home quarantine
(a) When a dog, cat, or domestic ferret that has bitten a human is identified, the owner is required to produce
the dog, cat, or domestic ferret for ten days' confinement at the owner's expense. Refusal to produce said dog,
cat, or domestic ferret constitutes a violation of this division, and each day of such refusal constitutes a separate
and individual violation. The animal must also be quarantined if there is probable cause to believe that it has
otherwise exposed a human to rabies. The ten-day observation period will begin the day of the exposure. The
animal must be placed in quarantine facility, licensed by the department of state health services, that is specified
by the local rabies control authority and observed at least twice daily. However, the local rabies control authority
may allow the animal to be quarantined in a veterinary clinic.
(b) The owner of the animal may request permission from the local rabies control authority for home
quarantine if the following criteria can be met:
(1) Secure facilities approved by the local rabies control authority must be used to prevent escape.
(2) The animal is currently vaccinated against rabies.
(3) The local rabies control authority or a veterinarian must observe the animal at least on the first
and last days of the quarantine period. If the animal becomes ill during the observation period, the
local health authority must be notified by the person having possession of the animal. At the end of
the observation period, the release from quarantine must be accomplished in writing.
(4) The animal was not a stray as defined in the Texas Health and Safety Code, section 826.002, at
the time of the potential exposure.
(c) If the biting animal cannot be maintained in secure quarantine, it shall be humanely destroyed and the
brain submitted to a department of state health services certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.35; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.02.032 Interruption of observation period
It shall be unlawful for any person to interrupt the ten-day observation period. (1998 Code, sec. 91.36)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/665
Sec. 2.02.033 Wild animals
No wild animal will be placed in quarantine. All wild animals involved in biting incidents will be humanely
killed in such a manner that the brain is not mutilated. The brain shall be submitted to a department of state
health services certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis. (1998 Code, sec. 91.37)
ARTICLE 2.03 REGISTRATION OF DOGS AND CATS*
Sec. 2.03.001 Required; procedures; fee
(a) No owner shall have within the town any dog or cat four months of age or older unless such dog or cat is
currently registered with the local health authority. A current metal registration certificate issued by the local
health authority, or a veterinarian authorized by the local health authority to issue the certificate, must be affixed
to a collar or harness that must be worn by the dog or cat at all times. No dog or cat shall be registered until it
has a current vaccination.
(b) Application for initial issuance or renewal of each registration must be made by the owner in writing or in
person and be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. If the cat or dog
being registered has been neutered or spayed and proof of such surgical sterilization can be shown to an animal
control officer or a veterinarian authorized to issue such registrations, the fee will then be discounted, as set forth
in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. Dogs and cats under the age of one year shall be registered at the
sterilized fee. Animals may be exempt from the sterilization provision upon written recommendation from a
veterinarian that such alteration would be harmful or dangerous to the animal.
(c) Registration certificates shall be renewed annually. The registration period will be from January 1 to
December 31. Certificates for the new period shall be available for sale at least 30 days in advance of the 60
days following January 1 and shall constitute a valid registration upon issuance.
(d) Registration and/or vaccination certificates (and tags) shall be valid only for the animal for which they
were originally issued.
(e) If there is a change in ownership of a registered dog or cat, the new owner may have the registration
transferred to his name. There shall be no charge for said transfer. Application for such transfer shall be made to
the local health authority in writing or in person.
(f) Fee-exempt registrations may be issued for the following: police or sheriff's department dogs and dogs
trained to assist audio or visually impaired persons. Eligibility for fee-exempt registration does not relieve the
owner of his responsibility under other provisions of this chapter.
(g) Veterinarians authorized by the local health authority to issue animal registration certificates may retain
$1.00 of the registration fee for every animal registered in accordance with this chapter.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.45)
Sec. 2.03.002 Denial or revocation
(a) The supervisor of animal control may refuse to register a cat or dog or revoke a permit issued to any
person who has been convicted in any duly authorized court of jurisdiction in the state or resides with any person
so convicted of any of the following:
(1) Cruelty to animals as defined in the Tex. Penal Code section 42.11, or negligence to an animal;
and
(2) Conviction of four or more separate and distinct violations of an animal control ordinance of a
municipality in the state within any 12-month period. Any person denied such a registration may
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/665
appeal the refusal to a municipal judge.
(b) The municipal judge shall uphold, overturn, or modify the local health authority's refusal to issue a
registration certificate.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.46)
ARTICLE 2.04 HABITUAL BARKING DOGS
Sec. 2.04.001 Prohibited
Within the territorial limits of the town, knowingly harboring a dog shall be unlawful if the dog's owner fails to
prevent the dog from habitually barking, whining, crying, howling, or yelping in such a manner that the resulting
noise (“habitual barking”) disturbs the peace and quiet of a neighborhood or a nearby area to such an extent that
it causes an unreasonable annoyance to persons of ordinary sensibilities living in such neighborhood or such
nearby area.
Sec. 2.04.002 Report of violation; written notice
(a) Reports relating to habitual barking prohibited by this article must be submitted in writing to the animal
control officer or other person designated by the town manager and must include the date of the violation, the
property address or general description of the premises where the violation occurred, and a brief description of
the occurrence. A report of a violation will not be acted upon under this article unless it is submitted to the town
in the manner stated above within 15 days after the date of the reported occurrence.
(b) Upon receipt of a properly submitted written report, the town shall send written notice to the person
reasonably determined to be the dog's owner, or, alternatively, if the identity of the dog's owner cannot be readily
determined, to the person who owns, occupies, or controls the property or premises referenced in the report of
violation, in which case the person that owns, occupies, or controls such property or premises shall be deemed
for the purposes of this article to be the dog's owner. The written notice shall include the property address or
general description of the premises where the reported violation occurred, the date of the occurrence, and a
warning that:
(1) The dog must be prevented from habitual barking in a manner prohibited by this article; and
(2) If the town receives any reports of an additional violation(s) of this article by the owner–or an
additional violation(s) of this article involving the same property or premises–occurring within the
30-day period beginning after the date of the written notice, then without further notice one or more
citations may be issued and/or the matter otherwise referred to the municipal court for prosecution.
(c) The written notice described above shall be sent to the owner via certified mail return receipt requested, or
be personally served by the animal control officer or that officer's designee. Notwithstanding any provision of
this article, the town shall not be required to provide a written notice with respect to any reports of an additional
violation(s) occurring within the 30-day period described in subsection (b)(2), above.
(Ordinance 2014-2-4C adopted 2/4/14)
ARTICLE 2.05 IMPOUNDMENT*
Sec. 2.05.001 Animals that may be impounded
The following animals may be impounded:
(1) Cats and dogs not exhibiting evidence of being vaccinated or registered;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/665
(2) Any animal infected with rabies or kept under conditions that could endanger the public or
animal health;
(3) Any animal found running at large, as that term is defined herein;
(4) Any animal treated in a manner determined by an animal control officer to be cruel and
inhumane;
(5) Any animal that has bitten a human being or needs to be placed under observation for rabies
determination, as determined by an animal control officer;
(6) Any animal that presents a violation of any provisions of this chapter.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.75)
Sec. 2.05.002 Right of occupants to confine animals found on premises
If any of the animals named in this chapter are found upon the premises of any person, the owner or occupant of
the premises shall have the right to confine such animal in a humane manner until he can notify an animal
control officer to retrieve the animal for impoundment. When so notified, it shall be the duty of the animal
control officer to impound such animal as herein provided. (1998 Code, sec. 91.76)
Sec. 2.05.003 Notification of owner
Reasonable effort shall be made by the local health authority to contact the owner of any animal impounded that
is wearing a current registration tag; however, final responsibility for location of an impounded animal is that of
the owner. (1998 Code, sec. 91.77)
Sec. 2.05.004 Disposition of impounded animals
(a) The owner can resume possession of any impounded animal upon payment of impoundment fees, handling
fees, and any veterinarian bills incurred by the local health authority for the welfare of the animal, and upon
compliance with vaccination and registration provisions of this code, except where herein prohibited.
(b) Disposition of animals impounded on the grounds of cruel or inhumane treatment shall be determined by
any court having jurisdiction over such matter.
(c) If any animal is being held in quarantine or observation for rabies, the owner shall not be entitled to
possession until it has been released from quarantine.
(d) The town council shall select and establish a place for impounding animals under any provisions of this
chapter.
(e) Any animal not reclaimed by the owner may be humanely euthanized after being impounded for 72 hours,
except that any animal wearing a current registration certificate tag shall be impounded for not less than 180
hours.
(f) Any impounded vicious or wild animal, unless there is reason to believe it has an owner, may be
immediately disposed of as may be deemed appropriate by the supervisor of animal control.
(g) Any nursing baby animal impounded without its mother, or where the mother cannot or refuses to provide
nutritious milk, may be immediately euthanized to prevent further suffering.
(h) Any impounded dog or cat not wearing a registration certificate tag may be given up for adoption after 72
hours of impoundment, except those under quarantine. Any impounded dog or cat wearing a current registration
tag may be given up for adoption after 180 hours of impoundment.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/665
(i) An owner who no longer wishes responsibility for an animal, or believes the animal to be in an ill or
injured condition, may sign a written waiver supplied by animal control allowing the animal to be immediately
given up for adoption or euthanized in a humane manner, providing that no warm-blooded animal that has bitten
a human being shall be euthanized before expiration of the ten-day quarantine period.
(j) Any impounded animal that appears to be suffering from extreme injury or illness may be euthanized or
given to a nonprofit humane organization for the purpose of veterinary care, as determined by the local health
authority.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.78)
Sec. 2.05.005 Fee schedule
Impoundment fees for all animals, including daily handling fees, quarantine fees, and adoption fees, shall be
those fees as determined by the county. (1998 Code, sec. 91.79; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.05.006 Liability for costs and fees
Every owner of an animal impounded by an animal control officer or voluntarily impounded by the owner shall
be liable for all costs and fees incurred by such impoundment. (1998 Code, sec. 91.80)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 3.01.001 Standard specifications for public works construction adopted
The town hereby adopts the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, first edition, 1995, and the
further amendments thereto, as promulgated by the North Central Texas Council of Governments. A copy of
such publication shall be maintained at all times in the office of the town secretary. (1998 Code, sec. 150.01)
Sec. 3.01.002 References to town building code
Articles 3.02 through 3.08 of this chapter shall be known as the town building code. (1998 Code, sec. 150.15)
Sec. 3.01.003 Enforcement of building regulations
The town's building official shall have the authority and power to enforce all provisions of the International
Building Code, the International Fire Code, the International Mechanical Code, and the International Plumbing
Code. The town's fire chief shall have the authority to enforce all provisions of the International Fire Code.
(1998 Code, sec. 150.21)
Sec. 3.01.004 Building permit
(a) Application. All persons desiring to construct, refurbish, remodel or improve any building or structure
within the corporate limits of the town shall make application for a building permit for said structure with the
town secretary. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a site plan in duplicate together
with such additional copies as the town secretary determines to be necessary for review by other administrative
officers and agencies, which shall be drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of a lot to be built
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/665
upon, the exact size and location of the building on the lot already existing, if any, and the location and
dimensions of proposed buildings, structures or alterations. Any application shall include such other information
as lawfully may be required by the town secretary, including existing or proposed uses of the building or
structure and land, conditions existing on the lot, and such other matters as may be necessary to determine
conformance with the town's zoning and subdivision control ordinance, and provide for the enforcement of these
regulations.
(b) Issuance. Building permits are to be issued by the town secretary upon the approval of the town building
official. All new construction of buildings, structures, fixed or movable, and remodeling or refurbishing of same;
swimming pools; mobile homes; prefabricated structures; portable buildings; outbuildings; and all other
buildings or structures within the corporate limits of the town must comply with this chapter, and a building
permit will be issued only when such compliance is assured. No placement, construction, remodeling,
refurbishment or construction of any kind of any building or structure may be commenced prior to the issuance
of a building permit.
(c) Fees. The town council may from time to time revise building permit fee schedules by resolution when the
council determines that such changes in the schedule of fees are necessary for the effective administration and
enforcement of the building codes adopted by the town.
(d) Additional regulations applicable to the subdivisions known as Oakwood Estates Phase II and Oakwood
Estates Phase III are adopted herein by reference as if fully set forth herein. Said additional regulations are on
file in the office of the town secretary.
(Ordinance 2015-31 adopted 11/3/15)
Sec. 3.01.005 Certificate of occupancy
(a) Required. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy or
character of occupancy of a building or structure, or portion thereof, shall be made until the building official has
issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein.
(b) Residential dwellings. Once an original certificate of occupancy has been issued for a residential dwelling,
and where no change has been made to the dwelling or property that would require a new building permit or
inspection, a new certificate of occupancy shall not be required when a new resident thereafter occupies the
residential dwelling.
(c) Application. Any person required to obtain a certificate of occupancy shall make application for such
certificate to the town secretary.
(d) Fee. A fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code, to cover the administration and
inspections required for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, shall be collected at the time of application.
(e) Issuance; contents. After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violation of
the provisions of this code or other laws which are enforced by the code enforcement agency, the building
official shall issue a certificate of occupancy which shall contain the following:
(1) The building permit number.
(2) The address of the building.
(3) The name and address of the owner.
(4) A description of that portion of the building for which the certificate is issued.
(5) A statement that the described portion of the building has been inspected for compliance with
the requirements of this code for the group and division of occupancy and the use for which the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/665
proposed occupancy is classified.
(6) The name of the building official.
(f) Temporary certificate. If the building official finds that no substantial hazard will result from occupancy of
any building or portion thereof before the same is completed, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be
issued for the use of a portion or portions of a building or structure prior to the completion of the entire building
or structure.
(g) Issuance not approval of violation. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an
approval of a violation of any provision of the building code, the Code of Ordinances of the town, or any other
ordinance of the town, or any other law applicable to said property.
(h) Posting. The certificate of occupancy shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises and shall not
be removed except by the building official.
(i) Revocation. The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy issued
under the provisions of this code whenever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect
information supplied, or when it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of
any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code.
(j) Existing commercial uses. All existing commercial uses of property, buildings, or structures shall require a
certificate of occupancy to be on file with the town secretary. Any such commercial use operating within the
corporate limits of the town on the effective date of this section without having a certificate of occupancy on file
with the town shall have a grace period of 90 days within which to make application for and obtain such
certificate, and during such period such existing commercial use shall not be considered in violation of this
section. The fee established in subsection (d) of this section to cover the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
shall be waived for such existing commercial uses during this 90-day grace period, which shall run from the
effective date of this section. Thereafter, any such existing commercial uses without the required certificate of
occupancy on file shall be in violation of this section and no longer exempt from the payment of the required
fee.
(1998 Code, sec. 150.24)
ARTICLE 3.02 BUILDING CODE*
Sec. 3.02.001 Adopted
The International Building Code, 2012 edition, as adopted by the International Code Council, Inc., in
cooperation with the International Conference of Building Officials, as amended by the recommended
amendments of the North Central Texas Council of Governments, a copy of both code and amendments being on
file in the office of the town secretary, is hereby adopted by reference and designated as the building code of the
town, the same as though such code and amendments were copied at length herein.
Sec. 3.02.002 Additional amendments
Additional amendments shall be made to the town building code as directed and set forth by this article or
adopted by ordinance from time to time by the town council and said amendments shall be maintained as a
public record in the office of the town secretary and will be available for public inspection and copying during
regular business hours.
(Ordinance 2014-38 adopted 11/4/14)
ARTICLE 3.03 PLUMBING*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/665
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.03.001–3.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Plumbing Code
Sec. 3.03.031 Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the town for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design, quality
of materials, erection, construction, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, conversion,
addition to, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance
of all building or structures, the 2012 International Plumbing Code, published by the International Code Council,
with the exception of such sections thereof as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended by Ordinance 2014-42,
and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated herein, the same as if entirely set out at length herein, and
from the date of which this section shall take effect, the provisions hereof shall be controlling within the
corporate limits of the town. This code shall be known as the plumbing code or the Fairview plumbing code.
(Ordinance 2014-42 adopted 11/4/14)
ARTICLE 3.04 ELECTRICITY†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.04.001 General standards for electrical equipment
All electrical equipment installed or used in the town and all installations of electrical equipment shall be
reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with the standards provided by the National Fire
Protection Association, and with the provisions of this chapter, applicable state statutes, and any rules or
regulations issued under authority thereof. (1998 Code, sec. 150.19(A))
Secs. 3.04.002–3.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Electrical Code
Sec. 3.04.031 Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the town for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design, quality
of materials, erection, construction, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, conversion,
addition to, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance
of all building or structures, the 2011 National Electrical Code, as published by the National Fire Protection
Association, and as amended by the recommended amendments to Ordinance 2014-45 of the North Central
Texas Council of Governments, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated herein, the same as if entirely
set out at length herein, and from the date of which this section shall take effect, the provisions hereof shall be
controlling within the corporate limits of the town. This code shall be known as the electrical code or the
Fairview Electrical Code. (Ordinance 2014-45 adopted 11/4/14)
ARTICLE 3.05 MECHANICAL CODE*
Sec. 3.05.001 Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the town for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design, quality
of materials, erection, construction, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, conversion,
addition to, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance
of all building or structures, the 2012 International Mechanical Code, published by the International Code
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/665
Council; with the exception of such sections thereof as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended by Ordinance
2014-41, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated herein, the same as if entirely set out at length
herein, and from the date of which this section shall take effect, the provisions hereof shall be controlling within
the corporate limits of the town. This code shall be known as the mechanical code or the Fairview mechanical
code. (Ordinance 2014-41 adopted 11/4/14)
ARTICLE 3.06 RESIDENTIAL CODE†
Sec. 3.06.001 Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the town for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design, quality
of materials, erection, construction, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, conversion,
addition to, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance
of all building or structures, the 2012 International Residential Code, published by the International Code
Council, with the exception of such sections thereof as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended by Ordinance
2014-39, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated herein, the same as if entirely set out at length
herein, and from the date of which this section shall take effect, the provisions hereof shall be controlling within
the corporate limits of the town. This code shall be known as the residential code or the Fairview residential
building code. (Ordinance 2014-39 adopted 11/4/14)
ARTICLE 3.07 ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE*
Sec. 3.07.001 Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the town for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design, quality
of materials, erection, construction, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, conversion,
addition to, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance
of all building or structures, the 2012 International Energy Conservation Code, published by the International
Code Council, with the exception of such sections thereof as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended by
Ordinance 2014-44, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated herein, the same as if entirely set out at
length herein, and from the date of which this section shall take effect, the provisions hereof shall be controlling
within the corporate limits of the town. This code shall be known as the energy conservation code or the
Fairview energy conservation code. (Ordinance 2014-44 adopted 11/4/14)
ARTICLE 3.08 FUEL GAS CODE
Sec. 3.08.001 Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the town for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design, quality
of materials, erection, construction, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, conversion,
addition to, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance
of all building or structures, the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code, published by the International Code Council,
with the exception of such sections thereof as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended by Ordinance 2014-43,
and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated herein, the same as if entirely set out at length herein, and
from the date of which this article shall take effect, the provisions hereof shall be controlling within the
corporate limits of the town. This code shall be known as the fuel gas code or the Fairview fuel gas code.
(Ordinance 2014-43 adopted 11/4/14)
ARTICLE 3.09 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS*
Sec. 3.09.001 General
When a building or other structure is found to be a dangerous structure by the building official, the building or
structure may be condemned or otherwise addressed pursuant to the provisions of this article, providing for
notice and a public hearing.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/665
Sec. 3.09.002 Reference to state law
This article is adopted pursuant to Texas Local Government Code chapter 54, subchapter C., and chapter 214,
subchapter A.
Sec. 3.09.003 Definitions
Dangerous structure. A structure that is in an unsafe condition that could injure, hurt, or harm individuals or
property and that:
(1) Regardless of its structural condition, is unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and
is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or
other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children; or
(2) Is boarded up, fenced, or otherwise secured in any manner if the structure constitutes a danger
to the public even though secured from entry or the means used to secure the structure are inadequate
to prevent unauthorized entry or use of the structure; or
(3) Is dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the public health,
safety, and welfare, and which:
(A) Contains one or more interior walls or other vertical structural members that list, lean or
buckle to such an extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity falls outside of
the middle third of its base;
(B) Exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more damage or deterioration to the
supporting member or members or 50% or more damage or deterioration to the nonsupporting
enclosure or to outside walls or coverings;
(C) Has one or more improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the
same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose
used;
(D) Has been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to
persons or property;
(E) Has become or is so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, or unsanitary or which utterly fails to
provide amenities essential to decent living so that they are unfit for human habitation or are
likely to cause sickness or disease so as to work injury to the health or welfare of those living
therein;
(F) Has parts thereof which are attached in a manner that they may fall and injure persons or
property;
(G) Has a foundation that is not so free of holes, cracks, buckling, crumbling and defects as
to support adequately the structure;
(H) Does not have a floor, exterior wall and roof that is so free of holes, cracks and loose,
rotten, warped or protruding boards necessary to protect the occupants of the structure
reasonably from weather elements and from danger of collapse;
(I) Does not have interior walls and ceilings that are so free of holes, cracks, loose plaster,
loose and baggy wallpaper, defective materials and structural deterioration as to reasonably
serve their purpose and as to protect the occupants of the structure from danger of collapse and
of fire; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/665
(J) Exists in violation of any provision of any applicable building code(s) of the town or any
provision of the town's fire code or other ordinances of the town as such provisions relate to
minimum standards for buildings or structures.
Occupant. Any individual living or sleeping in a building or structure or having possession of a space within a
building or structure.
Structure. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
Sec. 3.09.004 Declaration of nuisance
All structures that are found to be dangerous structures, after notice and hearing as provided for under the
provisions of this article, are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be secured, repaired, vacated or
demolished as provided in this article.
Sec. 3.09.005 Designation of official
The town building official or that person's designee shall–with or without the assistance of other town personnel,
officials, or consultants–present all cases at hearings presided over by the commission.
Sec. 3.09.006 Building and standards commission
A building and standards commission (“commission”) is hereby established, which shall be constituted by the
same members appointed by the town council to serve as the town's board of adjustment. The purpose of the
commission is to hear cases under this article. A majority of the regular members of the commission must be
present for a hearing. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner that vacancies are filled on the board of
adjustment and the regular membership of the commission and the regular membership of the board of
adjustment shall be the same. A majority of the entire regular commission members shall adopt as necessary all
rules for hearings and other commission matters in accordance with this article. The town council shall have the
authority to review and modify such rules at its discretion. All meetings and hearings conducted by the
commission shall be open to the public and minutes shall be kept of all such meetings and hearings, recording
the vote of each member. Said minutes shall be filed immediately in the offices of the town as public records. A
majority vote of the commission members voting on a matter is necessary to take any action under this article.
Sec. 3.09.007 Building and standards commission orders and other functions
After the public hearing required under this article, the commission may do any or all of the following:
(1) Declare a structure to be a dangerous structure;
(2) Order the repair, within a fixed period as set forth in this article, of a structure it determines to
be a dangerous structure;
(3) Order, in an appropriate case, the immediate removal of persons or property found on private
property, enter on private property to secure the removal if it is determined that conditions exist on
the property that constitute a dangerous structure, and order action to be taken as necessary to
remedy, alleviate, or remove any dangerous structure found to exist;
(4) Issue orders or directives to any peace officer of the state, including a sheriff or constable or the
chief of police of the municipality, to enforce and carry out the lawful orders or directives of the
commission;
(5) Determine the amount and duration of the civil penalty the municipality may recover as
provided for under the Texas Local Government Code, chapter 54, subchapter B by filing a certified
copy of the order with the district clerk for the county; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/665
(6) Take any other appropriate action as set forth under this article.
Sec. 3.09.008 Pre-hearing notice
(a) When a building or other structure is found to be a dangerous structure by the building official, the
building official–after performing the due diligence required under section 3.09.009–must send notice:
(1) By personal delivery, by certified mail with return receipt requested, or by delivery by the
United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, to the record owners of the
affected property, and each holder of a recorded lien against the affected property, as shown by the
records in the office of the county clerk of the county in which the affected property is located if the
address of the lienholder can be ascertained from the deed of trust establishing the lien or other
applicable instruments on file in the office of the county clerk; and
(2) To all unknown owners, by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each improvement
situated on the affected property or as close to the front door as practicable.
(b) The notice must be posted and either personally delivered or mailed on or before the 10th day before the
date of the hearing before the commission and must state the date, time, and place of the hearing. In addition, the
notice must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality on one occasion on or before
the 10th day before the date fixed for the hearing.
(c) When a notice is sent in accordance with this article to a property owner, lienholder, or registered agent
and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is
not affected, and the notice is considered delivered.
Sec. 3.09.009 Due diligence to determine persons in interest
Before sending any notice under this article, the building official shall determine the identity and address of a
property owner, lienholder, or registered agent by searching the following records:
(1) County real property records of the county in which the property is located;
(2) Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located;
(3) Records of the secretary of state, if the property owner, lienholder, or registered agent is a
corporation, partnership, or other business association;
(4) Assumed name records of the county in which the property is located;
(5) Tax records of the municipality; and
(6) Utility records of the municipality.
Sec. 3.09.010 Filing of pre-hearing notice binds subsequent owners
The commission may file notice of a hearing or other proceeding in the official public records of real property in
the county in which the affected property is located. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner
of the affected property if that information can be determined from a reasonable search of the instruments on file
in the office of the county clerk, a legal description of the affected property, and a description of the proceeding.
The filing of the notice is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholders, or other transferees of an interest in the
property who acquire such interest after the filing of the notice and constitutes notice of the proceeding on any
subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who acquires such interest after the filing of the notice.
Sec. 3.09.011 Hearing and order
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/665
A hearing under this article must be held by the commission. After the public hearing, if a building or structure
is found by the commission to be a dangerous structure according to the standards set forth in this article, the
commission may order that the building or structure be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished by
the owner within a reasonable time as provided by this article. The commission also may order that the
occupants, if any, be relocated within a reasonable time, and take any additional actions as set forth under
section 3.09.007. In a public hearing to determine whether a building or structure complies with the standards set
out in this article, the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any
work that may be required to comply with this article and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work.
Sec. 3.09.012 Content of the order
In conducting the public hearing required under this article, the commission shall include in the order the
amount and duration of a civil penalty, if any, and the requirement(s) for the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of
the dangerous structure to within 30 days:
(1) Secure the dangerous structure from unauthorized entry; or
(2) Repair, remove, or demolish the dangerous structure, or part thereof, unless the owner or
lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days.
Sec. 3.09.013 Extension of time
If the commission allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove, or demolish
the building or structure, the commission shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and
performance of the work (said schedules must be incorporated into the order) and shall require the owner,
lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work
is being performed, as determined by the hearing official.
Sec. 3.09.014 Additional extension of time
The commission may not issue an order allowing the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to
repair, remove, or demolish the building or structure or fully perform all work required to comply with the order
unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee:
(1) Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and
(2) Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90 days
because of the scope and complexity of the work.
Sec. 3.09.015 Assurances of compliance during the extension period
If the commission allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part of the
work required to repair, remove, or demolish the building or structure, the order shall require the owner,
lienholder, or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the commission to demonstrate compliance with
the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the
owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the building official to demonstrate compliance with the time
schedules. If the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee owns property, including structures or improvements on
property, within the municipal boundaries that exceeds $100,000.00 in total value, the commission may include
in the order a requirement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to post a cash or surety bond in an amount
adequate to cover the cost of repairing, removing, or demolishing a building or structure under this article. In
lieu of a bond, the commission may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to provide a letter of credit from
a financial institution or a guaranty from a third party approved by the commission. The bond must be posted, or
the letter of credit or third party guaranty provided, not later than the 30th day after the date the commission
issues the order.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/665
Sec. 3.09.016 Post-hearing notice
If the owner was not present at a public hearing held under this article, the commission shall send a copy of the
order to the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the owner or responsible party does not take the
ordered action within the time allotted in the order, the commission shall make a diligent effort to discover each
mortgagee and lienholder having an interest in the structure or in the property on which the structure is located.
The commission satisfies the requirements of this section to make a diligent effort, to use its best efforts, or to
make a reasonable effort to determine the identity and address of an owner, a lienholder, or a mortgagee if the
town searches the records set forth under section 3.09.009 of this article.
Sec. 3.09.017 Contents of post-hearing notice
Once the steps have been taken to identify each mortgagee and lienholder, the building official or fire marshal
shall obtain personal delivery on or shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each identified
mortgagee and lienholder a notice containing:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the structure and the
property on which it is located;
(2) A description of the violation of the town's standards that is present at the structure; and
(3) A statement that the town will vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the structure or relocate the
occupants of the structure if the ordered action is not taken within a reasonable time.
Sec. 3.09.018 Filing, publication and mailing of order
The commission shall as soon as possible after the date that the order is issued:
(1) File a copy of the order in the office of the town secretary;
(2) Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality in which the structure is
located a notice containing:
(A) The street address or legal description of the property;
(B) The date of the hearing;
(C) A brief statement indicating the contents of the order; and
(D) Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained; and
(3) Mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, or personally deliver a copy of the order to the
owner of the structure and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the structure.
Sec. 3.09.019 Remedies in the event of noncompliance
If the structure is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or the occupants are not relocated
within the allotted time as applicable under any order of the commission, the town may vacate, secure, remove,
or demolish the building or relocate the occupants at its own expense. This section does not limit the ability of
the town to collect on a bond or other financial guaranty that may be required elsewhere in this article. If the
town incurs expenses under this section, the town may assess the expenses on, and the town has a lien against
the property on which the structure was located. The lien is extinguished if the property owner or another person
having an interest in the legal title to the property reimburses the town for the expenses. The lien arises and
attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk
in the county in which the property is located. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner if that
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/665
information can be determined with reasonable effort, a legal description of the real property on which the
structure was located, the amount of expenses incurred by the town, and the balance due.
Sec. 3.09.020 Additional authority to secure a substandard structure
The town may secure a building or structure that the building official determines:
(1) Violates the minimum standards of this article or of any provision of any applicable building
code(s) of the town or any provision of the town's fire code or other ordinances of the town as such
provisions relate to minimum standards for buildings or structures; and
(2) Is unoccupied or is only occupied by persons who do not have a right of possession to the
building or structure.
Sec. 3.09.021 Notice of securing of structure
Before the 11th day after the date the structure is secured, the town shall give notice of the fact that the structure
was secured to the owner by:
(1) Personally serving the owner with written notice;
(2) Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the owner's post
office address;
(3) Publishing the notice at least twice within a 10-day period in a newspaper of general circulation
in the county in which the structure is located if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's
post office address is unknown; or
(4) Posting the notice on or near the front door of the structure if personal service cannot be
obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown.
Sec. 3.09.022 Contents of notice of securing of structure
The notice must contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the structure and the
property on which it is located;
(2) A description of the violation of the town standard(s) that is present at the structure;
(3) A statement that the town will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the structure; and
(4) An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing about any matter relating to the
town's securing of the structure.
Sec. 3.09.023 Hearing related to securing of a structure
If the owner requests a hearing with respect to the town's securing of a structure, the commission shall conduct a
hearing at which the owner may testify or present witnesses or written information about any matter relating to
the town's securing of the structure if, within 30 days after the date the town secures the structure, the owner
files with the town a written request for the hearing. The town shall conduct the hearing within 20 days after the
date the request is filed.
Sec. 3.09.024 Expenses related to securing of a structure
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/665
The town has the same authority to assess expenses relating to its securing of a structure as it has to assess
expenses under section 3.09.019 and a lien is created under this section in the same manner that a lien is created
under section 3.09.019 and is subject to the same conditions as a lien created under that section.
Sec. 3.09.025 Seizure and sale to recover expenses
The town may foreclose a lien on property under this article:
(1) In a proceeding relating to the property brought under subchapter E, chapter 33, Tax Code
(V.T.C.A., Tax Code section 33.91 et seq.); or
(2) In a judicial proceeding, if:
(A) A structure on the property has been demolished;
(B) A lien for the cost of the demolition of the structure on the property has been created and
that cost has not been paid more than 180 days after the date the lien was filed; and
(C) Ad valorem taxes are delinquent on all or part of the property.
Sec. 3.09.026 Salvage materials
When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the town shall have the right to sell the salvage
and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the
expenses of such demolition, removal and sale, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or
transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted, to the owner, subject to any order of a
court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state.
(Ordinance 2010-6-1A adopted 6/1/10)
ARTICLE 3.10 GREEN BUILDING PROGRAM
Sec. 3.10.001 Minimum standards
(a) The minimum standard for energy efficiency of single-family residential structures shall be the
Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star designation as it currently exists or may be amended.
(b) A drought-tolerant landscaping option must be provided to homebuyers (turf and plants).
(c) Information must be provided in models concerning the benefits of xeriscaping and water conservation
practices.
(d) If bedding areas are installed, they must be mulched (recycled content mulch or compost).
(e) If an irrigation system is installed, it must include a rain and freeze sensor, installed to manufacturer's
specifications.
(f) If an irrigation system is installed, it must be a zoned irrigation system, with a maximum demand per zone
approved by the town.
(g) A reduction in stormwater utility fees shall be awarded for on-site stormwater collection systems in
proportion to the size and capacity of the system.
(h) Mechanical room walls exposed to living area must be insulated to R-11.
(i) Range hoods vented to the outside must be provided.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/665
(j) One carbon monoxide detector, hardwired, shall be installed per 1,000 square feet of living space, with a
minimum of one per floor, in any house where there is an attached garage or in which any combustion device is
used.
(k) Unvented fireplaces and gas logs having a fan that blows any portion of the combustion gases into living
spaces are not allowed.
(l) All joints in the air distribution system shall be sealed with duct mastic or an approved equivalent.
(m) Total duct leakage, measured in CFM at 25 pascals pressure, shall be less than or equal to 5% of the
square footage served by each unit, or equal to or less than 10% of the fan flow at high speed for each system
installed.
(n) Airflow to each room shall match designed airflow calculations to within +/- 10%.
(o) The exterior ventilation system installed per ASHRAE standards must perform at the following: kitchen,
100 CFM; bathroom, 20 CSF continuous or 50 CFM spot; master bedroom, 20 CFM, and other bedrooms, 10
CFM.
(p) A furnace and/or duct mounted electronic/electrostatic air cleaner option shall be provided to homebuyers.
(q) A furnace and/or duct mounted electronic/electrostatic air cleaner option shall be provided to homebuyers.
(r) If a central vacuum system is installed, it must exhaust to the outside.
(s) HVAC plenums on the supply side must be constructed of sheetmetal (no duct board) with external
insulation (minimum R-6, if located in unconditioned space).
(t) Construction waste (bricks and wood) hauled from the building site by the builder shall be taken to a site or
facility legally empowered to accept it for recycling.
(u) A construction waste reduction/reuse plan must be written and followed by the builder.
(v) Unwanted building materials shall be donated to a nonprofit building organization.
(w) A built-in recycling option with two or more bins of at least five gallons each shall be provided to
homebuyers.
(x) A composting system option installed in the yard must be provided to homebuyers.
(1998 Code, sec. 150.65)
ARTICLE 3.11 CONSTRUCTION OF BERMS
Sec. 3.11.001 Intent and purpose
The purpose of these standards is to provide screening and buffering guidelines when an applicant wishes to
construct berms adjacent to public thoroughfares and between subdivisions, thereby creating an aesthetically
pleasing corridor which encourages harmony and discourages monotony, while ensuring safety and security and
reducing noise and glare in neighborhoods. It is also the intent to encourage screening and buffering at a
reasonable (moderate) cost with low to moderate maintenance requirements and to encourage sound planting
principles, including the use of indigenous plant material with reduced watering requirements. A variety of plant
materials shall be provided in order to discourage monotony, subject to review and approval by the town. (1998
Code, sec. 150.75)
Sec. 3.11.002 Applicability
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/665
The screening and buffering guidelines as described herein shall be followed when constructing berms along lots
that are contiguous to a public street or when constructed between subdivisions. For all subdivisions, a minimum
20-foot-wide common area shall be provided between all proposed or existing residential or commercial uses
adjacent to any proposed or existing street. (1998 Code, sec. 150.76)
Sec. 3.11.003 Administration
The applicant shall provide three complete sets of plans to the planning department which shall include the
following information: location of berming, fencing, walls or landscaping; sidewalks; location of the street and
property line; location of the screening and buffering area within the open space common area; location of
utilities (water, sanitary sewer, electric, cable, gas, etc.); construction details of the fencing or walls; specific
plant materials being used (including common name, scientific name, quantity, size, and spacing); planting
details; berm details; and an irrigation plan. Sheet size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches with the scale not to
exceed one inch equals 40 feet, or as determined by the director of planning. Upon approval of the final
construction plans, a Mylar reproducible shall be submitted to the planning department for permanent filing. The
Mylar shall be submitted prior to issuance of building permits. (1998 Code, sec. 150.77)
Sec. 3.11.004 Standards; screening alternatives
(a) Mandatory requirements. The following mandatory requirements shall be enforced:
(1) Minimum 20-foot-wide common area.
(2) Minimum one 3-inch DBH shade tree per 50 lineal feet of frontage.
(3) Minimum one 2-inch DBH ornamental tree per 50 lineal feet of frontage.
(4) Minimum 25% of length of screening to have bed of shrubs and ground cover.
(5) Minimum three-foot height plants.
(6) Irrigation system.
(7) All berms shall meet the drainage requirements of article 3.12, division 3 (stormwater) of the
Code of Ordinances.
(8) All berms must undulate both horizontally and vertically so as to as closely as possible
replicate a natural landform.
(b) Screening alternatives. The following screening alternatives may be incorporated when constructing
berms:
(1) Wrought iron or tubular steel fence. Must be continuous six-foot height with masonry columns
at 20 feet on center. If a 1,000-foot or greater distance exists between openings, provide a minimum
of a one-foot to three-foot offset every 100 to 300 feet to ensure undulating, natural in appearance
lines.
(2) Split rail fence. If a 1,000-foot or greater distance exists between openings, provide a minimum
of a one-foot to three-foot offset every 100 to 300 feet.
(3) Earthen berm (less than six feet). Must be a minimum of two and one-half feet in height with
shrubs a minimum of three additional feet in height. Berms must not exceed a maximum 4:1 slope.
Additional easement/common area space dedication may be required. Shrubs must reach required
height within two growing seasons or 18 months.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/665
(4) Masonry wall. May not exceed six feet in height. The color and style of masonry shall be
consistent with the surrounding vicinity. Requires specific approval by the planning and zoning
commission and town council at time of final plat approval.
(5) Earthen berm (six feet). May have a maximum 4:1 slope. Additional easement/common area
space dedication may be required. Requires specific approval by the planning and zoning
commission and town council at time of final plat approval.
(1998 Code, sec. 150.78)
ARTICLE 3.12 FLOODS AND STORMWATER
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.12.001–3.12.030 Reserved
Division 2. Flood Damage Prevention*
Part. I. In General
Sec. 3.12.031 Statutory authorization
The legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, section 16.315, delegated
the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore,
the town does ordain as follows.
Sec. 3.12.032 Findings of fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods
and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from
flood damage.
Sec. 3.12.033 Statement of purpose
It is the purpose of this division to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/665
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Sec. 3.12.034 Methods of reducing flood losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this division uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands;
(6) Limit or prohibit development which does not comply with the town's comprehensive plan,
land use plan and/or thoroughfare plan; and
(7) Require detailed floodplain evaluation of proposed development or floodplain alteration prior
to permitting.
Sec. 3.12.035 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this division shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this division its most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates
at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed
the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be
insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of future conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance
(100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/665
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1-percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A
usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A,
VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Area of uncertain flood hazard. All land within the town which lies within 250 feet of an area designated as zone
A on the town's flood insurance rate map, or whose ground surface elevation is equal to or less than ten feet
higher than the adjacent bank elevation of the creek within an area designated as zone A.
Base flood. The flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the
accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any
given year. Also called the base flood.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its
design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building. For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised
above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. Existing construction may also be referred to as existing structures.
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
Flood insurance study (FIS). See flood elevation study.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/665
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding.
Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
Floodway. See regulatory floodway.
Functionally dependent use. A use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out
in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary [of the Interior] to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/665
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle.
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new
construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/665
Special flood hazard area. See area of special flood hazard.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full
requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other
datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
Sec. 3.12.036 Lands to which this division applies
This division shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the town.
(Ordinance 2009-4-7E adopted 4/7/09)
Sec. 3.12.037 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/665
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current
scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Collin County, Texas and
Incorporated Areas,” dated June 7, 2017, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps dated June 7, 2017 and
any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this division. (Ordinance
2017-8 adopted 5/2/17)
Sec. 3.12.038 Basis for establishing the areas of uncertain flood hazard
Areas of uncertain flood hazard, as defined in section 3.12.035, generally include all land within the town which
lies within 250 feet of an area designated as zone A on the town's flood insurance rate map, or whose ground
surface elevation is equal to or less than ten feet higher than the adjacent bank elevation of the creek within an
area designated as zone A.
Sec. 3.12.039 Establishment of development permit
A floodplain development permit, including fill, shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of
this division. Permitting shall be required for all development or alteration of an area of special flood hazard or
of an area of uncertain flood hazard.
Sec. 3.12.040 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this division and other applicable regulations.
Sec. 3.12.041 Abrogation and greater restrictions
This division is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this division and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict
or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
Sec. 3.12.042 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this division, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
Sec. 3.12.043 Warning and disclaimer of liability
The degree of flood protection required by this division is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This division does not imply that land outside the areas
of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
division shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this division or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
Secs. 3.12.044–3.12.070 Reserved
Part II. Administration
Sec. 3.12.071 Designation of the floodplain administrator
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/665
The town engineer or designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the
provisions of this division and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance-
National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
Sec. 3.12.072 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
division.
(2) Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site
project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this
division.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior
approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is
the state water development board (TWDB) and also the state commission on environmental quality
(TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.12.037, the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
part III.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require
that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one foot at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on
the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than 1
foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(11) When a permit is sought for land which lies within an area of uncertain flood hazard or zone
A, both as defined in section 3.12.035, require that the person seeking a permit supply sufficient
appropriate information (as detailed in section 3.12.073) from which the floodplain administrator will
be able to establish the base flood elevations and design flood elevation through the property. When
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/665
such information has been provided, make a determination as to whether the land lies within or
outside of an area of special flood hazard.
(12) Determine if the proposed development could result in a significant change to the watershed
hydrology. If such a change appears possible, require that the person seeking a permit supply
sufficient appropriate information to demonstrate the effect that the proposed development would
have on watershed hydrology. Also require appropriate measures to mitigate such effects.
(13) On an annual basis, review creek and watershed computer models and floodplain mapping to
determine whether the current watershed, creek and floodplain conditions are adequately reflected in
the models and mapping.
(14) Order regular inspection of all floodplains through the town to determine whether
nonpermitted or otherwise noncompliant developments or other alterations have occurred. When
such developments or alterations are discovered, require that they be made compliant with the terms
of this division or that the creek or floodplain be restored to its prior condition.
Sec. 3.12.073 Permit procedures
(a) Application for a floodplain development permit (including fill) shall be presented to the floodplain
administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to
scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed
structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas
of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
and substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 3.12.102(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 3.12.072(1);
(b) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on
all of the provisions of this division and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/665
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use.
Sec. 3.12.074 Fill permit procedures
(a) If a fill permit is sought for land which lies within an area of uncertain flood hazard or zone A, both as
defined in section 3.12.035, the person seeking a permit shall be required to provide sufficient information to the
floodplain administrator from which base flood elevations and design flood elevations relative to the property
may be established. Such information may include, but not be limited to, the items listed below, which are
intended to set a standard for quality of work, but which will not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
comply with sound engineering and modeling procedures. Additionally, the person seeking a permit is
responsible for all fees, data and information required by FEMA or other governing body having jurisdiction in
the project area.
(1) A current topographic map of the subject land at a scale of 1" = 200' or larger and a minimum
contour interval of two feet. Elevation contours shall be based on National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929.
(2) Hydraulic modeling (if required) shall include the following as applicable to the current
effective model, the modified effective model and the proposed conditions model:
(A) A mathematical hydraulic model of the creek and floodplain with cross-section data
based on data surveyed on the ground or the above-indicated topographic map. The interval
between cross-sections shall generally not exceed 300 feet (smaller intervals are, of course,
acceptable, and, in any case, sound engineering and modeling procedures shall be employed).
(B) Roughness coefficients shall be field determined and shall generally fall within the
ranges specified in the town subdivision ordinance.
(C) The model shall be generated for use with the computer program HEC-2, as developed
by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering Center (use of other programs
must first be approved by the floodplain administrator).
(D) The flows to be used in the model shall be obtained from the floodplain administrator.
(E) The model shall connect to and be compatible with other existing hydraulic models
within one-half mile upstream or one-half mile downstream of the proposed development, if
such models have been approved by the floodplain administrator.
(F) Where no approved hydraulic models exist upstream or downstream of the proposed
development, the model shall extend a minimum of one-half mile upstream and one-half mile
downstream of the proposed development.
(G) Provide a detailed description of the method used for determining the standing water
surface elevation.
(H) Provide a description of modeling techniques, and assumptions made, and special or
unusual conditions encountered.
(I) Using the topographic map referred to in subsection (a)(1) of this section as a basis,
delineate the base floodplain and design floodplain as determined through hydraulic modeling.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/665
(J) Provide a profile of the creek showing the creek bed and water surface elevations for the
base and design floods.
(K) Provide plotted sections for effective, modified effective, and proposed conditions
hydraulic models.
(L) Provide a diskette containing the model (ASCII format) to the floodplain administrator.
(3) Hydrologic modeling (if required).
(A) Unless otherwise approved by the floodplain administrator, hydrologic modeling of the
proposed development shall be generated for use with the computer program HEC-1, as
developed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering Center. The current
effective hydrologic model of the watershed shall be obtained from the floodplain administrator.
(B) Demonstrate that the unmodified current effective model may be used on the applicant's
computer to duplicate the results on file with the town.
(C) Develop a model of the watershed with proposed development in place, using the town's
current effective model as a platform.
(D) Provide detailed calculations substantiating all modeling parameters which would be
affected by the proposed development.
(E) Provide a description of modeling techniques, any assumptions made, and special or
unusual conditions encountered.
(F) Provide a diskette containing the model (ASCII format) to the floodplain administrator.
(4) Certification by a registered professional engineer, attesting to the methods used, modeling
results and floodplain delineation accuracy.
(b) A fill permit shall be required for all development within areas of special flood hazard within the town.
Application for a fill permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on permit forms provided by the
town or facsimiles thereof, which include drawings (to scale) and technical information sufficient to fully
support the compliance of the proposed development with the provisions of this division. These data shall
include, but are not necessarily limited to, information which demonstrates the effects of such development on
the floodplain, including impacts on the floodplains, flood elevations, and velocities within the channel of the
ten-year and 100-year mean recurrence interval floods and in the discharges of the effective FIS upstream of,
downstream of, and along or through the proposed development, and further, the person making application
shall:
(1) Show the lowest floor elevated to a minimum of three feet above the base flood elevation or to
two feet above the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. In locations of assumed critical depth,
the energy gradient shall be used to establish these respective minimum lowest floor elevations.
(2) Furnish delineations of existing and post-development floodplains.
(3) Demonstrate, with technical data, the impacts on the design flood storage capacity of the
floodplain. The town has adopted the policy of restricting the loss of valley storage to 0% of the
design floodplain.
(4) Demonstrate, with technical data, that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/665
(5) Demonstrate with technical data that, at any point within the town, the watershed or the creek,
the effect of the proposed development:
(A) Will not increase the water surface elevations of the design flood (full urbanized
watershed);
(B) Will not increase the base flood (existing condition watershed) elevations;
(C) Will not increase velocities to an erosive level;
(D) Otherwise meets the provisions of part III of this division.
(6) Prepare technical data for the floodplain administrator's review and submittal to FEMA.
(7) Affirm that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal (Corps of Engineers,
section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (being 33 USC 1344), FEMA conditional and
final approval, and EPA NPDES permits), state, and other local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required.
(c) Approval or denial of a fill permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of
this division and the following relevant factors:
(1) Adequacy and completeness of information and data accompanying the permit application for
the purpose of making an informed, qualified determination;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The danger that materials may float onto other lands to the injury of others;
(5) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(6) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(7) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(8) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(9) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(10) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use;
(11) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
Sec. 3.12.075 Variance procedures
(a) The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for
variances from the requirements of this division.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/665
(b) The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this division.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures
set forth in the remainder of this division.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 3.12.073(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this division, the appeal board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of
section 3.12.033.
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(j) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant; and
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure
will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that
the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a)-(i) above are met; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/665
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Secs. 3.12.076–3.12.100 Reserved
Part III. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Sec. 3.12.101 General standards
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
Sec. 3.12.102 Specific standards
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section
3.12.037, section 3.12.072(8), or section 3.12.103(c), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to three (3) feet above the base
flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section
3.12.073(a)(1), is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to three (3) feet above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/665
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than 1
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's
FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage.
For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites:
(i) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
(ii) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(iii) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(iv) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured
home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to two (2) feet
above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the
community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be
elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at three (3) feet above the base flood
elevation; or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/665
grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: (A) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive
days; (B) be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or (C) meet the permit requirements of section
3.12.073(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (4)
of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system,
is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
Sec. 3.12.103 Standards for subdivision proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be
consistent with sections 3.12.032–3.12.034 of this division.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 3.12.039, section 3.12.073,
and the provisions of part III of this division.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development
including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 3.12.037 or section 3.12.072(8) of this
division.
(d) Flood elevation data shall be generated by a detailed engineering study for all zone A areas, within 100
feet of the contour lines of zone A areas, and other streams not mapped by FEMA, as indicated on the
community's FIRM.
(e) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(f) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage.
Sec. 3.12.104 Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.12.037, are areas designated as shallow
flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated to three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at
least 2 feet if no depth number is specified).
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to three (3) feet above the base
flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified); or
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base
specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/665
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of
effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 3.12.073 are satisfied.
(4) Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
Sec. 3.12.105 Floodways
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.12.037, are areas designated as floodways.
Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and
other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that
the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of part III.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory
floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first
completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
Sec. 3.12.106 Penalties for noncompliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this court order and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this
court order by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this court
order or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than
$2,000.00 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day a
violation occurs is a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the town from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ordinance 2009-4-7E adopted 4/7/09)
Secs. 3.12.107–3.12.150 Reserved
Division 3. Stormwater Quality
Sec. 3.12.151 Abbreviations
The following abbreviations when used in this division shall have the designated meanings:
BMP Best management practices
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/665
BTEX Benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylene
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
HHW Hazardous household waste
mg/1 Milligrams per liter
MS4 Municipal separate storm sewer system
NOI Notice of intent
NOT Notice of termination
ppb Parts per billion
PST Petroleum storage tank
RLA Registered landscape architect
RPE Registered professional engineer
RQ Reportable quantity
SWPPP Stormwater pollution prevention plan
TPDES Texas Pollutant Discharge of Elimination System
TPH Total petroleum hydrocarbons
USC United States Code
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/665
Sec. 3.12.152 Definitions
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this division, shall
have the meanings hereinafter designated.
Agricultural stormwater runoff. Any stormwater runoff from orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, range lands,
and other nonpoint source agricultural activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations
as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as
defined in 40 CFR, section 122.24.
Best management practices (BMP). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures,
and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMP's also
include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
Coal pile runoff. The rainfall runoff from or through any coal storage pile.
Commencement of construction. The disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading, or excavating
activities or other construction activities.
Commercial. Pertaining to any business, trade, industry, or other activity engaged in for profit.
Discharge. Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater, or any other substance whatsoever into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or into waters of the United States.
Discharger. Any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for, a discharge, including,
without limitation, any operator of a construction site or industrial facility.
Domestic sewage. Human excrement, gray water (from home clothes washing, bathing, showers, dishwashing,
recreational vehicles and food preparation), other wastewater from household drains, and waterborne waste
normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office
buildings, factories, and institutions, that is free from industrial waste.
Environmental protection agency (EPA). The United States Environmental Protection Agency, the regional
office thereof, any federal department, agency, or commission that may succeed to the authority of the EPA, and
any duly authorized official of the EPA or such successor agency.
Extremely hazardous substance. Any substance listed in the appendices to 40 CFR part 355, Emergency
Planning and Notification.
Facility. Any building, structure, installation, process, or activity from which there is or may be a discharge of a
pollutant.
Fertilizer. A solid or nonsolid substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient element in a form
available to plants and is used primarily for its essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or
stimulating growth of a plant or improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of two or more fertilizers. The term
does not include the excreta of an animal, plant remains, or a mixture of those substances, for which no claim of
essential plant nutrients is made.
Final stabilization. The status when all soil disturbing activities at a site have been completed, and a uniform
perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70% of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by
permanent structures has been established, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of
riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed.
Fire department. The fire department of the town or any duly authorized representative thereof.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/665
Fire protection water. Any water, and any substances or materials contained therein, used by any person other
than the fire department to control or extinguish a fire.
Garbage. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking, or
consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of
produce and other food products.
Harmful quantity of pollution. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the
contamination of, any water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans,
animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the
public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
Hazardous household waste (HHW). Any material generated in a household (including single and multiple
residences, hotels and motels, bunk houses, ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and
day use recreational areas) by a consumer which, except for the exclusion provided in 40 CFR, section 261.4(b)
(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261.
Hazardous substance. Any substance listed in table 302.4 of 40 CFR part 302.
Hazardous waste. Any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR part
261.
Hazardous waste treatment, disposal, and recovery facility. All contiguous land, and structures, other
appurtenances and improvements on the land, used for the treatment, disposal, or recovery of hazardous waste.
Herbicide. A substance or mixture of substances used to destroy a plant or to inhibit plant growth.
Industrial waste. Any waterborne liquid or solid substance that results from any process of industry,
manufacturing, mining, production, trade, or business.
Motor vehicle fluids. Any vehicle crankcase oil, antifreeze, transmission fluid, brake fluid, differential lubricant,
gasoline, diesel fuel, gasoline/alcohol blend, and any other fluid used in a motor vehicle.
Municipal landfill (or landfill). An area of land or an excavation in which municipal solid waste is placed for
permanent disposal, and which is not a land treatment facility, a surface impoundment, an injection well, or a
pile (as these terms are defined in regulations promulgated by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation
Commission).
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and
operated by the town and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which is not used for
collecting or conveying sewage.
Municipal solid waste. Solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, commercial,
institutional, or recreational activities, and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, and other solid waste other than industrial waste.
Nonpoint source. Any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a point source.
Notice of intent (NOI). The notice of intent that is required by either the industrial general permit or the
construction general permit.
Notice of termination (NOT). The notice of termination that is required by either the industrial general permit or
the construction general permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/665
Oil. Any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil or any fraction
thereof which is liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with
waste.
Operator. The person or persons who, either individually or taken together, meet the following two criteria:
(1) They have operational control over the facility specifications (including the ability to make
modifications in specifications); and
(2) They have the day-to-day operational control over those activities at the facility necessary to
ensure compliance with pollution prevention requirements and any permit conditions.
Owner. The person who owns a facility or part of a facility.
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint-stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
Pesticide. A substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel, or mitigate any pest, or any
substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant (as these terms
are defined in section 76.001 of the Texas Agriculture Code).
Petroleum product. A petroleum product that is obtained from distilling and processing crude oil and that is
capable of being used as a fuel for the propulsion of a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor gasoline,
gasohol, other alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil, and #1 and #2 diesel. (The
term does not include naphtha-type jet fuel, kerosene-type jet fuel, or a petroleum product destined for use in
chemical manufacturing or feedstock of that manufacturing.)
Petroleum storage tank (PST). Any one or combination of aboveground or underground storage tanks that
contain petroleum products and any connecting underground pipes.
Point source. Any discernable, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch,
channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation,
landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff.
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical
waste, radioactive materials, wrecked or discarded equipment and industrial [wastes] discharged into water. The
term pollutant does not include tail water or runoff water from irrigation or rainwater runoff from cultivated or
uncultivated range land, pastureland, and farmland.
Qualified personnel. Persons who possess the appropriate competence, skills, and ability (as demonstrated by
sufficient education, training, experience, and/or, when applicable, any required certification or licensing) to
perform a specific activity in a timely and complete manner consistent with the applicable regulatory
requirements and generally-accepted industry standards for such activity.
Registered landscape architect (RLA). A person who has been duly licensed and registered to practice landscape
architecture by the state board of architectural examiners.
Registered professional engineer (RPE). A person who has been duly licensed and registered by the state board
of registration for professional engineers to engage in the practice of engineering in the state.
Release. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching,
dumping, or disposing into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or the waters of the United States.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/665
Reportable quantity (RQ). For any “hazardous substance,” the quantity established and listed in table 302.4 of 40
CFR part 302; for any “extremely hazardous substance,” the quantity established in 40 CFR part 355 and listed
in appendix A thereto.
Rubbish. Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consist of:
(1) Combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber,
plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; and
(2) Noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal
furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1600 to 1800
degrees Fahrenheit).
Sanitary sewer (or sewer). The system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which carry industrial waste
and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities,
and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the town sewage treatment plant (and to which stormwater,
surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted).
Septic tank waste. Any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers,
and septic tanks.
Service station. Any retail establishment engaged in the business of selling fuel for motor vehicles that is
dispensed from stationary storage tanks.
Sewage (or sanitary sewage). The domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is discharged into the town
sanitary sewer system and passes through the sanitary sewer system to the town sewage treatment plant for
treatment.
Site. The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent
land used in connection with the facility or activity.
Solid waste. Any garbage, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or
air pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including, solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained
gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from
community and institutional activities.
State. The State of Texas.
Stormwater. Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.
Stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity. The discharge from any conveyance which is used for
collecting and conveying stormwater and which is directly related to manufacturing, processing, or raw
materials storage areas at an industrial plant which is within one of the categories of facilities listed in 40 CFR
122.26(b)(14), and which is not excluded from EPA's definition of the same term.
Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). A plan required by either the construction general permit or the
industrial general permit and which describes and ensures the implementation of practices that are to be used to
reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction or other industrial activity at the
facility.
Town. The Town of Fairview, Texas, or the town council of Fairview.
Town engineer. The person appointed to the position of town engineer by the town council or his/her duly
authorized representative.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/665
TPDES general permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity (or industrial general
permit). The industrial general permit issued by EPA on August 27, 1992, and published in volume 57 of the
Federal Register at page 41304 on September 9, 1992, and any subsequent modifications or amendments thereto.
TPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction sites (or construction general permit). The
construction general permit issued by EPA on August 27, 1992, and published in volume 57 of the Federal
Register at page 41217 on September 9, 1992, and any subsequent modifications or amendments thereto.
TPDES permit. A permit issued by EPA (or by the state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC, section
1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
Uncontaminated. Not containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
Used oil (or used motor oil). Any oil that has been refined from crude oil or a synthetic oil that, as a result of
use, storage, or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of
original properties but that may be suitable for further use and is recyclable in compliance with state and federal
law.
Water in the state (or water). Any groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding
reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico, inside the
territorial limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or
salt, navigable or nonnavigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface
water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state.
Water quality standard. The designation of a body or segment of surface water in the state for desirable uses and
the narrative and numerical criteria deemed by the State to be necessary to protect those uses, as specified in
chapter 307 of title 31 of the Texas Administrative Code.
Waters of the United States. All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to
use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all
interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use, degradation, or destruction of which
would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as
waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands
adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and any waters within the federal definition of “waters of the
United States” at 40 CFR, section 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds, or
lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act.
Wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
Yard waste. Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush that results from landscaping
maintenance and land-clearing operations.
Sec. 3.12.153 General prohibition
(a) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to any enforcement action for violation of subsection (a) of this section that the
discharge was composed entirely of one or more of the following categories of discharges:
(1) A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, a TPDES permit (other than the
TPDES permit for discharges from the MS4);
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/665
(2) A discharge or flow resulting from firefighting by the fire department;
(3) A flow of fire protection water that does not contain oil or hazardous substances;
(4) Agricultural stormwater runoff;
(5) A discharge or flow from water line flushing, but not including a discharge from water line
disinfection by superchlorination or other means unless it contains no harmful quantity of chlorine or
any other chemical used in line disinfection;
(6) A discharge or flow from lawn watering, landscape irrigation, or other irrigation water;
(7) A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or natural spring;
(8) A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped groundwater or rising groundwater;
(9) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined as 40 C.F.R., section 35.2005(20)) to the
MS4;
(10) Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation drain, crawl space pump, footing drain,
or sump pump;
(11) A discharge or flow from a potable water source not containing any harmful substance or
material from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank or other container;
(12) A discharge or flow from air-conditioning condensation that is unmixed with water from a
cooling tower, emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or any other source of pollutant;
(13) A discharge or flow from individual residential or charity carwashing;
(14) A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland;
(15) A discharge or flow from water used in street washing that is not contaminated with any soap,
detergent, degreaser, solvent, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance;
(16) Stormwater runoff from a roof that is not contaminated by any runoff or discharge from an
emissions scrubber or filter or any other source of pollutant;
(17) Swimming pool water that has been dechlorinated so that it contains no harmful quantity of
chlorine, muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool
water or in pool cleaning. The water must have a pH of 6 to 9, and the flow does not cause flooding;
(18) Discharges associated with dye testing.
(c) No affirmative defense shall be available under subsection (b) of this section if the discharge or flow in
question has been determined by the town engineer to be a source of a pollutant or pollutants to the waters of the
United States or to the MS4, written notice of such determination has been provided to the discharger, and the
discharge has occurred more than 15 days beyond such notice. The correctness of the town engineer's
determination that a discharge is a source of a pollutant or pollutants may be reviewed in any administrative or
judicial enforcement proceeding.
Sec. 3.12.154 Specific prohibitions and requirements
(a) The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not necessarily inclusive of all the discharges
prohibited by the general prohibition in section 3.12.153.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/665
(b) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that causes or contributes
to causing the town to violate a water quality standard, the town's TPDES permit, or any state-issued discharge
permit for discharges from its MS4.
(c) No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose, or otherwise
introduce or cause, allow, or permit to be introduced any of the following substances into the MS4:
(1) Any used motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid;
(2) Any industrial waste;
(3) Any hazardous waste, including hazardous household waste;
(4) Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit trap waste;
(5) Any wastewater from a commercial carwash facility; from any vehicle washing, cleaning, or
maintenance at any new or used automobile or other vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop,
repair shop, or maintenance facility; or from any washing, cleaning, or maintenance of any business
or commercial or public service vehicle, including a truck, bus, or heavy equipment, by a business or
public entity that operates more than two such vehicles;
(6) Any wastewater from the washing, cleaning, de-icing, or other maintenance of aircraft;
(7) Any wastewater from commercial floor, rug, or carpet cleaning;
(8) Any wastewater from the washdown or other cleaning of pavement that contains any harmful
quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning
substance; or any wastewater from the washdown or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill,
leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred,
unless all harmful quantities of such released material have been previously removed;
(9) Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions filter,
or the blowdown from a boiler;
(10) Any swimming pool water containing any harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid or other
chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning, or if
the pH of less than 6 or greater than 9;
(11) Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous substances or materials. (This
prohibition does not apply to discharges or flow from firefighting by the fire department.);
(12) Any water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment;
(13) Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle salvage yard;
(14) Any substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the MS4;
(15) Solid or liquid substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in storm sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the stormwater system;
(16) Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST), or any leachate or runoff from soil
contaminated by a leaking PST, or any discharge of pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from
the remediation of any such PST release, unless the discharge satisfies all of the following criteria:
(A) Compliance with all state and federal standards and requirements; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/665
(B) No discharge containing a harmful quantity of any pollutant.
(Ordinance 2012-1-3B adopted 1/3/12)
(d) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any harmful quantity of sediment, silt,
earth, soil, or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation or other construction activities, or
associated with landfilling or other placement or disposal of soil, rock, or other earth materials, in excess of what
could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control measures to the maximum
extent practicable under prevailing circumstances. In the event an erosion control measure fails two times, the
town shall require an improvement or replacement of the existing erosion control measure to be installed, and
the revised control measure to be submitted to the town engineer for his or her approval. (Ordinance 2016-33
adopted 12/6/16)
(e) No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic or industrial, to the MS4, or allow
such a connection to continue.
(f) No person shall cause or allow any pavement washwater from a service station to be discharged into the
MS4 unless such washwater has passed through a properly functioning and maintained, grease, oil, and sand
interceptor before discharge into the MS4.
(g) Used oil regulation. No person shall:
(1) Discharge used oil into the MS4 or a sewer, drainage system, septic tank, surface water,
groundwater, or watercourse;
(2) Knowingly mix or commingle used oil with solid waste that is to be disposed of in a landfill or
knowingly directly dispose of used oil on land or in a landfill;
(3) Apply used oil to land for dust suppression, weed abatement, or other similar use that
introduces used oil into the environment.
Sec. 3.12.155 Compliance monitoring
(a) Right of entry; inspection and sampling. The town engineer shall have the right to enter the premises of
any person discharging stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system MS4 or to waters of the United
States to determine if the discharger is complying with all requirements of this division, and with any state or
federal discharge permit, limitation, or requirement. Dischargers shall allow the town engineer ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and for the
performance of any additional duties. Dischargers shall make available to the town engineer, upon request, any
SWPPP's, modifications thereto, self-inspection reports, monitoring records, compliance evaluations, notices of
intent, and any other records, reports, and other documents related to compliance with this division and with any
state or federal discharge permit.
(1) Where a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make necessary arrangements with its
security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the town engineer will be
permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing his/her responsibilities.
(2) The town engineer shall have the right to set up on the discharger's property, or require
installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the discharger's
operations.
(3) The town engineer may require any discharger to the MS4 or waters of the United States to
conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis, and other monitoring of its stormwater discharges, and
may specify the frequency and parameters of any such required monitoring.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/665
(4) The town engineer may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary at
the discharger's expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used
to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the discharger at the written or verbal request of the
town engineer and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
discharger.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the town engineer access to the discharger's premises shall be
a violation of this division.
(b) Search warrants. If the town engineer has been refused access to any part of the premises from which
stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this division, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and
sampling program of the town designed to verify compliance with this division or any order issued hereunder, or
to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the town engineer may seek
issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 3.12.156 Administrative enforcement remedies
(a) Warning notice. When the town engineer finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this division, or any order issued hereunder, the town engineer may serve upon that person a written
warning notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting the discharger to
immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution whereby any offending discharge will cease.
Investigation and/or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice in no way relieves the alleged
violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the warning notice. Nothing in this
subsection shall limit the authority of the town engineer to take any action, including emergency action or any
other enforcement action, without first issuing a warning notice.
(b) Notification of violation. When the town engineer finds that any person has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this division, or any order issued hereunder, the town engineer may serve upon that
person a written notice of violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of reoccurrence thereof, to include specific
required actions, shall be submitted by the alleged violator to the town engineer. If the alleged violator denies
that any violation occurred and/or contends that no corrective action is necessary, an explanation of the basis of
any such denial or contention shall be submitted to the town engineer within ten (10) days of receipt of the
notice. Submission of an explanation and/or plan in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the
authority of the town engineer to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation.
(c) Consent orders. The town engineer may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or
other similar documents establishing an agreement with any person responsible for noncompliance with any
provision in this division or any order issued hereunder. Such documents may include specific action to be taken
by the person to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents
shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (e), (f) and (g) of
this section and shall be judicially enforceable.
(d) Show cause hearing. The town engineer may order any person who has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this division, or any order issued hereunder, to appear before the town engineer and show cause
why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the alleged violator
specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a
request that the alleged violator show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/665
notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the
alleged violator. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the rights and procedures specified in section
3.12.157(a)(7) of this division. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the alleged violator.
(e) Compliance orders. When the town engineer finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this division, or any order issued hereunder, the town engineer may issue an order to the
violator directing that the violator come into compliance within a specified time limit. Compliance orders also
may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and
management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the MS4 and waters of the
United States. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established by a state or federal
standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the person of liability for any violation, including
any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the violator.
(f) Remediation; abatement; and restoration orders. When the town engineer finds that a person has violated,
or continues to violate, any provision of this division, or any order issued hereunder, and that such violation has
adversely affected the MS4, the waters of the United States or any other aspect of the environment, the town
engineer may issue an order to the violator directing him/her to undertake and implement any appropriate action
to remediate and/or abate any adverse effects of the violation upon the MS4, the waters of the United States, or
any other aspect of the environment, and/or to restore any part of the MS4, the waters of the United States, or
any other aspect of the environment that has been harmed. Such remedial, abatement, and restoration action may
include, but not be limited to: monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of the adverse effects and determination of
the appropriate remedial, abatement, and/or restoration action; confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment, and
disposal of any discharged or released pollution or contamination; prevention, minimization, and/or mitigation
of any damage to the public health, welfare, or the environment that may result from the violation; restoration or
replacement of town property or natural resources damaged by the violation. The order may direct that the
remediation, abatement, and/or restoration be accomplished on a specified compliance schedule and/or be
completed within a specified period of time. An order issued under this subsection does not relieve the violator
of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of an order under this subsection shall
not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against any responsible party.
(g) Emergency cease and desist orders.
(1) When the town engineer finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this division, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations are likely
to recur, and that the person's violation(s) have caused or contributed to an actual or threatened
discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to present an imminent
or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, the town
engineer may issue an order to the violator directing it immediately to cease and desist all such
violations and directing the violator to:
(A) Immediately comply with all division requirements; and
(B) Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a
continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating
the discharge.
(2) Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under this subsection shall
immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger's
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the town engineer may take
such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or waters of the United
States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment, including immediate termination of a
facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility services. The town engineer may
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/665
allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
town engineer that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are
initiated against the discharger under this division. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part,
for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence, to the town engineer within 10 days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an
emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the violator.
(h) Red tags. Whenever the town engineer finds that any operator of a construction site has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this section of this division, or any order issued thereunder, the town
engineer may order that a “red tag” be issued to the operator, posted at the construction site, and distributed to all
town departments and divisions whose decisions affect any activity at the site. Unless express written exception
is made by the town engineer, the “red tag” shall prohibit any further construction activity at the site and shall
bar any further inspection or approval by the town associated with a building permit, grading permit, site
development plan approval, or any other town approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to
assume occupancy at the site. Issuance of a “red tag” order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the violator.
Sec. 3.12.157 Right to reconsideration, hearing, and appeal
(a) Reconsideration and hearing.
(1) Any person subject to a compliance order under section 3.12.156(e), a remediation, abatement,
or restoration order under section 3.12.156(f), an emergency cease and desist order under section
3.12.156(g), or a red tag order under section 3.12.156(h) of this division may petition the town
engineer to reconsider the basis for his/her order within ten (10) days of the affected person's notice
of issuance of such an order.
(2) Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of
any further right to administrative reconsideration or review of the order.
(3) In its petition, the petitioning party must indicate the provisions of the order objected to, the
reasons for the objection(s), any facts that are contested, the evidence that supports the petitioner's
view of the facts, any alternative terms of an order that the petitioner would accept, and whether the
petitioning party requests a hearing on its petition.
(4) The effect of any compliance order under section 3.12.156(e), remediation, abatement, or
restoration order under section 3.12.156(f), and any red tag order under section 3.12.156(h) shall be
stayed pending the town engineer's reconsideration of the petition, and any hearing thereon, unless
the town engineer expressly makes a written determination to the contrary. The effectiveness of any
emergency cease and desist order under section 3.12.156(g) shall not be stayed pending the town
engineer's reconsideration, or any hearing thereon, unless the town engineer expressly and in writing
stays his/her emergency order.
(5) Within thirty (30) days of the submittal of a petition for reconsideration, the town engineer
shall either:
(A) Grant the petition and withdraw or modify the order accordingly;
(B) Deny the petition, without hearing if no material issue of fact is raised; or
(C) If a hearing has been requested and a material issue of fact has been raised, set a hearing
on the petition.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/665
(6) Written notice of any hearing set by the town engineer pursuant to subsection (5) above shall be
served on the petitioning party personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested)
at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative
of the petitioning party.
(7) The town engineer may himself/herself conduct the hearing and take evidence, or he/she may
designate any employee of the town or any specially-designated attorney or engineer to:
(A) Issue in the name of the town notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony
of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing;
(B) Take evidence;
(C) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence,
together with recommendations to the town engineer for action thereon.
At any hearing held pursuant to this subsection, testimony taken shall be under oath and
recorded. Any party is entitled to present his/her case or defense by oral or documentary
evidence and to conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true
disclosure of the facts. A transcript will be made available to any party to the hearing upon
payment of the usual charges thereof.
(8) After the town engineer has reviewed the evidence, he/she shall either:
(1) Grant the petition;
(2) Deny the petition; or
(3) Grant the petition in part and deny it in part.
The town engineer may modify his/her order as is appropriate based upon the evidence and
arguments presented at the hearing and his/her action on the petition. Further orders and
directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
(b) Appeal.
(1) Any person whose petition for reconsideration by the town engineer has not been granted in its
entirety and who remains adversely affected by the town engineer's order, or who is subject to an
order of the town engineer issued following a show cause hearing under section 3.12.156(d), may
appeal the action of the town engineer to the town council by filing a written appeal with the town
council within twenty (20) days of the person's notice of the town engineer's adverse action on the
petition for reconsideration.
(2) Failure to submit a timely written appeal to the town council shall be deemed to be a waiver of
further administrative review.
(3) In its written appeal to the town council, the appealing party shall indicate the particular
provisions of the order objected to, the particular determinations of the town engineer that are
contested, the reasons that the town engineer's order and/or determinations are contested, and any
alternative order that the appealing party would accept.
(4) The effect of the town engineer's order, as issued or modified, shall not be stayed pending the
appeal to the town council, unless the town council expressly so states.
(5) Within thirty (30) days of the submittal of a written appeal to the town council, the town
council shall hear and consider the appeal in open meeting. The appellant shall be notified at least ten
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/665
(10) days in advance of the date and time of the town council meeting at which the appeal will be
heard and considered.
(6) The appellant shall have the right to public appearance before the town council to present oral
and written statements in support of his/her appeal.
(7) Upon consideration of any written and oral statements made to the town council, as well as the
record made before the town engineer, the town council shall act on the appeal by affirming,
vacating, or modifying the order of the town engineer, and/or by remanding the matter to the town
engineer for further action.
(8) Following final action by the town council on the appeal, any adversely affected party may
challenge such action by the town council in an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 3.12.158 Judicial enforcement remedies
(a) Civil remedies.
(1) Whenever it appears that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
division that relates to:
(A) The preservation of public safety, relating to the materials or methods used in
construction of any structure or improvement of real property;
(B) The preservation of public health or to the fire safety of a building or other structure or
improvement;
(C) The establishment of criteria for land subdivision or construction of buildings, including
street design;
(D) Dangerously damaged or deteriorated structures or improvements;
(E) Conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation, or other matter that creates
breeding and living places for insects and rodents; or
(F) Point source effluent limitations or the discharge of a pollutant, other than from a
nonpoint source, into the MS4.
The town may invoke sections 54.011–54.017 of the Texas Local Government Code and
petition the state district court or the county court at law of the county, through the town
attorney, for either the injunctive relief specified in subsection (2) or the civil penalties
specified in subsection (3) below, or both the specified injunctive relief and civil penalties.
(2) Pursuant to section 54.016 of the Texas Local Government Code, the town may obtain against
the owner or the operator of a facility a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, that:
(A) Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this division that relates to any
matter specified in subsection (1) above; or
(B) Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary for compliance with
any provision of this division that relates to any matter specified in subsection (1) above.
(3) Pursuant to section 54.017 of the Texas Local Government Code, the town may recover a civil
penalty of not more than $1,000.00 per day for each violation of any provision of this division that
relates to any matter specified in subsection (1)(A)–(E) above, and a civil penalty of not more than
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/665
$5,000.00 per day for each violation of any provision of this division that relates to any matter
specified in subsection (1)(F) above, if the town proves that:
(A) The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the division; and
(B) After the defendant received notice of the division provisions, the defendant committed
acts in violation of this division or failed to take action necessary for compliance with this
division.
(b) Criminal penalties.
(1) Any person who has violated any provision of this division, or any order issued hereunder, shall
be strictly liable for such violation regardless of the presence or absence of a culpable mental state
and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $2,000.00 per violation, per day.
(2) Any person who has knowingly made any false statement, representation, or certification in any
application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant
to this division, or any order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with, or knowingly
rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $2,000.00 per violation, per day.
(3) In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the court shall take into account all
relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation,
corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, the knowledge, intent,
negligence, or other state of mind of the violator, and any other factor as justice requires.
(c) Civil suit under the Texas Water Code. Whenever it appears that a violation or threat of violation of any
provision of section 26.121 of the Texas Water Code, or any rule, permit, or order of the state natural resource
conservation commission, has occurred or is occurring within the jurisdiction of the town, exclusive of its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, the town, in the same manner as the state natural resource conservation commission,
may have a suit instituted in a state district court through its town attorney for the injunctive relief or civil
penalties or both authorized in subsection (a) of section 26.123 of the Texas Water Code, against the person who
committed or is committing or threatening to commit the violation. This power is exercised pursuant to section
26.124 of the Texas Water Code. In any suit brought by the town under this subsection, the state natural resource
conservation commission is a necessary and indispensable party.
(d) Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this division are not exclusive of any other remedies
that the town may have under state or federal law or other town ordinances. The town may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a violator. The town is empowered to take more than one enforcement
action against any violator. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ordinance 2012-1-3B adopted 1/3/12)
ARTICLE 3.13 SIGNS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.13.001 Purpose
(a) Regulation of the location, size, placement and certain features of signs is necessary to enable the public to
locate goods, services, and facilities in the corporate limits of the town, to encourage the general attractiveness
of the community, and to protect property values therein.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/665
(b) Accordingly, it is the intention of this article to establish regulations governing the display of signs and in
part to achieve the following:
(1) Safety. To promote the safety of persons and property by providing that signs:
(A) Promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and convenience;
(B) Do not obstruct firefighting, emergency vehicle access, police surveillance, or other
governmental functions; and
(C) Do not overload the public's capacity to receive information or increase the probability of
traffic congestion and accidents by distracting attention or obstructing vision.
(2) Communications efficiency. To enhance the economy and the business of the town by
promoting the reasonable, orderly, and effective display of signs, and thereby encourage increased
communication with the public so that:
(A) Businesses and services may identify themselves.
(B) Customers and other persons may locate a business or service.
(C) Signs are compatible with their surroundings, are appropriate to the type of activity to
which they pertain, and are expressive of the identity of proprietors and other persons
displaying signs.
(D) Persons exposed to signs are not overwhelmed by the number of messages presented.
(3) Environmental quality and preservation. To protect the public welfare and to enhance the
appearance and economic value of the landscape by providing that signs:
(A) Do not interfere with scenic views, and protect and preserve the unique and natural
beauty of the town;
(B) Do not create a nuisance to persons using the public rights-of-way;
(C) Do not create a nuisance to occupancy of adjacent and contiguous property by their
brightness, size, height, or movement; and
(D) Are not detrimental to land or property values.
(E) Limit light pollution and preserve dark skies in accordance with town ordinances
regulating outdoor lighting.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.01, adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.002 Definitions
(a) For the purposes of understanding, administration and enforcement of this article, the following words and
terms relating to all signs within the town are defined:
Awning. An architectural projection which provides weather protection, identity and decoration and is supported
by the building to which it is attached. It is composed of a lightweight rigid or retractable skeletal structure over
which a cover of lightweight metal, fabric or other similar material is attached.
Banner. A temporary sign made of cloth, canvas or other similar material, usually an elongated rectangle in
shape, which may be used for decorative purposes or to provide information but is not permanently affixed to a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/665
building, structure or the ground.
Building official. The chief town building official or official designee.
Bunting. A fabric or similar material fashioned into decorative, flag-like design(s) typically used for celebrative
occasions as adornments to buildings, walls, fences and other structures. Bunting is defined as a temporary sign
when displayed for advertising or other public attention-getting purposes.
Canopy. A lightweight architectural structure or projection made of canvas or other material which provides
weather protection, identity and decoration and is supported either by a building to which it is attached or to a
framework attached and set to the ground.
Change panel. A portion of a sign face that may be readily removed, altered, substituted or otherwise changed to
reflect updated or frequently varying information which is shown as part of the sign copy.
Code enforcement officer. The town official duly registered with the state with authority to enforce various
municipal and state codes.
Commercial planned development district (CPDD). A planned development area within the western section of
the town which emphasizes commercial development and supporting higher density residential development
according to specific guidelines and standards for architecture, streetscape and site planning.
Copy. That portion of a sign which conveys a specific identity or message to the viewer of the sign. Copy on a
sign includes only letters, numerals, figures, emblems, logos, trademarks and pictures. Copy does not include
stripes, patterns, outlines or other related devices used to enhance the sign, sign background or message of the
sign.
Dilapidated or deteriorated condition. Describes any sign where:
(1) Elements of the surface or background have portions of the finished material missing, broken,
defaced or otherwise existing in a condition not consistent with the original design other than normal
wear.
(2) A panel is visibly cracked or, in the case of wood or similar products, splintered in such a way
as to constitute an unsightly or harmful condition.
(3) A structural support or frame member is visibly bent, broken, dented or torn.
(4) The sign, or its elements, are twisted or leaning or at an angle other than the angle at which it
was originally erected.
(5) The colors of the sign or sign copy are faded to an extent which creates an unsightly
appearance.
(6) The communication message or wording can no longer be clearly and easily read.
(7) The sign or its elements are not in compliance with the current electrical code or building code
of the town.
Display height, facade. The vertical distance on a building facade where a primary facade-mounted
identification sign may be displayed. The vertical distance is measured by the applicable unbroken (by
intervening horizontal architectural elements) vertical plane of the facade between either:
(1) The roof line and nearest building opening (door, window, etc.) below it;
(2) The roof line and the ground (when no intervening opening exists);
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/665
(3) A cornice or similar detail at the roof line and the nearest opening (door, window, etc.) or
horizontal architectural detail below it;
(4) A cornice or similar detail at the top of a parapet facade and the nearest opening (door, window,
etc.) or horizontal architectural detail below it; or
(5) The bottom of a building opening (door, window, etc.) and the top of a building opening (door,
window, etc.) below it.
Facade. The exterior walls of a building exposed to public view, especially referring to the principal faces of the
building through which there may be public entries. Facade also means the exterior vertical face areas (non-roof)
visible to public view of specialized elevated building forms such as canopies, porte-cocheres, and porticoes.
Face. The surface of a sign upon or through which a message or illustration is displayed.
Flag. A piece of fabric or similar synthetic material, usually rectangular in shape, containing a distinctive design
or message.
Garage sale. The sale of personal or household goods in a residential area or on the property of a nonprofit
organization. Also called a “yard sale.”
Grand opening. An event or time period acknowledgement of the opening of a new business or other
organizational entity; the opening of a business or other organization at a different location; the major expansion
of a business or other organization; or the reopening of a business or other organization after a period of either
being closed or substantially reduced in operational access for causes such as rebuilding, remodeling or
restricted property access.
Illuminated sign. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, or designs illuminated by electric lights,
luminous tubes or other means used to draw attention to, to light up, or to provide viewing of the sign and its
contents during periods of darkness. Illuminated signs include both:
(1) Externally illuminated sign. Any sign which is illuminated from a light source which is not
included within the sign face or the sign structure.
(2) Internally illuminated sign. Any sign which is illuminated from a light source within the sign
face or within the sign structure.
Logo. Any design or insignia of a company or product which is commonly used in advertising to identify that
company or product.
Multitenant commercial development. A building or group of buildings, such as but not limited to shopping
centers and office centers, constructed and managed as a total entity where multiple commercial tenants occupy
floor space which has been divided into separate areas for respective individual occupant use.
North Fairview planned development district (NFPDD). A planned development zoning area within the
northeastern part of the town which emphasizes environmental preservation and development of permitted uses
according to specific guidelines and standards for architecture, streetscape and site planning.
Parapet. The extension of the main walls of a building above the roof level.
Pennant. Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other similar material, usually triangular in shape, designed to be
suspended from lines, poles or other mounting devices and used for decorative, attention-getting or advertising
purposes.
Premises. Any parcel of real property together with all buildings and structures thereon.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/665
Public works director. The director of the department of public works for the town or designee.
Searchlight. An electrical light capable of generating and projecting a concentrated beam or beams of light into
the sky which are visible in periods of darkness from distances away from the source of the light.
Sign. Any device and its supporting structure designed to visually attract viewer attention or to convey either
commercial or noncommercial messages to the public, but not including any lawful display of merchandise. The
term “sign” means and shall include any name, letter, number, identification, description, announcement,
declaration, message, picture, emblem, logo, trademark, flag, banner, vehicle, inflatable device, pennant, or
enhancing decorative pattern and the supporting structure of any of these devices which is placed upon or
affixed to any building or outdoor structure, erected or otherwise placed upon a parcel of land, which directs
attention to any object, product, service, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business. Sign types
include:
(1) Sign, advertising (or promotional). Any sign used to draw attention to or promote the sale,
lease, rental or use of specific products, services or the business establishments providing such
products or services. Advertising and promotional signs include, but are not limited to, information
about prices, availability, products, sources, brands, identifying logos, organizations and specific
periods of time or events (e.g., sales, holidays, store openings, store closings, etc.) which are intended
to encourage commercial activity. Advertising or promotional signs may be categorized as either
temporary or permanent signs depending upon construction and period of display.
(2) Sign, agricultural. Any sign identifying the farm or ranch where the sign is placed and
advertising produce, crops, animals or poultry raised or quartered thereon.
(3) Sign, apartment. Any sign identifying a multifamily dwelling, including but not limited to
apartment buildings, apartment complexes and on-premises apartment offices.
(4) Sign, awning. Any awning containing signage used to identify a business, profession, service,
product, or activity offered on the premises of the sign location.
(5) Sign, billboard. Any pole sign, as that term is defined in this article, having a face surface area
exceeding one hundred (100) square feet which advertises products, services or entities located either
on-premises or off-premises and where the sign surface area is available for lease, rent or hire.
(6) Sign, cabinet (box). A sign constructed in a manner so that the sign face is surrounded by
vertical and horizontal structural members which create an enclosed space of unspecified depth
behind the sign face where lighting may be installed. A cabinet sign may have either a single sign
face or two sign faces with an enclosed space between the two faces.
(7) Sign, canopy. Any awning containing signage used to identify a business, profession, service,
product, or activity offered on the premises of the sign location.
(8) Sign, commercial. A sign installed in connection with nonresidential use by a commercial
business establishment or by other nonresidential organizations such as churches, schools, clubs,
nonprofit groups or government entities.
(9) Sign, contractor/construction/development. Any on-site temporary sign identifying the project
name or any of the parties involved in the development, design, financing, engineering, construction,
landscaping or other improvement of the site on which the sign is located.
(10) Sign, directional. Any on-site sign designed to direct the public to entrances, exits and
services relating to the property.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/665
(11) Sign, directory. Any sign listing occupants within shopping centers, office buildings and other
commercial developments with multiple occupants or tenants.
(12) Sign, door. Any sign affixed to or displayed from either the interior or exterior surface of a
door used for the purposes of advertising products, sales or services or for the purpose of providing
information about the establishment occupying the premises.
(13) Sign, exterior. Any sign erected or placed outside the confined interior floor space of a
building.
(14) Sign, freestanding. An on-site sign not attached to any building which is supported by
uprights, braces, pedestals, bases or other means capable of maintaining the sign in its designed
position while withstanding the stresses of weight and wind loads.
(15) Sign, garage sale. A temporary sign advertising the sale of personal or household goods in a
residential area or on the property of a nonprofit organization.
(16) Sign, historic. A sign that is forty (40) years old or older, is of itself of historic significance or
contributes to the historic fabric of the town or area.
(17) Sign, inflatable. Any sign expanded, enlarged or supported by the use of air or gas.
(18) Sign, institutional. Any sign used to identify schools, churches, hospitals, child care facilities
and similar public or quasi-public institutions.
(19) Sign, menu board. Any on-site sign displaying a list of items offered for sale on the premises.
Typically used at restaurants and drive-through restaurants.
(20) Sign, monument. A sign mounted to a solid ground-level base constructed of masonry
materials or to a base where vertical supports are fully enclosed by materials which provide no clear
or open space for the full width of the sign structure between the bottom of the sign face and the
surface of the ground.
(21) Sign, mural. Pictures which may or may not be used for advertising purposes which are
painted on or attached to the surfaces of building walls.
(22) Sign, obsolete. Any sign which no longer serves a bona fide use or purpose.
(23) Sign, permanent. Any sign installed or erected with the intent of use beyond a temporary
period.
(24) Sign, pole. Any permanent sign which is erected on a vertical framework consisting of one or
more uprights supported by the ground.
(25) Sign, political. Any sign relating to a political issue, to a particular candidate for elected office
or to a political party.
(26) Sign, portable. Any sign that is not permanently attached to or affixed to the ground, to a
building or to some other permanent fixed structure or object. This term specifically includes
advertising displays affixed to or installed on a vehicle or other mobile unit such as a trailer, wheel or
skid.
(27) Sign, promotional. See “sign, advertising.”
(28) Sign, reader board. Any sign comprised of changeable letters or numerals which allow for a
frequent change of sign copy. Reader board signs include two types:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/665
(A) Electronic. Uses electronically displayed numbers, letters and symbols (such as LCDs)
controlled by remote or other automated means.
(B) Manual. Uses letters, numbers and symbols which can be readily changed by the physical
substitution, addition, removal or rearrangement of such copy.
(29) Sign, real estate. Any on-site temporary sign pertaining to the sale or rental of property.
(30) Sign, roof. Any sign erected upon or above a roof of a building.
(31) Sign, temporary. Any sign used to display information related to a use, event or condition of
limited duration of 30 days or less unless specifically designated (e.g., real estate) for a longer but
definite limited period as defined elsewhere by this article related to a specific sign usage.
(32) Sign, wall. Any sign attached to or painted onto an exterior wall of a building or structure. A
wall sign includes any painting or other appurtenances added to the wall or sign which have the
purpose of drawing attention to the sign face.
(33) Sign, window. Any sign affixed to or displayed from either the interior or exterior surface of a
window used for the purposes of advertising products, sales or services or for the purpose of
providing information about the establishment occupying the premises.
(34) Sign, yard sale. A temporary sign advertising the sale of personal or household goods in a
residential area or on the property of a nonprofit organization.
Sign regulations. Regulations are the specific governing requirements for the design, construction, location,
illumination and use of signs. These requirements are stated in various sections of this article.
Sign surface area. The actual measured geometric area of the face of a sign. Where two or more signs share
space on a single structure, each sign may be measured separately for calculating the surface area; however, the
combined area of such signs shall not exceed the total surface area allowed for the sign structure.
Single-family residential zones. Those zones where single-family homes may be constructed on individual lots.
These zones include RE-1, RE-1.5, RE-2, RE-3, PC, PD, CPDD zones G, I and L, Heritage Ranch Planned
Development, and any other zones established by the town council for the construction of single-family homes
on individual lots.
(b) The commercial planned development district (CPDD) and North Fairview planned development district
(NFPDD) also allow other sign types unique to the CPDD zones within this defined area of the town. Definitions
for specific signs in the CPDD and NFPDD are set forth in section 3.13.041 of this article.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.02(B), (C), adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.003 Penalty
(a) Whenever in this article or any ordinance of the town an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in this article or ordinance the doing of any act is required
or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation
of such provision of this article or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500; provided,
however, that a final penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety,
zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, may not exceed $2,000.
(b) Notwithstanding the above provisions, no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the
same or a similar offense under the laws of the state.
(c) Each day a violation of this article or of any ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/665
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.99, adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.004 Administration and enforcement
The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the town council and its agents and/or
inspectors. (Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.02(A), adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.005 Appeals and variances
(a) Authorization to hear appeals and grant or deny variances. There is hereby created a sign board of appeals
which shall have the following power and authority:
(1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the code enforcement officer or building official in the
enforcement of this article;
(2) In appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions as set forth below, to grant variances
from the size, spacing, height, setback, location and other requirements set forth in this article;
(3) To authorize the alteration or reconstruction of a nonconforming sign provided such
reconstruction does not, in the judgment of the board, increase the degree of nonconformity of the
sign and that the long-term goal of bringing signs into conformance is achieved; and
(4) To permit the use of potential sign exceptions (e.g., use of logos or variations in size as
referenced in section 3.13.131(8)) where authorized by this article, and where the board determines
after a public hearing that the sign will not have a significant adverse impact on traffic or pedestrian
safety, or on the use or enjoyment of adjacent properties.
(b) Basis and rules for appeals. In order to grant a variance, the board must find that:
(1) The requested variance does not eliminate any requirement of this article and does not allow
any prohibited signs.
(2) The variance is necessary for the preservation of a property right of the applicant substantially
the same as is possessed by owners of other property in the same zone or vicinity. The hardship is
peculiar to the property of the applicant and not due to the general conditions of surrounding
properties. (Note: A hardship is intended to include a change in elevation, a curve in a roadway or
other substantial physical element which obstructs sign visibility.)
(3) Economic gain or loss is not the sole basis for finding a hardship or granting a variance.
(4) A variance would not create an unnecessary hardship upon another parcel of land or business
entity occupying such land.
(c) Applicability of variance. A variance applies only to the particular sign for which it was granted. Any
subsequent change to that sign terminates the variance. Any change or alteration of a sign requires a new permit
without consideration of any prior variance or prior ordinance.
(d) Application. A property owner or authorized agent may initiate a request for an appeal or a variance by
filing an application in writing with the building official using forms prescribed for that purpose. The application
for an appeal must be received within ten (10) days after placement of a letter in U.S. mail addressed to the
address on the application or to the address of the current owner of record in the county tax records which
contains the written decision rendered by the town that is being appealed. The application for a variance shall be
accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and an illustration of the sign or proposed
sign. The board may require other drawings, pictures, copies of the permit application or other information
necessary to an understanding of the sign, the property site and the relationship to surrounding properties. The
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/665
applicant shall pay a fee as established by the town at the time the application is filed. The board shall hear and
determine the appeal or application for a variance as soon as practicable after receipt of an application.
(e) Designation of appeals board. The zoning board of adjustment for the town is hereby designated to serve
as the sign board of appeals.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.14, adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.006 Additional lighting regulations
The town has established a lighting ordinance designed to protect night skies from unnecessary glare and light
pollution. Because signs can create various levels of nighttime lighting brightness, refer to article 3.14 (outdoor
lighting) for additional information and limitations on sign lighting. (Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.02(D),
adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.007 Prohibited and nonconforming signs
(a) No billboard or off-premises sign (unless specifically permitted by other sections of this article) shall be
built or erected by any person, group, business establishment, organization, unincorporated association or
corporation within the town or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Neither the town nor any town official shall issue a
permit for the construction of new off-premises signs or billboards within the town.
(b) The following signs are prohibited within the town:
(1) Pole signs;
(2) Inflatable signs;
(3) Searchlights;
(4) Signs with visible neon elements (except for authorized interior signs);
(5) Advertising signs held or carried by individuals or animals on or near publicly accessible roads,
sidewalks, trails, or rail lines;
(6) Signs painted on or otherwise attached to natural features such as shrubs, trees or rocks;
(7) Signs painted on or otherwise attached to utility poles, bridge abutments or constructed
elements which are within or part of a public right-of-way;
(8) Portable signs. (This provision does not restrict identification signs on vehicles or other signs
attached to vehicles which are legally licensed and operated upon public streets. However, these
vehicles shall not be parked where the intent is to use the vehicle as advertising.)
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.03, adopted 8/1/06)
(9) Internally illuminated cabinet signs except where specifically permitted in commercial planned
development district zones. (Ordinance 2007-3-6C, sec. 1.A, adopted 3/6/07)
(c) Signs not specifically permitted by the various sections of this article are prohibited within the town.
(d) An exception to these prohibitions is allowed in the case of temporary signs otherwise permitted in other
sections of this article and as follows: Any billboard already existing at the time of the enactment of this article
will be subject to a renewal permit issued by the town secretary for the duration of one year.
(e) Nonconforming signs located within the town limits shall be governed by the following rules:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/665
(1) Grandfather clause. If, at the time of passage of this article, a sign does not conform to the
provisions of this article, said sign may be continued and maintained in reasonable repair subject to
other applicable regulations set forth in subsequent subsections of this section pertaining to
nonconforming signs. Grandfathered status, however, shall not prevent the town from taking action to
correct or remove a grandfathered sign when the sign causes a clear and immediate threat to the
public safety or welfare of the community.
(2) Replacement or moving of nonconforming sign. All signs that are lawfully in existence on the
date of adoption of this article may exist in their present form, but no such signs shall be replaced or
moved unless a permit is issued pursuant to the provisions of section 3.13.009 of this article. Any
legal nonconforming sign which has been substantially destroyed or dismantled for any purpose other
than maintenance shall be deemed as completely destroyed if the cost of repairing the sign is more
than 60% of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location. Under this
provision, the sign shall be removed and a permit shall be required, pursuant to section 3.13.009, to
erect a new sign.
(3) Destruction of nonconforming sign. If a nonconforming sign is destroyed by any cause to the
extent of more than sixty (60) percent of it value, then, and without further action by the town
council, the sign shall be subject to all applicable regulations of this article. For the purpose of this
article, the value of any sign shall be the estimated cost to replace the sign in-kind, as determined by
the town code enforcement official.
(4) Unsafe billboards. Any existing nonconforming billboard standing at the time of the enactment
of this article shall be brought into conformance (shall cease to exist) when said billboard becomes
structurally unsafe.
(5) Additional requirements. Notwithstanding the “grandfather” provision of this section, all
existing nonconforming signs located on any land parcel at the time of the enactment of this article
shall be brought into conformance when:
(A) There is a change in ownership of the property;
(B) There is a change in the use of the land parcel;
(C) There is a change in the sign's nature or intent;
(D) There is any alteration of the sign.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.03, adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.008 General regulations
The following regulations apply to all signs not exempted by this article:
(1) All signs must be well maintained so that they are structurally safe and do not cause litter to the
surrounding area or appear to be in a dilapidated condition. Signs must not endanger traffic by
obstructing the view of any street, road, highway or intersection.
(2) No sign shall project over any right-of-way except as permitted in the case of federal, state, and
town directional and/or regulatory signs.
(3) No flashing or animated light signs are permitted.
(4) No sign may be painted on, mounted on or otherwise attached to the roof of a building.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/665
(5) Obscene signs in which the dominant theme of material taken as a whole appeals to a prurient
interest in sex, or is patently offensive because it affronts community standards relating to the
description or representation of sexual matters, and is utterly without redeeming social value, are
prohibited.
(6) Signs which imitate an official traffic sign or signal or which contain the words “stop,” “go
slow,” “caution,” “danger,” “warning,” or similar words are not permitted except on private property
where they will not be confused with any official traffic sign or signal.
(7) No person shall attach or maintain any sign upon any tree, public utility pole or public building
unless specifically permitted by this article.
(8) No person shall paint a sign or attach a sign, other than a nameplate, to the outside of a fence or
railing.
(9) Each sign shall be constructed of durable material and shall be maintained in a high state of
repair at all times.
(A) Any sign, banner, flag, or pennant which becomes dilapidated, deteriorated or otherwise
in a state of disrepair shall be removed by the permit applicant, sign owner or property owner if
not refurbished, repaired, or removed within ten (10) calendar days after official written notice
by the town code enforcement officer.
(B) Upon failure to comply with such notice, the public works director is authorized to enter
the property upon which such sign is located and cause the removal of such sign. The owner of
the land, building or structure to which such sign is attached and upon which it is erected, and
the owner of such sign and the holder of the sign permit, are jointly and severally liable for any
expense incident to removal, including reasonable administrative costs.
(10) Political signs may be erected on any private property with the consent of the property owner.
No sign permit is required provided that such signs comply with the following:
(A) They are not greater than eight (8) feet high;
(B) They do not have a sign face area greater than 36 square feet; and
(C) They are not illuminated and have no moving elements.
(11) For the purpose of applicability of zoning classifications, setbacks, and the like under article
14.02 of this code, all signs located outside of a principal structure shall be considered structures
unless such signs are placed flat against such principal structure, subject to all requirements in this
chapter applicable to structures.
(12) Wherever used in this section or elsewhere in this article, the term “installed,” “erected” or
“constructed” shall also mean “reinstalled,” “reerected” or “reconstructed” except with respect to
periodic and normal maintenance, including repainting or other refurbishing, and shall also mean
“built” or “rebuilt,” all as may be appropriate to the context or conditions thereof.
(13) After enactment of this article, no sign shall be erected, placed or modified except in
conformance with this article.
(14) All signs must also conform with specific sign requirements for the applicable zones as set
forth respectively in sections 3.13.010, 3.13.011, 3.13.012, and 3.13.013 and division 2 of this article.
(15) The following signs are exempt from the requirements of this article: signs required or
authorized by law or by federal, state, county, or town authority; official legal notices issued by any
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/665
court, public body or person in performance of legal public duty; and historical sign plaques.
(16) Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, any sign authorized in this article
may contain a noncommercial message in lieu of a commercial message.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.04, adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.009 Permit
(a) Required. Sign permits are required for all exterior signs placed within the town limits unless specifically
exempted by other subsections within this section. Permit applications (when required) must be submitted, the
permit application fees (where applicable) must be paid and the application must be approved prior to placing
any sign at its intended location.
(b) Signs exempt from permit and fee. The following signs are exempt from sign permit and sign fee
requirements; however, such signs shall comply with all applicable requirements of this article. (Failure to
comply with applicable ordinances will result in the removal of noncompliant signs by designated town
officials.)
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.05, adopted 8/1/06)
(1) Temporary signs not exceeding six square feet in surface area which advertise the sale, rental or
lease of the premises on which such signs are located. (Ordinance 2007-3-6C, sec. 1.B, adopted
3/6/07)
(2) Signs (temporary or permanent) located inside a building.
(3) Political signs located on private property.
(4) Yard and garage sale signs.
(5) Temporary contractor/developer signs not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in surface area
when located on the premises of the property tract under development.
(6) Temporary contractor/construction signs not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in surface area
which provide information about construction entrances or permitted construction working hours for
a project in the process of development.
(7) Any temporary banner or sign announcing a community, civic, charitable or organizational
event which is located on the premises of the sponsoring organization or event site.
(8) All municipal signs.
(c) Signs exempt from fee. The following signs require issuance of a valid sign permit but are exempt from
the payment of any associated sign permit fees:
(1) Any temporary banner or sign announcing a community, civic, charitable or organizational
event which is located off the premises of the sponsoring organization.
(d) Procedures. An applicant shall submit for approval a sign permit application, which shall be reviewed by
the public works director or designee for compliance with the requirements of this article. Subject to meeting
applicable sign requirements, the applicant will be granted a permit by the public works director or designee
after review of the application, with:
(1) The payment (if required) of a filing fee for both permanent and temporary signs in an amount
set, from time to time, by resolution of the town council;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/665
(2) The submittal of the following information about the proposed sign(s):
(A) Three copies of a plan (drawn to scale) shall be submitted on standard white or graph
paper, 8-1/2" x 11" or larger, to show an illustration of the sign and sign copy. The plan
information shall include the sign's proposed dimensions, including the height, width and
distance from the ground at the base of the sign to the top of the sign.
(B) Type of lighting to be used, and placement of lights, and area which will be illuminated.
(C) Location of sign(s), boundaries of the parcel of land involved, and locations of and
accesses to buildings.
(D) Names of property owner(s), address, telephone number, and the date of application.
(3) The application for a permit for the erection of a sign in which electrical wiring and
connections are to be used shall be approved by the building official.
(4) Every applicant for a permit under this article for permanent exterior attached or detached signs
erected shall carry a liability insurance policy (minimum $100,000) which covers the subject sign,
the installer and the sign installation. The policy must be carried by an approved and Best A-rated
insurance company authorized to do business in the state. A bond carried by an approved and Best Arated
carrier covering the subject sign will also be acceptable. Proof of liability coverage shall be
submitted by means of certificate.
(5) The building official may suspend or revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this
article whenever he/she shall determine that the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect
or false information supplied, or whenever such permit is issued in violation of any of the provisions
of this article, any other ordinance of this town, or any laws of this state or of the federal government.
Such suspension or revocation shall be effective when communicated in writing to the person to
whom the permit is issued, the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises upon which the sign is
located. Any signs installed under a revoked permit shall be removed by the permit holder, sign
owner, or property owner within thirty (30) days of written notice of the revocation.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.05, adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.010 Signs for zoning change requests
Zoning change request signs are governed by the rules set forth in section 14.02.002(f)(1). (Ordinance 2006-017,
sec. 152.06, adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.011 Signs requiring conditional or special use permit
Any signage requiring a conditional or special use permit shall be governed by those conditional or special use
regulations that apply to the basic zoning classification under which the conditional or special use permit is
granted. (Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.07, adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.012 Single-family residential, AG, FH and MH zones
(a) Permitted signs generally. In single-family residential, AG, FH and MH zones, there shall be allowed on
any one lot or parcel of land under a single ownership not more than one sign, temporary in nature, the size of
which shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area, nor exceed five (5) feet in height inclusive of mounting; such
sign to be erected or placed not closer to any side or rear lot line than permitted under the regulations for the
appropriate zone under article 14.02, nor less than ten (10) feet from any front (street-side) lot line. (Ordinance
2007-3-6C, sec. 1.C, adopted 3/6/07)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/665
(b) Public signs. Within single-family residential, AG, FH and MH zones, the following signs are permitted
without reference to the owner(s) and/or occupant(s) of any lot or parcel of land:
(1) Federal, state and town directional and/or regulatory signs;
(2) Historic signs.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.08, adopted 8/1/06)
(c) Real estate signs. One (1) temporary real estate or contractor sign (not to exceed six sq. ft. in size) is
allowed in single-family residential, AG, FH and MH zones, provided that such sign is placed at the location of
the property concerned. The foregoing notwithstanding, if the property offered for rental or sale comprises ten or
more acres, and fronts on two or more streets, roads, or highways, additional signs of identical dimensions may
be erected, the total not to exceed one for each frontage. (No town sign permit is required for these temporary
real estate signs.) (Ordinance 2007-3-6C, sec. 1.D, adopted 3/6/07)
(d) Construction signs. One “construction entrance” sign not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in size is
allowed at each construction entrance within a project development for the duration of the project construction
or while structures within the project are being constructed. One “construction hours” sign, not to exceed thirtytwo
(32) square feet in size, providing information about permitted construction hours in the town is allowed at
each project development entrance during the construction period of the project.
(e) Garage sale signs. Temporary signs announcing yard or garage sales are allowed subject to the following
restrictions:
(1) One yard or garage sale sign, not to exceed five (5) square feet in area, is allowed at the
location of the yard/garage sale.
(2) Two directional yard or garage sale signs, each not to exceed five (5) square feet in area, may
be placed at the intersections of roads during the period of the sale.
(3) Yard or garage sale signs may be erected one day prior to the yard sale event and must be
removed immediately upon conclusion of the sale event.
(f) Zoning change request signs. Temporary signs announcing a zoning change request are allowed in singlefamily
residential, AG, FH and MH zones, and must follow the rules as outlined in section 14.02.002(f)(1).
(g) Exceptions. Subject to the size limitations in subsection (a) of this section, temporary signs providing
directional or other information concerning special home or farm occupation events (horse or other animal
shows, special auctions, special produce sales, and the like) may be erected at the site of the event, or at
locations other than those of the special events, providing always these conform additionally to the following:
(1) The erection of such signs shall be for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, and the
applicant(s) must demonstrate that such signs are to be placed with the permission of the property
owner(s) or occupant(s) involved, if they are other than the sponsor of the special event(s); and
(2) Any such signs will not be erected or placed more than five days in advance of the event(s),
and will be removed within five days following the event(s); however, an exception to the time limit
above may be granted by the town public works director in those cases where special event(s), by
their nature, require a longer period, but in no case shall the period exceed 120 days, inclusive of the
time periods specified above.
(h) Illumination; reflective materials. With the exception of federal, state and town directional and/or
regulatory signs, no sign in single-family residential, AG, FH and MH zones shall be artificially illuminated, or
constructed with iridescent or other highly reflective materials.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/665
(i) Advertising flags. Advertising flags in single-family residential and MH zones are allowed at the main
entry of a residential development (subdivision) and at one model home of each participating builder during the
period of time when the development is actively marketing homes or lots for sale. When a development has sold
85% of its platted lots or constructed residences, such advertising flags must be removed. Flags of governmental
entities (such as the United States, the state and the town) may remain at a development entry if incorporated
and approved as part of the development landscape plan. There shall be no advertising flags allowed in AG or
FH.
(j) Development signs. In addition to the foregoing signs, a development sign for residential developments
meeting the following standards shall be permitted:
(1) The developer may put up a temporary for sale/marketing sign for a new residential
development of ten (10) lots or greater.
(2) The sign may go up once the final plat has been approved by the town council, and must be
taken down once 75% of the lots have been sold.
(3) Sign size may not exceed 32 square feet of surface area.
(4) No sign will exceed ten feet in height above grade level, excluding decorative features (a
decorative extension, crowns, frames, etc.).
(5) The sign must be framed with sides not to exceed six inches in width, and with the top and
bottom framing of the sign not to exceed ten inches in width.
(6) Permit required. The developer must complete an application for a sign permit, pay a sign
permit fee as required by the town schedule of permits and fees to the town, and receive the approved
sign permit before the sign may be erected. The location of the sign will be approved through the
platting process and shall be submitted in conjunction with the preliminary plat.
(7) The sign must remain in good condition or the town reserves the right to remove it.
(k) Single-family residential zones defined. For purposes of this article, single-family residential zones are
defined as those zones where single-family homes may be constructed on individual lots.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.08, adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.013 GB and business PC zones
(a) Single business sites.
(1) Permanent flat to wall sign.
(A) One sign per building permanently affixed to the building is permitted. No part of the
sign may be mounted above the highest part of the building.
(B) Maximum size:
Business Size* Sign Size
1500 sq. ft. or less 24 sq. ft.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/665
1501 - 3000 sq. ft. 36 sq. ft.
3001 - 6000 sq. ft. 48 sq. ft.
6001 sq. ft. and greater 60 sq. ft.
*Refers to the finished interior of the building or building suite.
(2) Freestanding permanent sign.
(A) Only one sign per site is permitted, unless the site fronts on two streets.
(B) Maximum size:
Frontage Maximum
Less than 240 ft. 18 sq. ft.
240 - 480 ft. 100 sq. ft.
Greater than 480 ft. 150 sq. ft.
(C) A business that fronts two streets may erect a sign facing each street; however, the total
square footage allowed per subsection (2)(B) above may not be exceeded by both signs
combined.
(D) A change panel may be incorporated within the allowable sign area for price information
signs at vehicle fueling stations and in other signs (typically used by institutional organizations
such as churches, schools, governmental entities and nonprofit service agencies) where
information is periodically updated.
(E) The height of the sign from the ground (level grade) shall not exceed six (6) feet.
(3) Flags.
(A) One organizational flag per business is permitted.
(B) Oversize flags (greater than 8.95' x 17') may not be displayed.
(C) No pole used to display a flag(s) shall be higher than fifty (50) feet, measured from
ground level.
(D) Flags of governmental entities and organizations (e.g., U.S. flag, state flags, town flags
and corporate organizations) may be displayed in conjunction with project developments when
shown on project development plans filed with the town.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/665
(E) No more than three (3) flagpoles are allowed within a display group when flags are
displayed within these zones.
(F) Organizational flags may not be displayed on the same flagpole used to display the flag
of a governmental entity.
(G) Flags must be kept in good repair and displayed in accordance with established etiquette
for that flag. Inappropriately displayed or deteriorated flags are not allowed and must be
removed from display.
(4) Temporary signs (other than real estate).
(A) A single temporary sign may be used either as a freestanding or building-mounted sign
for up to thirty (30) days per year.
(B) The size of a temporary sign shall not exceed thirty-two square feet.
(C) Temporary signs may be used for the following purposes only:
(i) “Grand openings” for new businesses (in addition to permanent signs);
(ii) Announcing special events (such as parades, concerts and similar);
(iii) During renovation of or a change in any permanent sign;
(iv) Awaiting construction or reconstruction of a permanent sign;
(v) To announce a zoning change request as described in section 14.02.002(f)(1).
(5) Banners. Banners may be used as temporary signs and may be used only in accordance with the
following provisions:
(A) Announcement banners. One such banner may be used only for the following:
(i) “Grand openings” or business/organization opening announcements;
(ii) Awaiting installation or renovation of a permanent sign;
(iii) Special events (noncommercial).
Announcement banners must be mounted flat against a premises wall or may be
mounted on poles within the landscape area of the premises. Banners may not
exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in size. Announcement banners require a sign
permit and may be mounted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. Banners
must be kept in good repair or will be subject to removal.
(B) Decorative banners. Banners may be used for decorative or seasonal/special event
promotional purposes for a business or other organization on a temporary basis subject to the
following requirements:
(i) May be mounted against a premises wall or may be mounted on utility pole crossmembers
specifically designed to mount banners and pennants.
(ii) May not be used to advertise products, sales events or business entities.
(iii) Individual banners may not exceed 16 square feet in size.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/665
(iv) May be mounted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(v) May not be used for repetitive (more than 3 per year) displays per displaying
organization.
(vi) Within major planned mixed use developments (>300,000 square feet floor space),
banner size may be up to 30 square feet; may be displayed up to 4 times per year for
periods up to 45 days.
(vii) Sign permits are required.
(viii) Must be kept in good repair and nonfaded condition.
(C) Advertising banners. Banners designed to advertise products, prices, sales events or
business/organizational entities are not allowed for display.
(6) Pennants and bunting. Pennants and bunting may be used as temporary signs and may be used
only in accordance with the following requirements:
(A) May be used only for a “grand opening” event for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(B) May not be used as part of a recurring display.
(C) A sign permit is required for the exterior display of pennants or bunting.
(D) Exceptions. Pennants and bunting may be used without permit for celebration of official
U.S. and state holidays. No individual holiday display of pennants or bunting may exceed seven
(7) days in duration.
(7) Construction signs. One temporary “construction entrance” sign not to exceed sixteen (16)
square feet in size is allowed at each construction entrance within a project development for the
duration of the project construction or while structures within the project are being constructed. One
temporary “construction hours” sign, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size, providing
information about permitted construction hours in the town is allowed at each project development
entrance during the construction period of the project.
(8) Lights. No moving, flashing or animated signs are permitted.
(9) Illumination. Signs may be either externally illuminated with concealed or low-profile shielded
floodlighting or backlit with halo illumination. Internally illuminated signs are not permitted in GB
and PC zones. Note: When not required for evening and night business operation, security or other
reasonable lighting needs, the town encourages the reduction of sign lighting (dimming or turning
off) during time periods when sign illumination is unnecessary.
(b) Multibusiness sites.
(1) Permanent flat to wall sign.
(A) One sign per business permanently affixed to the building is permitted. No part of the
sign may be mounted above the highest part of the building.
(B) Maximum size:
Business Size* Size
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/665
1500 sq. ft. or less 24 sq. ft.
1501 - 3000 sq. ft. 36 sq. ft.
3001 - 6000 sq. ft. 48 sq. ft.
6001 sq. ft. and greater 60 sq. ft.
*Refers to the finished interior or the building or building suite.
(2) Freestanding permanent signs.
(A) Only one sign per site is permitted unless the site fronts on two streets.
(B) Maximum size:
Frontage Maximum Area
Less than 240 ft. 18 sq. ft.
240 - 480 ft. 100 sq. ft.
Greater than 480 ft. 150 sq. ft.
(C) A business that fronts two streets may erect a sign facing each street; however, the total
square footage allowed per subsection (2)(B) above may not be exceeded by both signs
combined.
(D) A change panel may be incorporated within the allowable sign area where information is
subject to change on a regular basis, for example, price information signs at vehicle fueling
stations and in the signs of institutional organizations such as churches, schools, governmental
entities and nonprofit service agencies.
(E) The height of the sign from the ground shall not exceed six (6) feet above grade level
unless the area of the sign exceeds one hundred (100) square feet, in which instance the height
may be eight (8) feet above grade level.
(3) Flags.
(A) One organizational flag per business is permitted.
(B) Oversize flags (greater than 8.95' x 17') may not be displayed.
(C) No pole used to display a flag(s) shall be higher than fifty (50) feet, measured from
ground level.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/665
(D) Flags of governmental entities and organizations (e.g., U.S. flag, state flags, town flags
and corporate organizations) may be displayed in conjunction with project developments when
shown on development plans filed with the town.
(E) No more than three (3) flagpoles are allowed within a display group when flags are
displayed within these zones.
(F) Organizational flags may not be displayed on the same flagpole used to display the flag
of a governmental entity.
(G) Flags must be kept in good repair and displayed in accordance with established etiquette
for that flag. Inappropriately displayed or deteriorated flags are not allowed and must be
removed from display.
(4) Temporary signs (other than real estate).
(A) A single temporary sign may be used either as a freestanding or building-mounted sign
for up to thirty (30) days per year.
(B) The size of a temporary sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
(C) Temporary signs may be used for the following purposes only:
(i) “Grand openings” for new businesses (in addition to permanent signs);
(ii) Announcing special events (such as parades, concerts and similar);
(iii) During the renovation of or a change in any permanent sign;
(iv) Awaiting construction or reconstruction of a permanent sign;
(v) To announce a zoning change request as described in section 14.02.002(f)(1).
(5) Banners. Banners may be used as temporary signs and may be used only in accordance with the
following provisions:
(A) Announcement banners. These banners may be used only for the following:
(i) “Grand openings” or business/organization opening announcements;
(ii) Awaiting installation or renovation of a permanent sign;
(iii) Special events (noncommercial).
Display of one banner per street facing facade is allowed for individual businesses
or organizations. Multiple banners are allowed for display for large project
developments. Announcement banners must be mounted flat against a premises wall
or may be mounted on poles within the landscape area of the premises and may not
exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in size. Announcement banners require a sign
permit and may be mounted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. Banners
must be kept in good repair or will be subject to removal.
(B) Decorative banners. Banners may be used for decorative or seasonal/special event
promotional purposes for planned development projects, individual businesses, governmental
entities or other organizations on a temporary basis subject to the following requirements:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/665
(i) May be mounted against a premises wall or may be mounted on utility pole crossmembers
specifically designed to mount banners and pennants.
(ii) May not be used to advertise products, sales events or business entities.
(iii) Individual banners may not exceed 16 square feet in size.
(iv) May be mounted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(v) May not be used for repetitive (more than 3 per year) displays per displaying
organization.
(vi) Within major planned mixed use developments (>300,000 square feet floor space),
banner size may be up to 30 square feet; may be displayed up to 4 times per year for
periods up to 45 days.
(vii) Sign permits are required.
(viii) Must be kept in good repair and nonfaded condition.
(C) Advertising banners. Banners designed to advertise products, prices, sales events or
business/organizational entities are not allowed for display.
(6) Pennants and bunting. Pennants and bunting may be used as temporary signs and may be used
only in accordance with the following requirements:
(A) May be used only for a “grand opening” event for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(B) May not be used as part of a recurring display.
(C) A sign permit is required for the exterior display of pennants or bunting.
(D) Exceptions. Pennants and bunting may be used without permit for celebration of official
U.S. and state holidays. No individual holiday display of pennants or bunting may exceed seven
(7) days in duration.
(7) Construction signs. One temporary “construction entrance” sign not to exceed sixteen (16)
square feet in size is allowed at each construction entrance within a project development for the
duration of the project construction or while structures within the project are being constructed. One
temporary “construction hours” sign, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size, providing
information about permitted construction hours in the town is allowed at each project development
entrance during the construction period of the project.
(8) Lights. No moving, flashing or animated signs are permitted.
(9) Illumination. Signs may be either externally illuminated with concealed or low-profile shielded
floodlighting or backlit with halo illumination. Internally illuminated cabinet signs are not permitted
in the GB or PC zones. Note: When not required for evening and night business operation, security or
other reasonable lighting needs, the town encourages the reduction of sign lighting (dimming or
turning off) during time periods when sign illumination is unnecessary.
(10) Other signs. All signs permitted in single-family residential zones, AG, FH and MH zones are
also permitted in the GB and PC zones.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.09, adopted 8/1/06)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/665
(c) Temporary real estate signs.
(1) A temporary real estate sign may be placed on a property in these zones, indicating its
availability for sale or lease, or announcing project development on the site. Real estate industry
standard signs, which are six (6) square feet in size or less, do not require a sign permit. All larger
(>6 square feet) real estate signs require a permit. The following size, dimension and height
restrictions apply to temporary real estate signs: (Ordinance 2007-3-6C, sec. 1.E, adopted 3/6/07)
Property Size*
Maximum
Sign Size
Maximum
Dimension Ratios**
Maximum
Height***
0 - <10 acres 18 square feet 2 to 1 4 feet
10 - <50 acres 32 square feet 2 to 1 4 feet
50 - <100 acres 64 square feet 2 to 1 4 feet
100+ acres 96 square feet 2.5 to 1 4 feet
*Property size shall mean the total contiguous acreage owned by a single or joint owner,
or the total acreage of each separately platted lot. Where a single project includes several
platted lots, both a project sign and individual lot signs may be used, each conforming to
the sizes and dimensions stated above.
**Dimension ratios shall be measured from height to width or width to height.
***Maximum height shall be measured from the ground to the lowest part of the sign.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (c)(1) above, when a property available for sale, lease or project
development fronts on two or more streets, roads or highways, an additional temporary sign may be
placed on the property at each of the secondary frontage locations.
(3) No flags, banners or other attention-getting devices may be attached to temporary real estate
signs.
(4) Lighting of temporary real estate signs is not permitted.
(5) Temporary real estate signs must be of professional quality construction and must be
maintained in an attractive condition. Signs that fade, tilt, decay, or become defaced, broken or
otherwise deteriorated shall be repaired to original condition or removed from the property as
directed by the town.
(6) Temporary real estate signs are allowed for a period of eighteen (18) months and may be
renewed, for a fee, for one additional eighteen-month period, provided such signs are kept in good
condition/appearance, and do not otherwise become detrimental to the community in terms of safety,
communication effectiveness, or environmental quality, as described in section 3.13.001 of this code.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/665
(7) In those situations where temporary real estate signs are needed for periods longer than thirtysix
(36) months, a new sign permit application for a new or refurbished sign must be submitted to the
town for approval.
(8) A sign identifying a real estate agent or manager may be added on a separate panel at the top or
bottom of the sign. Any such panel addition may not exceed 10 inches in width and must be
contained within the width of the primary sign.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.09, adopted 8/1/06)
Secs. 3.13.014–3.13.040 Reserved
Division 2. CPDD and NFPDD Zones*
Part I. In General
Sec. 3.13.041 Sign categories and definitions
(a) Temporary exterior signs. These signs include a wide variety of visual communications placed in an
exterior location which are to be removed after a temporary period of time. Individual types of temporary signs
are more specifically defined in various parts of sections 3.13.012 and 3.13.013. Applicable regulations for
temporary signs within the CPDD zones are the same as those regulations found in applicable subsections of
sections 3.13.008, 3.13.012 and 3.13.013. Those regulations and subsections which apply specifically within the
CPDD are set forth under regulations for temporary signs within the CPDD in subsequent sections of this
division.
(b) Permanent exterior commercial signs. Permitted sign categories and types:
(1) Detached signs (identifying ground level). These are freestanding (not attached to a building
nor supported by external supports) signs mounted to a solid base at ground level. Also identified as
monument signs, the following specific types of detached (ground level identifying) signs are
allowed:
(A) Detached project signs. Signs located near a street edge which identify a named project
(development);
(B) Detached premises signs. Signs which identify individual businesses, buildings or
organizations.
(C) Detached premises sign - fuel. A specialized detached premises sign used specifically for
business or brand identification and fuel pricing information for a business establishment
engaged in the sale of motor vehicle fuels.
(D) Detached project/premises combination signs. Signs located near a commercial
development entry which identify both a named building or project (with multiple occupants or
tenants) and the individual businesses/organizations located within that development project.
(2) Detached signs (large development identifying - elevated). A monument sign (freestanding,
self-supporting sign mounted on a solid base) or landmark structure (e.g., water storage tank)
constructed at an elevated level which is used to identify large-scale multitenant developments such
as shopping centers and major office parks. These signs (when approved) may also be used to
identify major tenants within the development.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/665
(3) Detached signs (flags). Flags which represent governmental subdivisions, project developments
or business establishment/organization identities used for aesthetic purposes or to attract attention to
the displaying project or organization.
(A) Governmental flags. Flags representing various governmental entities (i.e., the United
States, the state, the county, and the town).
(B) Identification flags. Flags used for purposes of organization identification.
(4) Attached premises signs. Signs physically attached to the exterior of a building which identify
or provide information about the building or the business establishments, organizations or tenants
located within that building. Attached premises signs include the following specific types of attached
signs:
(A) Primary facade-mounted identification signs. The main signage which identifies
buildings, individual business establishments or organizations at the premises location. Such
signs are mounted on upper portions of the building facade(s) and are considered the principal
signs identifying the building or business/organization and its location. Such signs are often
called “main storefront” signs. Note: Signs which provide information about services, products,
locations or subordinate sections within an identified business establishment are not defined as
identification signs and are not allowed.
(B) Facade-mounted identification signs (fuel dispensing canopy). Signage identifying an
individual business or brand which is placed on the facade or fascia of a permanently
constructed canopy located over the pumps of a retail fuel (e.g., gasoline) dispensing facility.
(C) Blade identification signs. Signage which identifies business establishments or
organizations at occupied premises located on or along a pedestrian way. Such signs are
mounted on a mast or bracket extending from the building facade over the pedestrian way.
(D) Attached identification signs (other). Signage applied or attached to lower levels of the
building facade, doors, windows, awnings or other physical attachments to the building which
provides additional identification for individual business establishments or organizations
located within the premises.
(E) Premises information signs. Signage applied or attached to the exterior of the building
facade, doors or windows which conveys information about a business/organization occupant(s)
such as the address, hours of operation, entry/exit, phone number and e-mail address. Note:
Advertising information is not included nor allowed as part of a premises information sign.
Advertising information, including information about services, products, locations or
subordinate sections within the business premises, is not allowed on the exterior of any building
for any business establishment or other organization within the building premises.
(F) Restaurant menu information signs. Signage displayed near the entry to a restaurant
which conveys information about that restaurant's menu selections and prices. Such signage is
sometimes described as a restaurant menu board sign.
(c) Interior commercial signs. Permanent or temporary signs attached to or displayed within the interior
premises of a building, or business establishments/organizations located within the building, and that are readily
visible from the exterior of the building, which provide information about the building, the occupants or the
products/services provided by the occupant. Specific types of interior signs include:
(1) Interior information signs. Signage applied or attached to the interior of the premises such as on
the entry door, windows or walls which conveys information about the business/organization such as
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/665
the address, hours of operation, entry/exit, etc. Advertising information is not included and not
considered as part of a premises information sign.
(2) Interior advertising signs. Signage displayed within the interior of a business
establishment/organization premises which conveys information about the products, services, prices,
and special events (i.e., sales and seasonal activity) offered or being promoted by the business
establishment/organization.
(d) Site directional and information signs. Provide information to both vehicular and pedestrian traffic which
is of assistance in finding and accessing locations on a large site or within a certain area. Such signs may also be
used to provide sales, leasing and construction information within a development or project.
(e) Permanent exterior residential signs. Permitted categories and types:
(1) Residential development identification signs. Signs located at or near a residential development
entry (or entries) which identify either a single-family or multifamily residential development by
name.
(2) Site directional and information signs. Signage which provides information to both vehicular
and pedestrian traffic which is of assistance in finding and accessing locations within the residential
development area. Such signage may also be used to provide sales, leasing and construction
information. (Note: These directional signs are not to be construed to mean town street signs which
identify street names.)
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.10, adopted 8/1/06)
Secs. 3.13.042–3.13.070 Reserved
Part II. Temporary Signs
Sec. 3.13.071 Temporary exterior signs in CPDD residential zones
The regulations for and descriptions of temporary signs specified in section 3.13.012, subsections (a), (b), (c),
(d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i) and (j), apply within the following CPDD zones for residential uses:
(1) Town Square Zone (Zone C).
(2) Residential Adjacency Zone (Zone D).
(3) Residential Transition Zone (Zone H).
(4) Old Highway 5 Zone (Zone G).
(5) Central Single-Family Preservation Zone (Zone I).
(6) Eastern Single-Family Preservation Zone (Zone L).
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.11(A), adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.072 Temporary exterior signs in CPDD commercial zones
(a) General requirements. The regulations for and descriptions of temporary signs specified in section
3.13.013, subsections (a)(4), (5), (6) and (7), (b)(4), (5), (6) and (7), and (c)(1) through (8), apply within the
following CPDD zones for nonresidential uses:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/665
(1) Northern Ceremonial Parkway Zone (Zone A).
(2) Northern Office/Commercial Zone (Zone B).
(3) Town Center Zone (Zone E).
(4) Western Office/Commercial Zone (Zone F).
(5) Southern Ceremonial Parkway Zone (Zone J).
(6) Southern Edge Commercial Zone (Zone K).
(7) Northeastern Gateway Zone (Zone M).
(8) Highway 5 Nonresidential Zone (Zone N).
(b) Large developments.
(1) Notwithstanding general exterior sign size requirements specified per subsection (a) of this
section, signs announcing project developments on land tracts which total more than 150 acres in
assembled size may request and receive approval for larger signs through the development concept
plan or site plan approval process.
(2) Notwithstanding general exterior sign location requirements specified per subsection (a) of this
section, signs announcing project developments on land tracts which total more than 150 acres in
assembled size may request and receive approval for multiple designated sign locations through the
concept plan or site plan approval process.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.11(B), adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.073 Temporary interior signs in CPDD commercial zones
The following regulations govern the display of temporary interior signs within business establishments and
other organizations within the CPDD that are either open to the public or to participating members/invitees of
the establishment:
(1) General requirements.
(A) Any temporary interior signage which is affixed or attached to storefront doors or
windows is subject to the rules and requirements of this article pertaining to interior signage.
(B) Other signs within the interior premises of a business/organizational establishment are
exempt from the requirements of this article.
(C) Temporary interior signs do not require a sign permit from the town. However, interior
signs affixed or attached to windows or doors are subject to the requirements of this article as
specified. Noncomplying signs may be ordered removed or adjusted by the town code
enforcement officer.
(2) Limitations on size and location.
(A) Interior signage, whether temporary or permanent, may not cover, occupy or exceed
twenty-five percent (25%) of the total area of the storefront windows or doors visible to the
public from the exterior of the premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/665
(B) Interior signage, whether temporary or permanent, may not cover, occupy or exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the area of any individual storefront window or door visible to the public from
the exterior of the premises.
(C) No interior signage may be placed in a location on windows or doors which obscures
clear public view (at normal adult eye levels) into the business/organizational establishment
from the exterior of the premises.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.11(C), adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.074 Temporary exterior signs in NFPDD zones
(a) Residential uses. The regulations for and descriptions of temporary signs specified in section 3.13.012
apply on any land parcel within the NFPDD where an permitted residential use is established or where a plan is
submitted and approved for residential development
(b) Commercial uses. The regulations for and descriptions of temporary signs specified in section 3.13.013
apply on any land parcel within the NFPDD where a permitted commercial use is established or where a plan is
submitted and approved for commercial development.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.11(D), adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.075 Temporary interior signs in NFPDD zones
The regulations for temporary interior signs for CPDD zones described in section 3.13.073 apply on any land
parcel within the NFPDD where a permitted nonresidential use is established or where a plan is submitted and
approved for nonresidential development. (Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.11(E), adopted 8/1/06)
Secs. 3.13.076–3.13.100 Reserved
Part III. Commercial Signs
Sec. 3.13.101 General regulations applicable to all permanent commercial signs
These regulations apply to all permanent signs located within any CPDD or NFPDD zone:
(1) Only signs that are specifically allowed by this regulation may be displayed. All other signs
and types of signs not specifically permitted are forbidden within the CPDD and NFPDD.
(2) For any multitenant development with more than one exterior identification sign, the developer
must prepare a governing set of rules and restrictions for all exterior signs in the development. Such
rules and restrictions must ensure that the exterior building signs are constructed and displayed in
coordinated fashion for all tenants within the development.
(3) A sign shall not rotate, gyrate, blink, flash, or move in any fashion.
(4) Off-premises signs are not permitted.
(5) Roof signs are not permitted.
(6) Sign copy on any sign shall be coordinated in size, color and type style.
(7) Sign copy shall be applied in a manner which avoids shadow distortion.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/665
(8) Primary attached building identification signs shall be mounted in a position on the building
facade. In no case shall a sign extend in height above the horizontal line where the building wall
plane intersects the building roof line. When mounted on a parapet, no sign may extend above the
parapet wall.
(9) Logo symbols shall not exceed the maximum sign height or be 50% greater than the actual
letter height; symbols may not be located closer than 1/2 letter height to any building edge, window,
door, column, corner, mullion, sign band, canopy or other significant architectural feature. Exceptions
may be granted to these size and location requirements when the logo is part of a registered
trademark.
(10) A change panel may be incorporated within the allowable sign area where information is
subject to change on a regular basis, for example, price information signs at vehicle fueling stations
and in the signs of institutional organizations such as churches, schools, governmental entities and
nonprofit service agencies.
(11) A sign's background color shall be limited to one color only.
(12) Copy color shall contrast with the background color.
(13) When there are multiple individual identifying business signs on a building (e.g., retail strip
center), all signs must be coordinated in size, color and type of sign.
(14) Paint on nonferrous metals shall be a Matthews acrylic polyurethane or equal self-etching
primer.
(15) Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, any sign authorized in this article
may contain a noncommercial message in lieu of a commercial message.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.12(A), adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.102 Detached signs (large development identifying - elevated)
(a) Permitted zones. This sign is permitted with a special use permit only in the following CPDD zones when
specifically allowed and approved as part of the overall project development site plan:
(1) Northern Office Commercial Zone (Zone B).
(2) Western Office Commercial Zone (Zone F).
(3) Southern Edge Commercial Zone (Zone K - Central Expressway frontage only).
(b) Governing requirements.
(1) Location. Must be located near the street frontage normally within the landscape setback zone
near the project entry.
(2) Design. The sign must be an elevated monument style sign or an existing elevated landmark
structure. (Pole signs are not permitted.) If an elevated monument sign is used, the sign must be
designed and constructed incorporating materials and design elements used in the project/building(s)
being identified. The proposed design of the sign (including all dimensions, materials and lighting)
shall be submitted as part of the project site plan for specific approval. The sign copy for identified
individual businesses (if used) must be uniform in design and size.
(3) Lighting. The sign may be illuminated only with either:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/665
(A) Internal illumination that lights only the sign copy and not the sign background;
(B) Halo lighting; or
(C) Other lighting specifically approved as part of the special use permit approval.
Notes: Neon lighting and internal illumination (other than specifically permitted above) is
not allowed. When not required for evening and night business operation, security or other
lighting needs, the town encourages the reduction of sign lighting (dimming or turning
off) during time periods when sign illumination is unnecessary.
(4) Number of signs. Only one sign of this type is permitted per authorized project.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.12(B), adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.103 Detached signs (identifying ground level)
(a) Permitted zones. The following types of commercial signs are permitted for general use in the following
zones when constructed according to the governing requirements for each sign:
(1) CPDD zones.
(A) Northern Ceremonial Parkway Zone (Zone A).
(B) Northern Office Commercial Zone (Zone B).
(C) Town Center Zone (Zone E).
(D) Western Office Commercial Zone (Zone F).
(E) Old Highway 5 Zone (Zone G).
(F) Southern Ceremonial Parkway Zone (Zone J).
(G) Southern Edge Commercial Zone (Zone K).
(H) Northeastern Gateway Zone (Zone M).
(I) Highway 5 Nonresidential Zone (Zone N).
(2) NFPDD zones.
(A) Northern Gateway Zone.
(B) Old Mill Road.
(b) Detached project sign.
(1) Location. Must be located near the street frontage within the landscape setback zone near the
project entry. The sign shall be located so that it does not interfere with required line-of-sight
visibility needed for safe ingress/egress at the project entry.
(2) Design. The sign shall be a monument sign designed and constructed in accordance with one of
the following criteria:
(A) Per diagram #54 of the Fairview Central Business District Guidelines. The sign shall
conform to the specified dimensions and the placement of messages shown on diagram #54 and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/665
shall be constructed incorporating the same materials used in the building(s) being identified.
Project name information may be substituted for corporate name information shown in diagram
#54.
(B) A custom-designed monument sign which is not greater than 11 feet in length or 5 feet in
height. The sign must be primarily of masonry construction and must incorporate the primary
material used in the construction of the building being identified. When the sign design includes
non-masonry materials in the sign face, that non-masonry portion of the sign face may not
exceed fifteen (15) square feet in size and must be framed on at least three sides by the
predominant masonry construction. The sign must include the street number address of the
project being identified.
(3) Lighting. The sign may be illuminated only with either:
(A) Concealed external shielded low-profile floodlights;
(B) Internal illumination that lights only the sign copy and not the sign background;
(C) Halo lighting.
Note: When not required for evening and night business operation, security or other
lighting needs, the town encourages the reduction of sign lighting (dimming or turning
off) during time periods when sign illumination is unnecessary.
(4) Number of signs. Only one sign of this type is permitted per project. Where the project has
frontage on more than one street, one sign is permissible for each separate frontage location.
(c) Detached premises sign.
(1) Location. Detached premises signs are located as follows based on the conditions of their use:
(A) When used to identify an individual business occupying a stand-alone building, the sign
may be located near the street edge within the landscape setback area or it may be located
outside the landscape setback area away from the street in a separate landscape bed which
extends 2-1/2 feet from the base of the sign. The sign shall be located so that it does not
interfere with required line-of-sight visibility needed for safe ingress/egress at the project entry.
(B) When used to identify an individual business that occupies space within a building
housing multiple tenants, the sign must be located outside the landscape setback zone and set on
the business premises in a separate landscape bed which extends at least 2-1/2 feet from the
base of the sign structure. Notwithstanding allowances for use of this type sign, a permit for
such sign may be withheld in those circumstances where multiple signs within one project
would create confusion, clutter or excessive signage not in keeping with the project's overall
design.
(2) Design. Must be built as a monument style sign incorporating the materials used in the building
being identified.
(A) When a detached premises sign is located near the street edge within the landscape
setback zone, the sign shall be a monument sign designed and constructed in accordance with
one of the following criteria:
(i) Per diagram #54 in the Fairview Central Business District Guidelines. The sign shall
conform to the specified dimensions and placement of messages shown on the diagram.
Individual business names and information may be substituted in the sign face area for the
corporate information shown in the diagram.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/665
(ii) A custom-designed monument sign which is not greater than 11 feet in length or 5
feet in height. The sign must be primarily of masonry construction and must incorporate
the primary material used in the construction of the building being identified. When the
sign design includes non-masonry materials in the sign face, that non-masonry portion of
the sign face may not exceed 15 square feet in size and must be framed on at least three
sides by the predominant masonry construction. The sign must include the street number
address of the premises being identified.
(B) When a detached premises sign is located away from a street edge outside the landscape
setback zone, the signs may be constructed according to custom individual designs. The sign
must not exceed 4 feet in height nor exceed 5 feet in width. The sign may not exceed 15 square
feet of sign face area. (Note: Sign face area does not include a masonry base or surrounding
elements which may frame the sign.) When multiple businesses are identified on the same sign,
the sign copy identifying the separate businesses must be uniform in design, color and size.
(Note: Variation is permitted for corporate logos used in conjunction with the sign copy.)
(3) Lighting. The sign may be illuminated only with either:
(A) Concealed external shielded low-profile floodlights;
(B) Internal illumination that lights only the sign copy and not the sign background;
(C) Halo lighting.
Note: When not required for evening and night business operation, security or other
lighting needs, the town encourages the reduction of sign lighting (dimming or turning
off) during time periods when sign illumination is unnecessary.
(4) Number of signs. Only one sign of this type is permitted per individual business except where a
business has frontage on more than one street. When a business has frontage on more than one street,
one sign is permitted for each street frontage location.
(d) Detached premises sign - fuel. Permitted for use only at a motor vehicle fuel dispensing business which is
approved for use in specific CPDD and NFPDD zones. Some zones require a special use permit and have special
requirements for fuel dispensing business locations in those zones.
(1) Location. Must be located near the street frontage within the landscape setback zone near the
premises entry or entries. The sign shall be located so that it does not interfere with required line-ofsight
visibility needed for safe ingress/egress at the project entry.
(2) Design. The sign shall be a monument sign designed and constructed incorporating the same
materials used in the building being identified.
(A) The sign must include a masonry base and masonry sides enclosing the sign face. The
overall sign (including masonry elements) dimensions may not exceed 5-1/2 feet in height and
it may not exceed 9-1/2 feet in length.
(B) Brand, corporate or business identification logos must be placed on a masonry
background which is separated from the sign face providing the fuel pricing information.
(C) Fuel pricing information may be provided using electronic reader board information with
black background or with other numerical symbols on a sign face which meet the lighting
requirements for the sign.
(3) Lighting. The sign may be illuminated only with either:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/665
(A) Concealed external shielded floodlights;
(B) Internal illumination that lights only the sign copy and not the sign background;
(C) Halo lighting.
Note: When not required for evening and night business operation, security or other
lighting needs, the town encourages the reduction of sign lighting (dimming or turning
off) during time periods when sign illumination is unnecessary.
(4) Number of signs. Only one such sign of this type is permitted per individual fuel dispensing
business except where the business has frontage on more than one street. Where a business has
frontage on more than one street, one sign is permitted for each street frontage location.
(e) Detached project/premises combination sign.
(1) Location. Must be located near the street frontage within the landscape setback zone near the
project entry.
(2) Design. The sign shall be a monument sign designed and constructed incorporating the same
materials used in the project being identified.
(A) The sign must include a masonry base and it must include masonry or other horizontal
and vertical construction elements to frame the sign face.
(B) The sign base must be set in a landscaped bed with dedicated landscaping around the sign
extending at least 2 feet from the sign base.
(C) The overall sign (including the masonry base and frame around the sign face) shall not
exceed 6 feet in height nor exceed 8 feet in length.
(D) Copy elements of the sign face which identify individual tenants/occupants within the
building/development project must be done in one common font style and one common color.
(Multiple colors and font styles may be allowed when a coordinated design plan for the sign is
submitted as part of the site plan for the development project.)
(E) The sign must be constructed in accordance with project sign restrictions or regulations
prepared by or for the developer to govern signs within the development project. Such project
development regulations must be consistent with requirements of this article and must be
submitted to the town prior to receiving an approved permit application for any sign within the
development.
(F) The sign copy on individual sign faces which identify respective tenants must conform to
this article and those specified design requirements of the project sign restrictions. These
restrictions must include a planned font pattern, letter size and color plan. When the sign permit
application is submitted to the town, the design standards for individual tenant/occupant
identification must be included with the permit application.
(3) Lighting. The sign may be illuminated only with the following approved lighting methods:
(A) Concealed external shielded floodlights.
(B) Internal illumination that lights only the sign copy and not the sign background.
(C) Halo lighting.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/665
Note: When not required for evening and night business operation, security or other
lighting needs, the town encourages the reduction of sign lighting (dimming or turning
off) during time periods when sign illumination is unnecessary.
(4) Number of signs. Only one sign of this type is permitted per project. Where the project has
frontage on more than one street, one sign is permissible for each separate frontage location.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.12(C), adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.104 Detached signs (flags)
Flags may be displayed which represent governmental subdivisions, project developments or business
establishment/organization identities in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Governmental flags. Flags representing governmental entities (e.g., the United States, the state,
the county, and the town) may be displayed subject to the following restrictions:
(A) Only one governmental flag for each political entity may be displayed as part of any flag
grouping displayed for any project development or organization being identified. Proper flag
etiquette (established by the respective government entities) must be observed in the display of
governmental flags.
(B) Only one flag display grouping is allowed per site unless multiple locations are identified
and approved as part the project development site plan.
(C) Oversize (larger than 8.95' x 17') flags are not allowed for display except for official
purposes or otherwise approved as part of a development site plan.
(D) No pole used to display a flag(s) shall be higher than fifty (50) feet, measured from
ground level.
(2) Identification flags. A single flag may be used when displayed on a commercially
manufactured flagpole for purposes of organization identification subject to the following
requirements:
(A) Identification flags may be displayed as part of a grouping with governmental flags.
(B) Only one identification flag may be displayed to identify any commercial development
project unless multiple flags or multiple locations are identified and approved as part of the
development's site plan.
(C) One identification flag may be displayed on any site occupied by a single stand-alone
business establishment or other organization.
(D) One identification flag may be displayed on any site occupied by multiple business
establishments or other organizations.
(E) Displayed advertising or identification flags may not exceed five (5) feet in length or
three (3) feet in width.
(F) Identification flags may not be displayed on the same flagpole where a governmental flag
is displayed.
(G) No pole used to display a flag(s) may exceed fifty (50) feet in height, measured from
ground level.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/665
(3) Flag group displays. Governmental and identification flags may be displayed in groups in
accordance with the following requirements:
(A) No more than five (5) flagpoles are allowed within a display group when flags are
displayed to identify a commercial development project within CPDD commercial zones.
Displays of more than five (5) poles may be approved when submitted and approved as part of
a project site plan. All pole heights within a display must be appropriate (according to the flag
manufacturer's recommendations) for the size of flags displayed.
(B) No more than three (3) flagpoles are allowed within a display group when flags are
displayed to identify an individual business or organization within commercial development
project within CPDD commercial zones. Displays of more than three (3) poles may be
approved when submitted and approved as part of a site plan. All pole heights within a display
must be in accordance with the flag manufacturer's recommendations for the size of flags
displayed. No pole used to display a flag(s) may exceed fifty (50) feet in height.
(C) Identification flags may not be displayed on the same flagpole where a governmental flag
is displayed.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.12(D), adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.105 Attached premises signs
(a) The following category of commercial signs is permitted for general use in the following zones when the
sign is constructed and placed in allowed locations according to the governing requirements for each sign:
(1) CPDD zones.
(A) Northern Ceremonial Parkway Zone (Zone A).
(B) Northern Office Commercial Zone (Zone B).
(C) Town Center Zone (Zone E).
(D) Western Office Commercial Zone (Zone F).
(E) Old Highway 5 Zone (Zone G).
(F) Southern Ceremonial Parkway Zone (Zone J).
(G) Southern Edge Commercial Zone (Zone K).
(H) Northeastern Gateway Zone (Zone M).
(I) Highway 5 Nonresidential Zone (Zone N).
(2) NFPDD zones.
(A) Gateway Zone.
(B) Old Mill Road Zone.
(b) Primary facade-mounted identification sign.
(1) Location. Must be mounted on the upper level of the masonry wall facade(s) of the building
where the business being identified is located in accordance with the following restrictions:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/665
(A) The sign must be contained within the horizontal limits of the premises which it
identifies.
(B) The sign may not be mounted in an area on a facade face which is vertically extended
more than 6 feet above the building roof line (or 6 feet above a horizontal line defined by the
typical level of the top edge of the building parapet) unless that facade is designed and extended
vertically as part of a primary architectural building element. The architectural element must be
characterized by building depth, building form and roof form or parapet edge treatment per
CPDD architectural guidelines.
(C) Some facade-mounted sign designs (see “Design” in the following subsection) are
restricted by location for use only in certain zones or areas of the CPDD.
(2) Design. All primary facade-mounted signs on any one building (with multiple signs) or on
buildings within a multibuilding development must be constructed and displayed in accordance with
specified project development restrictions (prepared by or for the project developer) which govern
sign types, numbers, size, mounting location and other applicable project criteria. These signs must
also be designed and constructed according to one or more of the following town sign design criteria
and are subject to the specified restrictions for each of the respective sign types:
(A) A sign with dimensional, reverse channel symbols and letters.
(B) A sign consisting of channel letters and symbols fabricated with opaque metal sides and
translucent plastic faces subject to the following limitations:
(i) Exposed raceways are not permitted.
(ii) Channel letter signs may be used only in commercial project developments west of
Greenville Avenue (SH 5).
(C) A sign consisting of three-dimensional symbols and letters.
(D) A combination sign which includes a reverse channel letter sign and a subordinate (in
size) cabinet sign where only the copy is illuminated and the background of the sign face is
totally opaque.
(E) A flat sign with copy consisting of painted letters and symbols. Copy on the flat sign may
be raised (dimensional) if desired.
(F) Other unique sign designs for major buildings with floor space in excess of 50,000 square
feet which are specifically submitted and approved as part of a development site plan or
amendment to a development site plan.
(3) Size. These signs must fit within the orthogonal perimeter allowed for each of the specified
designs. The orthogonal perimeter is determined by a line drawn in rectangular fashion at the
outermost points of a sign's height and width. The following size restrictions apply:
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.12(E), adopted 8/1/06)
(A) Reverse channel letter signs and copy.
(i) Maximum height for a sign with a single line of copy shall not exceed either 36
inches or 50% of the display height of the wall facade to which it is attached, whichever is
less. (Note: Refer to “display height” definition.)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/665
(ii) Maximum height for a sign with multiple lines of copy shall not exceed either 48
inches or 62.5% of the display height of the wall facade to which it is attached, whichever
is less.
(Ordinance 2010-5-4A, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/10)
(iii) Maximum width shall not exceed 75% of the width of the wall facade for the
premises to which it is attached.
(iv) When a project development or building includes a dominant user(s) that is
significantly larger than other development/building tenants (i.e., an anchor or junior
anchor tenant), that dominant large user(s) is allowed to have a larger sign in accordance
with the following requirements:
a. Maximum height for signs with either single or multiple lines of copy is 96
inches for buildings with 100,000 square feet of floor space or greater.
b. Maximum height for signs with either single or multiple lines of copy is 72
inches for buildings with at least 50,000 square feet but less than 100,000 square feet
of floor space.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.12(E), adopted 8/1/06)
(B) Channel letter signs and copy.
(i) Maximum height for a sign with a single line of copy shall not exceed either 30
inches or 37.5% of the display height of the wall facade to which it is attached, whichever
is less. (Note: Refer to “display height” definition.)
(ii) Maximum height for a sign with multiple lines of copy shall not exceed either 36
inches or 50% of the display height of the wall facade to which it is attached, whichever is
less.
(Ordinance 2010-5-4A, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/10)
(iii) Maximum width shall not exceed 75% of the width of the wall facade to which it is
attached.
(iv) When a project development or building includes a dominant user(s) that is
significantly larger than other development/building tenants (i.e., an anchor or junior
anchor tenant), that dominant large user(s) is allowed to have a larger sign in accordance
with the following requirements:
a. Maximum height for signs with either single or multiple lines of copy is 96
inches for buildings with 100,000 square feet of floor space or greater.
b. Maximum height for signs with either single or multiple lines of copy is 72
inches for buildings with at least 50,000 square feet but less than 100,000 square feet
of floor space.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.12(E), adopted 8/1/06)
(C) Dimensional letter signs and copy.
(i) Maximum height for a sign with a single line of copy shall not exceed either 30
inches or 37.5% of the display height of the wall facade to which it is attached, whichever
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/665
is less. (Note: Refer to “display height” definition.)
(ii) Maximum height for a sign with multiple lines of copy shall not exceed either 36
inches or 50% of the display height of the wall facade to which it is attached, whichever is
less.
(Ordinance 2010-5-4A, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/10)
(iii) Maximum width shall not exceed 75% of the width of the wall facade for the
premises to which it is attached.
(D) Combination sign and copy.
(i) The height of the cabinet sign portion of the combination sign may not exceed 25%
of the height of the entire sign.
(ii) Maximum height and width dimensions are the same as those dimensions specified
for reverse channel letter signs and copy (see subsection (3)(A) above).
(E) Flat sign and copy.
(i) Maximum height and width dimensions are the same as those dimensions specified
for channel letter signs and copy.
(ii) Copy shall not be located any closer than 1/2 letter height to any sign edge or other
line of copy. Exceptions may be granted when the copy includes or is part of a registered
trademark.
(iii) When more than one size of copy is used, distance requirements to the sign edge
are based on the size of the nearest line of copy.
(iv) When more than one line of copy is used within a sign, distance requirements
between the lines of copy are based on the smaller size line of copy.
(v) When multiple lines of copy are abutted with no spacing between them, the
adjoined multiple lines are considered as one line of copy.
(F) Other unique signs (for major buildings). Specific dimensions will be determined for the
sign as part of the site plan approval process for the building and sign.
(4) Lighting. Attached primary business identification signs (facade-mounted) may be illuminated
only by the following methods as specifically prescribed for each type of sign:
(A) Signs with reverse channel letters mounted directly on a building facade may be
illuminated with halo illumination only.
(B) Channel letter signs at allowed locations within the CPDD may be illuminated internally.
(Note: Exposed raceways are not permitted.)
(C) Signs with dimensional letters may be illuminated with external illumination (cutoff,
shielded fixtures) designed and mounted for the purpose of illuminating only the sign and not
the expanse of the building facade.
(D) Combination signs made with both reverse channel letters and a cabinet (box) element
may be illuminated with a combination of halo illumination (for reverse letters or silhouette
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/665
type symbols) and internal illumination lighting only the copy of the sign (for the cabinet part
of the sign).
(E) Flat panel signs may be illuminated only with downward directed, shielded lights
designed and mounted for the purpose of illuminating only the sign and not the expanse of the
building facade.
(F) Other unique signs (for major buildings) approved as part of a site plan approval must be
lighted in accordance with the specific requirements of that site plan approval.
Note: When not required for evening and night business operation, security or other
lighting needs, the town encourages the reduction of sign lighting (dimming or turning
off) during time periods when sign illumination is unnecessary.
(5) Number of signs. One sign of this type is permitted for each street facing (or public parking lot
facing) building facade of the business establishment or organization being identified.
(6) Other limitations. Advertising information (including information about services, products,
locations or subordinate sections within the business premises) is not defined as an identification sign
and is not allowed on the exterior of any building for any business establishment or for other
organizations within the building premises.
(c) Facade-mounted identification sign (fuel dispensing canopy).
(1) Location. Must be mounted on the canopy facade in a position which is centered in the vertical
dimension of the facade and located within the first fifteen (15) feet from the canopy corner in the
horizontal dimension. The sign must be contained within the vertical facade limits of the canopy and
may not extend above the canopy roof line. Except for an allowed accent strip (see below), the sign
must be contained horizontally within the allowed fifteen (15) feet limit, including any color
treatment normally identified with a particular fuel brand. Some of the allowed sign designs (see
“Design” in the following subsection) are restricted by location for use in certain zones and areas of
the CPDD.
(2) Design.
(A) All facade-mounted signs on any canopy must be part of a specified design theme with
respect to sign type, size, and mounting location. These signs must be designed and constructed
as one of the following sign types:
(i) A sign with dimensional, reverse channel symbols and letters.
(ii) A sign consisting of channel letters and symbols fabricated with opaque metal sides
and translucent plastic letters subject to the following limitations:
a. Exposed raceways are not permitted.
b. Channel letter signs may be used only at fuel dispensing establishments located
west of Greenville Avenue (SH 5).
(iii) A sign consisting of three-dimensional letters and symbols.
(iv) A combination sign which includes a reverse channel letter sign and a subordinate
(in size) cabinet sign where only the copy is illuminated and the background of the sign
face is totally opaque.
(v) A flat panel sign.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/665
(B) The color of any canopy fascia must comply with CPDD building color requirements of
exhibit B, paragraph III, 1.f.v. Accent striping (if used) must be limited to one complementary
color and shall consist of only one accent stripe per fascia which is not wider than 12 inches.
(3) Size. These signs must fit within the orthogonal perimeter allowed for each of the specified
designs. The orthogonal perimeter is determined by a line drawn in rectangular fashion at the outmost
points of a sign's height and width. The following size restrictions apply:
(A) Reverse channel letter signs and copy.
(i) Maximum height for a sign with a single line of copy shall not exceed 36 inches or
50% of the height of the canopy facade to which it is attached.
(ii) Maximum height for a sign with multiple lines of copy shall not exceed 48 inches
or 62.5% of the height of the canopy facade to which it is attached.
(iii) Maximum width shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet.
(B) Channel letter signs and copy.
(i) Maximum height for a sign with a single line of copy shall not exceed 30 inches or
37.5% of the height of the canopy facade to which it is attached.
(ii) Maximum height for a sign with multiple lines of copy shall not exceed 36 inches
or 50% of the height of the canopy facade to which it is attached.
(iii) Maximum width shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet.
(C) Dimensional letter signs and copy.
(i) Maximum height for a sign with a single line of copy shall not exceed 30 inches or
37.5% of the height of the canopy facade to which it is attached.
(ii) Maximum height for a sign with multiple lines of copy shall not exceed 36 inches
or 50% of the height of the canopy facade to which it is attached.
(iii) Maximum width shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet.
(D) Combination sign and copy.
(i) The height of the cabinet sign portion of the combination sign may not exceed 25%
of the height of the entire sign.
(ii) Maximum height and width dimensions are the same as those dimensions specified
for reverse channel letter signs and copy.
(E) Flat sign and copy.
(i) Maximum height and width dimensions are the same as those dimensions specified
for channel letter signs and copy.
(ii) Copy shall not be located any closer than 1/4 letter height to any sign edge or other
line of copy.
(iii) When more than one size of copy is used, distance requirements to the sign edge
are based on the size of the largest line of copy.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/665
(iv) When multiple lines of copy are abutted with no spacing between them, the
adjoined multiple lines are considered as one line of copy.
(4) Lighting. Attached canopy signs (facade-mounted) may be illuminated only by the following
methods as specifically prescribed for each type of sign:
(A) Signs with reverse channel letters mounted directly on a canopy facade may be
illuminated with halo illumination only.
(B) Channel letter signs at allowed locations within the CPDD may be illuminated internally.
(Note: Exposed raceways are not permitted.)
(C) Signs with dimensional letters may be illuminated with external illumination (cutoff,
shielded fixtures) designed and mounted for the purpose of illuminating only the sign and not
the expanse of the canopy facade.
(D) Combination signs made with both reverse channel letters and a cabinet (box) element
may be illuminated with a combination of halo illumination (for reverse letters or silhouette
type symbols) and internal illumination lighting only the copy of the sign (for the cabinet part
of the sign).
(E) Flat panel signs may be illuminated only with shielded lights (cutoff type preferred)
designed and mounted for the purpose of illuminating only the sign and not the expanse of the
canopy facade.
Note: When not required for evening and night business operation, security or other
lighting needs, the town encourages the reduction of sign lighting (dimming or turning
off) during time periods when sign illumination is unnecessary.
(5) Number of signs. One sign of this type is permitted for each street facing canopy facade.
(d) Blade identification sign.
(1) Location. Blade identification signs along a pedestrian-oriented street, promenade or walkway
must be mounted perpendicular to the building plane so as to hang out over the pedestrian
way/sidewalk or business entry. All such signage must be hung from a simple horizontal mast or
bracket at a height (minimum 7 feet above finished floor) appropriate to the building facade and
business entry. Such mounting height should be consistent with other signs along the nearby
pedestrian walkway. (Refer to diagram #72, exhibit B, CPDD guidelines).
(2) Design. Blade identification signs must comply with the following design and construction
requirements:
(A) Must include the business/organization name and may include a logo or symbol
indicating the establishment's function or type of business.
(B) The sign may be fabricated with wood, metal, fiberglass or exterior grade foam with
weather-resistant coating. Molded, vacuum-formed fiberglass or plastic blade signs are not
allowed.
(C) Signs may be no larger than twelve (12) square feet in sign face area.
(D) Sign thickness shall not be less than one and one-half inches (1.5").
(E) Customization of painted or other type graphics on the sign face is allowed as are the
edge pattern and the shape of the sign itself (refer to diagram #72, exhibit B, CPDD guidelines).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/665
(3) Lighting. Attached blade signs along pedestrian ways may be illuminated by the ambient light
of the pedestrian area. However, where desired, individual blade signs may also be lighted with
adjacent external illumination such as mast or sign attached shielded floodlights (maximum wattage
of 40 watts per light). Internal illumination is not allowed for blade signs.
(4) Number of signs. One sign of this type is permitted for each separate public entry to the
business from the public pedestrian way, sidewalk or parking lot.
(e) Attached identification sign (other).
(1) Location. These signs may be attached or applied within the horizontal limits of the premises
for the identified business/organization to any location on the lower half of the building facade; to
doors, windows, awnings, canopies, overhangs or other constructed attachments to the building.
(2) Design. Must be consistent with the primary business identification signs (facade or blade) of
the identified business and may include corporate or business logos. These business identification
signs (other) are considered as secondary identification signs which must be subordinate in size and
prominence to the primary facade or blade identification signs of the business/organization being
identified.
(3) Lighting. Most secondary business identification signs of this type will not require special
lighting. However, when used, it must be either:
(A) Halo lighting;
(B) Shielded floodlights designed to illuminate only the sign and not the building facade or
other building element to which the sign is attached.
Note: When not required for evening and night business operation, security or other
reasonable lighting needs, the town encourages the reduction of sign lighting (dimming or
turning off) during time periods when sign illumination is unnecessary.
(4) Number of signs and other limitations. Secondary business identification signs (other) shall be
subject to the following additional restrictions:
(A) No more than two secondary business identification signs shall be allowed per 50 feet of
building frontage facing a front or side street.
(B) Flat, painted plastic or metal signs may not be applied to any building facade.
(C) Advertising information (including information about services, products, locations or
subordinate sections within the business premises) is not defined as an identification sign and is
not allowed on the exterior of any building for any business establishment or for other
organizations within a building premises.
(f) Premises information signs.
(1) Location. This informational signage may be attached within the horizontal limits of the
premises to any location on the exterior building facade, doors or windows. However, as a minimum,
address information (street number) must be in a visible location which is consistent for all individual
premises within the same building.
(2) Design. Customized design is allowed for business information signage.
(3) Lighting. Most business information signs of this type will not require special lighting.
However, when used, it must be shielded, must not shine directly into viewers' eyes and must be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/665
limited in wattage consistent with the sign's intended purpose. Neon lighting is not allowed except as
permitted in subsection (4) which follows.
(4) Number of signs and other limitations. Business information signs are subject to the following
additional restrictions:
(A) Business information signs may not cover more than 25% of any window, facade or door
to which such signage is applied. (Note: Sign size is determined by an orthogonal measurement
of the outer edges of the sign information.)
(B) One neon sign per street facing facade is allowed for any business. Such sign must be
mounted within the business interior premises and may not exceed 1.5 square feet in size.
(Note: Sign size is determined by an orthogonal measurement of the outer edges of the sign
perimeter.)
(C) Advertising information (including information about services, products, locations or
subordinate sections within the business premises) is not defined as a business information sign
and is not allowed on the exterior of any building for any business establishment or for other
organizations within a building premises.
(g) Restaurant menu information signs.
(1) Location. Restaurant menu informational signage (menu boards) may be attached within the
horizontal limits of the restaurant premises to any location on the exterior building facade near the
restaurant entry. As an alternative location, menu boards may be installed permanently as a
freestanding sign in a common area within 10 feet of the restaurant entrance.
(2) Design. Customized design is allowed restaurant menu board signage in accordance with the
following limits:
(A) Menu boards attached to a building facade shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size.
(B) Freestanding menu boards shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in size.
(3) Lighting. Menu boards attached to a building facade must be illuminated with low wattage (not
to exceed 20 watts), downwardly directed and shielded luminaires designed to illuminate only the
sign and not the building facade. Freestanding menu boards, if illuminated, may be illuminated with
downwardly directed and shielded low wattage luminaires for each side of the sign. Note: When not
required for evening and night business operation, security or other reasonable lighting needs, the
town encourages the reduction of sign lighting (dimming or turning off) during time periods when
sign illumination is unnecessary.
(4) Number of signs. One menu board sign is allowed for each primary customer entrance to the
restaurant premises.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.12(E), adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.106 Interior commercial signs
The following requirements govern the display of permanent interior signs within business establishments and
other organizations within the CPDD that are either open to the public or to participating members/invitees of
the establishment:
(1) General requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/665
(A) Permanent interior signs may be used for business information purposes only.
Advertising is not allowed on permanent interior signs.
(B) Any interior signs affixed or attached to storefront doors or windows are subject to the
rules and requirements of this article pertaining to interior signage.
(C) Other signs within the interior premises of a business or organizational establishment are
exempt from the requirements of this article.
(D) Permanent interior signs do not require a sign permit from the town.
(2) Location and size.
(A) Interior signage, whether temporary or permanent, may not collectively cover, occupy or
exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total area of the storefront windows or doors visible to
the public from the exterior of the premises.
(B) Interior signage, whether temporary or permanent, may not collectively cover, occupy or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the area of any individual storefront window or door visible to the
public from the exterior of the premises.
(C) No interior signage may be placed in a location on windows or doors which obscures
clear public view (at normal adult eye levels) into the business/organizational establishment
from the exterior of the premises.
(3) Design. Custom design is allowed. Signs must be professionally prepared and properly attached
to the interior of the windows or doors to which they are affixed.
(4) Lighting.
(A) Lighting of interior commercial signs is not allowed, with the following exception: One
neon (or similar gas) sign per business establishment is allowed for each street facing frontage
for purposes of providing basic business or product/service information (e.g., “Open,”
“Cleaners,” “Donuts,” etc.). Copy for such signs is limited to two words.
(B) No neon sign of this type may exceed three (3) square feet in size. Location requirements
for interior signs must be observed.
Note: When not required for evening and night business operation, security or other
reasonable lighting needs, the town encourages the reduction of sign lighting (dimming or
turning off) during time periods when sign illumination is unnecessary.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.12(F), adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.107 Site directional and information signs
These signs are intended to move pedestrians and vehicles in an orderly fashion to specific locations within a
development.
(1) Location. Uniform in location sites chosen within the development.
(2) Design. Must be of a uniform design as specified in the CPDD guidelines (exhibit B) unless a
different design is approved as part of the development site plan. The CPDD guidelines (exhibit B)
require that signs be mounted on a 3-1/2-inch diameter (square cross-section) tubular pole at a
uniform height of 6 feet above grade. The poles must be colored dark bronze (and painted with
polyester urethane paint).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/665
(3) Lighting. Directional and information signs are not required to be illuminated. If such signs are
illuminated, the following lighting is permitted:
(A) Shielded, downward directed floodlights designed to illuminate only the sign.
(B) Internal illumination which lights only the copy of the sign and not the face or
background of the sign.
Note: When not required for evening and night business operation, security or other
reasonable lighting needs, the town encourages the reduction of sign lighting (dimming or
turning off) during time periods when sign illumination is unnecessary.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.12(G), adopted 8/1/06)
Secs. 3.13.108–3.13.130 Reserved
Part IV. Residential Signs
Sec. 3.13.131 General regulations
General sign regulations (applicable to all permanent residential CPDD and NFPDD signs):
(1) Only signs that are specifically permitted within this regulation may be displayed. All other
signs and types of signs not specifically permitted are forbidden within the CPDD and NFPDD.
(2) A sign shall not rotate, gyrate, blink, flash, or move in any fashion.
(3) Off-premises signs are not permitted.
(4) Roof signs are not permitted.
(5) Sign copy on any sign shall be coordinated in size, color and type style.
(6) Copy shall be applied in a manner which avoids shadow distortion.
(7) Primary attached building identification signs shall be mounted in a position generally centered
in position on the building facade. In no case shall a sign extend in height above the horizontal line
where the building wall plane intersects the building roof line. When mounted on a parapet, no sign
may extend above the parapet wall.
(8) Logo symbols shall not exceed the maximum sign height or be 50% greater than the actual
letter height; symbols may not be located closer than 1/2 letter height to any building edge, window,
door, column, corner, mullion, sign band, canopy or other significant architectural feature. Exceptions
may be granted to these size and location requirements when the logo is part of a registered
trademark.
(9) A sign's background color shall be limited to one color only.
(10) A sign shall not have excessive detail and information which make the sign difficult to read.
(11) Copy color shall contrast with the background color.
(12) When there are multiple individual identifying business signs on a building (e.g., retail strip
center), all signs must be coordinated in size, color and type style.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/665
(13) Paint on nonferrous metals shall be a Matthews acrylic polyurethane or equal self-etching
primer.
(14) Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, any sign authorized in this article
may contain a noncommercial message in lieu of a commercial message.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.13(A), adopted 8/1/06)
Sec. 3.13.132 Permitted signs
(a) Applicability. The following residential signs (with their respective governing requirements stated) are
permitted in the following zones and within residential developments approved for development in all other
CPDD and NFPDD zones:
(1) CPDD zones.
(A) Town Square Zone (Zone C).
(B) Residential Adjacency Zone (Zone D).
(C) Old Highway 5 Zone (Zone G).
(D) Residential Transition Zone (Zone H).
(E) Central Single-Family Preservation Zone (Zone I).
(F) Eastern Single-Family Preservation Zone (Zone L).
(2) NFPDD zones.
(A) Gateway Zone.
(B) Old Mill Road Zone.
(b) Residential development identification signs.
(1) Location. Must be located at and incorporated as part of the development entry or entries.
When constructed on an entry median, must be located so that it does not project into or encroach
upon any sidewalk or sidewalk setback. When not on an entry median, these signs may not be built as
a separate structure and placed in a location in front of any wall built as part of the development
entry.
(2) Design. The sign must be designed so that it is fully integrated with the overall development
entry (or multiple entries) design or with a mall design when identifying one development among
several when located at or along a common entryway (drive, street, etc.). Signs may be designed to
be either part of a development's entry feature wall, or a detached monument sign placed on an entry
median. When designed as a median sign, the sign must not be taller than five (5) feet nor longer than
eight (8) feet. Median signs must have a masonry base that is the same predominant building material
as that of the development being identified.
(3) Lighting. The sign may be illuminated only with either:
(A) Concealed external shielded floodlights; or
(B) Halo lighting.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/665
(c) Site directional and information signs.
(1) Location. Uniform in selected sites within the development.
(2) Design. Must be of a uniform design throughout the CPDD. Signs must be mounted on a 3-1/2-
inch diameter (square cross-section) tubular pole at a uniform height of 6 feet above grade. The poles
must be colored dark bronze (and painted with polyester urethane paint).
(3) Lighting. Directional and information signs will not be illuminated.
(Ordinance 2006-017, sec. 152.13(B), adopted 8/1/06)
Secs. 3.13.133–3.13.160 Reserved
Part V. Major Planned Mixed-Use Development
Sec. 3.13.161 Definitions
Electronic sign. A sign, display, or device that changes its message or copy by programmable electronic or
mechanical processes.
Major planned mixed-use development (MPMD). A development in the town's corporate limits of over 150
contiguous acres as assembled and approved and permitted by the town as a single development with over
1,000,000 planned square feet of commercial, retail, and residential uses, located in one or more of the CPDD
zones.
Official sponsor. An individual, business, association, organization or other interest that has been provided such
status by the entity that owns or controls any given special event, amenity, or facility within the boundaries of
the MPMD.
Permanent stage structure. A nonportable indoor or outdoor structure that is constructed of concrete or stone or
a combination thereof and is:
(1) Open to the public's view;
(2) Consists of a raised platform intended for use as an area for theatrical, musical, or artistic
performances or for speeches or ceremonies; and
(3) Rises at least three feet above the viewing audience's ground level, and is at least 30 feet wide
and 20 feet deep.
Special event. A gathering of persons for an event or activity - including but not limited to a series or “season”
of multiple similarly themed events or - as designated and scheduled by the entity that owns or controls any such
event(s) or activity(ies), provided that the event is otherwise lawful and in compliance with applicable
regulations.
Sec. 3.13.162 Applicability
(a) This part shall apply only to signs located within the boundaries of an MPMD.
(b) This part is in addition to and cumulative of the regulations, requirements, prohibitions, restrictions and
procedures elsewhere in this article that otherwise apply to signs located within an MPMD. In the event of a
direct conflict between a provision of this part and an otherwise applicable provision in this article, this part shall
prevail.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/665
Sec. 3.13.163 Certain signs
(a) Signs advertising or providing a message to the public relating to any object, product, event, service, place,
activity, person, institution, organization or business not located within the boundaries of an MPMD are
prohibited, except to the extent permitted by subsection (b), below, or another provision of this part.
(b) The types of signs described in subsection (a), above, are permitted provided, however, that the face of
such signs may not exceed 50" x 70" and must be installed inside of sign structures where the face of the sign is
enclosed behind glass or other similar transparent material commonly used for backlit signs.
Sec. 3.13.164 Certain banners
(a) In addition to other types of banners permitted under this article, banners are permitted in an MPMD year
round and may be up to 30 square feet in size, provided, however, that they relate only to:
(1) Businesses, organizations, or tenants located within the boundaries of the MPMD; or
(2) Special events, amenities, or facilities located within the boundaries of the MPMD and/or the
official sponsor(s) of such special events.
(b) Banners are subject to a one-time permit approval and must be kept in good repair or will be subject to
removal. Removal of a banner due to failure to maintain it in good repair results in automatic expiration of the
permit at the time of removal.
Sec. 3.13.165 Additions to certain existing signs or structures
Signs located in proximity to and identifying special events, amenities, or facilities located within the boundaries
of the MPMD and/or the official sponsors of such special events, amenities or facilities may be:
(1) Located and secured - in accordance with standard engineering principles - above a permanent
stage structure; provided, however, that the sign face does not exceed eight feet in width and eight
feet in height;
(2) Located within and attached to the interior of the fencing of an enclosed area used for beach
and sand volleyball purposes; provided, however that the face of such signs not exceed eight feet in
width, four feet in height, and the total number of such signs may not exceed 24; or
(3) Attached to or within ten feet of an operable motor vehicle, provided that:
(A) The vehicle is of the type marketed and sold as the primary business of the official
sponsor;
(B) Is of the current or year-end model year at any time during which the vehicle is located
within the boundaries of the MPMD;
(C) The vehicle must not be operated at any time when such sign is being displayed (other
than to be moved to or from the premises of the MPMD);
(D) There may be only a single, temporary sign on or within 10 feet of such vehicle; and
(E) The sign may not exceed three feet in width and two feet in height.
Sec. 3.13.166 Electronic sign requires CU district application
(a) Each MPMD may apply for one or more locations within the MPMD to become a conditional use permit
district (CU district) in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 14, article 14.02, division 11 of this
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/665
code.
(b) Before submitting an application for a CU district, the person(s) representing the MPMD must meet for a
preapplication conference with town staff. This meeting should result in a consensus between said representative
and town staff in keeping with the town vision and goals relating to appropriate placement of the electronic sign
within the MPMD and general technical requirements.
(c) If CU district zoning is approved by the town, it must be limited to those areas of the MPMD that are
necessary for the sign(s) to be located, as depicted on a site plan submitted in accordance with the CU district
zoning application procedures.
(d) A CU district zoning is the only method by which an electronic sign may be approved by the town and
approval by the town council of such a CU zoning district shall constitute the final sign permit required to be
obtained from the town for such sign. If CU district zoning is approved by the town council for an electronic
sign, said CU district zoning shall expressly state any additional conditions to which the electronic sign must
conform.
(e) Before any construction of or placement of an electronic sign in the MPMD, the applicant must also obtain
a duly issued permit from the state agency responsible for granting permits for electronic signs and the sign
must, at a minimum, conform to all applicable provisions of state law and regulations.
(f) As between any conflict between the provisions of state law/regulations and the conditions required by the
town under the CU district zoning, the more restrictive of such laws/regulations or conditions shall prevail.
(g) If CU district zoning is approved by the town for a portion of the MPMD upon which an electronic sign
may be located, such sign is exempted from the regulations under this article of this code, unless to the extent
the conditions required by the town provide otherwise.
Sec. 3.13.167 Additional electronic sign regulations
(a) An electronic sign may not:
(1) Be illuminated by flashing, intermittent, or moving lights;
(2) Contain or display animated, moving video, or scrolling advertising;
(3) Consist of a static image projected on a stationary object; or
(4) Be a mobile sign located on a truck or trailer.
(b) Each message on an electronic sign must be displayed for at least eight seconds. A change of message
must be accomplished within two seconds and must occur simultaneously on the entire sign face.
(c) An electronic sign must:
(1) Contain a default mechanism that freezes the sign in one position if a malfunction occurs; and
(2) Automatically adjust the intensity of its display according to natural ambient light conditions.
(d) An electronic sign must contain only advertising or providing a message to the public relating to any
object, product, event, service, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business located within the
boundaries of the MPMD.
(e) The design of the electronic sign must be approved by a structural professional engineer licensed to
practice in the state. Certification of approval by the engineer must be in writing and delivered to the town along
with all other required application materials.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/665
(Ordinance 2012-1-3C adopted 1/3/12)
ARTICLE 3.14 OUTDOOR LIGHTING
Sec. 3.14.001 Purpose; applicability; creation of lighting districts
(a) Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to regulate the installation and use of outdoor night
lighting fixtures in the town and improve nighttime public safety, utility and security by restricting the nighttime
emission of light rays which are sources of light trespass and unnecessary glare and are detrimental to the safety
and security of persons, property, and vehicular traffic. Unwanted nighttime light detracts from the traditional
aesthetic values of the town; the town wishes to limit light pollution and preserve the naturally dark skies.
(b) Applicability.
(1) The provisions of this article shall apply to all outdoor lighting within the town regardless of
purpose, except that active public safety operations of the town shall be exempted. In addition to the
provisions of this article, outdoor lighting installations in the Commercial Planned Development
District (CPDD) shall also comply with lighting standards established in Ordinance 2014-9-11B, as
amended or may be amended in the future. Unless noted otherwise, lighting standards established for
the CPDD in Ordinance 2014-9-11B, as amended or may be amended in the future, shall supersede in
the event a conflict exists with the provisions of this article.
(2) Existing outdoor fixtures that are nonconforming but were legally installed prior to the
effective date of this article are excluded for the duration of their useful lives. However, the owners
and operators of such currently installed lighting shall shield or adjust their lighting to eliminate glare
and prevent light trespass, where required by the shielding requirements, within a period of six
months from the effective date of this article.
(3) A lighting plan shall be filed whenever a landscape plan is required as part of a plat. A
landscape plan is required when any building, construction, or development requires platting or site
plan approval.
(4) Outdoor lighting installations shall comply with all applicable building and electrical codes of
the town, state, and federal government.
(5) The town commits to making use of adaptive controls and/or curfews during nonactive hours in
any future installation of municipally-owned lighting that wasn't installed for the purposes of public
safety.
(c) Creation of lighting districts. The zoning districts established in these regulations are consolidated into
lighting districts to allow for uniform lighting from one district to the other. The lighting districts are as follows:
(1) District 1. Includes the CPDD. The boundaries of the CPDD are established in Ordinance
2014-9-11B, as amended or may be amended in the future. Said ordinance is available electronically
on the town planning department's webpage and a copy is kept as an official town record in the
custody of the town secretary's office.
(2) District 2. Includes all areas outside of the CPDD.
Sec. 3.14.002 Definitions
Accent lighting. Lighting used to emphasize or draw attention to a special object or building.
Candela. A measure of luminous intensity in a certain direction. Useful in determining how much light is shining out of a
fixture and in what direction.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/665
Fixture. The assembly that holds the lamp in a lighting system. It includes the elements designed to give light output
control, such as a reflector (mirror) or defractor (lens), the ballast, the housing and the attachment parts.
Floodlight. A luminaire designed to project or “flood” its light in a defined area. Floodlights are directional in character.
Footcandle. A measure of illuminance, i.e., visible light falling on a given surface. One footcandle (fc) is equal to one
lumen per square foot. Illumination can be measured in footcandles both horizontally and vertically with an illumination
photometer.
Full cutoff fixture. Outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that light rays emitted by the fixture (either directly
from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture) are projected below the horizontal plane passing through the lowest point on
the fixture from which light is emitted.
Glare. The sensation produced by luminance within the visual field that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which
the eyes are adapted to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. Note: The magnitude of
the sensation of glare depends upon such factors as the size, position, and luminance of the source and the luminance to
which the eyes are adapted.
IESNA. Illumination Engineering Society of North America, an association of professionals in the field of lighting and
related professions.
Illuminance. Luminous flux incident on a surface per unit area. Illuminance is normally expressed in footcandles (lumens
per square foot) or lux (lumens per square meter).
Installed. Set up and fixed in position for use.
Light pollution. Artificial light that causes a detrimental effect on the environment, or astronomical enjoyment of the
night sky, or causes undesirable glare or unnecessary illumination of adjacent properties.
Light trespass. Light falling where it is not wanted or needed, generally light from one property that shines onto another
property or onto the public right-of-way.
Lighting plan. A plan used for an approval process or construction indicating all site improvements and the number,
location, type of fixture, and manufacturer's data on all the proposed lighting, both pole- and building-mounted.
Lumen. A measure of visible light power or luminous flux generated by a light source.
Luminaire. A complete lighting unit, consisting of a lamp(s), reflector, refractor, lens, wiring, and sockets. Often referred
to as a “fixture.”
Luminance. Luminance flux per unit solid angle. Luminance is normally expressed in candelas per square meter (lumens
per square meter per steradian) or footlamberts (1/pi lumens per square foot per steradian). Luminance is composed of the
light impingent on a scene and the light reflected back from all of the objects and surfaces in the scene.
Luminous flux. Visible light power or light energy per unit of time. The unit of measure is lumens.
Mounting height. The vertical distance between the ground and the bottom of a light source.
Outdoor light fixtures. Outdoor lighting or reflective surfaces, lamps, and similar devices, either portable or permanently
installed in an open air environment and not within an enclosed structure, which are used for illumination or advertisement.
Such devices shall include but are not limited to search, spot, and flood lights for:
(1) Buildings and structures.
(2) Parking lot lighting.
(3) Billboards and other signs.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/665
(4) Product display area lighting.
(5) Recreational areas.
(6) Landscape lighting.
(7) Street lighting.
(8) Building overhangs and open canopies.
(9) Security.
Pole light. An outdoor light mounted on a wooden or metal pole 12 or more feet in height, for the purpose of illuminating
a yard or other open area.
Shielded. The light source is equipped with internal and/or external shields and louvers to prevent glare from emitted light
at normal viewing angles.
Sunset. The time of day that the sun sets below the horizon.
Uniformity ratio. The ratio of average illuminance on a surface to the minimum illuminance.
Watt. A measure of power, most often electric power.
Sec. 3.14.003 Penalty
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be subject to the same penalty
as provided for in the Code of Ordinances of the town, as heretofore amended, and upon conviction shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense, and every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed to
constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 3.14.004 Prohibited lighting
(a) The installation of any unshielded non-cutoff mercury vapor fixture or lamp, low-intensity neon, krypton,
or argon discharge tubes for use as outdoor lighting is prohibited. Such lamps or tubes may be used as indirect
lighting sources for signs constructed and lighted in accordance with applicable provisions of the town code.
(b) The use of a laser source light or any similar high-intensity light (such as a strobe light) is prohibited.
(c) The operation of searchlights is prohibited.
(d) The use of general floodlighting fixtures shall be prohibited unless they meet the shielding requirements of
this article.
Sec. 3.14.005 Exemptions generally
(a) The following are exempt from the provisions of this article:
(1) Seasonal displays using multiple low-wattage bulbs provided that they do not constitute a fire
hazard or create a nuisance and are maintained in a safe and orderly condition.
(2) Vehicular lights and all temporary emergency lighting needed by the police department, fire
department or other emergency services.
(3) All temporary lighting used for the construction or repair of roadways, utilities or other public
infrastructure.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/665
(4) All lighting required by local, county, state or federal governmental agencies.
(b) The code enforcement officer of the town may authorize additional property-specific exemptions when
proposed outdoor lighting does not conflict with the purposes of this article. An application for such an
exemption must be made in writing and include an outdoor lighting plan pursuant to section 3.14.006.
Temporary lighting for special events shall be reviewed in this manner.
Sec. 3.14.006 Temporary exemptions
(a) Application. Any person may submit a written request, on a form prepared by the jurisdiction, to the
town's building official for a temporary exemption from the requirements of this article. The request for
temporary exemption shall contain the following information:
(1) Specific exemption or exemptions requested;
(2) Type and use of outdoor fixture involved;
(3) Duration of time for the requested exemption;
(4) Total wattage of lamp or lamps;
(5) Proposed location on the premises (if any) and addresses of premises thereunder;
(6) Physical size of outdoor light fixture(s) and type of shielding provided;
(7) Such other data and information as may be required by the building official.
(b) Approval; duration. The town's code enforcement officer shall have five business days from the date of
submission of the request for temporary exemption to act in writing on the request. If approved, the exemption
shall be valid for not more than 30 days from the date of issuance of the approval. The approval shall be
renewable at the discretion of the town's building official upon a consideration of all the circumstances. Each
such renewed exemption shall be valid for not more than 30 days.
(c) Appeals. If the request for temporary exemption is disapproved, the person making the request will have
the appeal rights provided in section 3.14.007.
Sec. 3.14.007 Appeals
Any person substantially aggrieved by any decision of the town's building official made in administration of this article has
the right and responsibility to appeal to the town manager.
Sec. 3.14.008 General standards
The following standards apply to all nonexempt or otherwise approved outdoor lighting fixtures and applications:
(1) Nuisance prevention. All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be designed, located, installed, aimed
downward or toward structures, retrofitted if necessary, and maintained in order to prevent glare,
light trespass and light pollution. Avoiding nuisance lighting means using “neighbor friendly”
lighting which avoids the use of outdoor lights which shine or reflect light onto or into a neighboring
residence or other facility so as to annoy or disturb the persons occupying the residence or facility.
(2) Maintenance. Fixtures and lighting systems shall be in good working order and maintained in a
manner that serves the original intent of the lighting system.
(3) Lighting levels. Outdoor lighting installations shall be designed to avoid harsh contrasts in
lighting levels between the project site and the adjacent properties.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/665
(A) District 1 shall conform with lighting level standards and lumen maximums established
in Ordinance 2014-9-11B, as amended or may be amended in the future.
(B) District 2 shall conform with lighting level standards established by this article. District 2
has a maximum limit of 50,000 lumens per developed acre for all lighting. The 50,000 lumens
per developed acre maximum in district 2 applies to all lighting irrespective of shielding
condition. Street lighting and lighting in public right-of-way (ROW) or easements don't count
towards the 50,000 lumens per developed acre maximum.
(4) Lamp types. LED, metal halide, high-pressure sodium or low-pressure sodium may be used for
all new security lights and street lighting installed in district 2. Low-wattage incandescent, compact
fluorescent and LED lamps may be used for residential lighting, entrance lighting and landscape
lighting. Lamp types in district 1 shall conform to the applicable provisions of Ordinance 2014-9-
11B, as amended or may be amended in the future.
(5) Fixture types. All new outdoor lighting shall use full cutoff luminaires with the light source
downcast and fully shielded with no light emitted above the horizontal plane, with the following
exceptions:
(A) Fixtures in district 2 that have a maximum output of 1,000 lumens (equivalent to one
highly efficient 40-watt incandescent lamp) or less, regardless of the number of bulbs, may be
left unshielded provided that they have an opaque top to prevent the light from shining directly
upward. However, partial (e.g., obscured glass) or full shielding is preferred to control light
output in all situations. Unshielded and partially shielded lighting in district 2 shall not exceed
10,000 lumens per developed acre. Unshielded lighting in district 1 shall conform to applicable
provisions of Ordinance 2014-9-11B, as amended or may be amended in the future.
(B) Fixtures in district 2 that have a maximum output of 1,500 lumens (equivalent to one
highly efficient 60-watt incandescent lamp) may be partially shielded using a semitransparent
barrier, provided that the lamp does not cause light trespass, no direct glare is produced and the
fixture has an opaque top to keep light from shining directly upward. Unshielded and partially
shielded lighting in district 2 shall not exceed 10,000 lumens per developed acre. Partially
shielded lighting in district 1 shall conform to applicable provisions of Ordinance 2014-9-11B,
as amended or may be amended in the future.
(C) Floodlights that do not meet the definition of full cutoff may be used if permanently
directed downward, if no light is projected above the horizontal plane and if fitted with external
shielding to prevent glare and off-site trespass. Unshielded floodlights are prohibited.
(D) Fixtures that are specifically approved by the planning and zoning commission and town
council submitted as part of a lighting plan for a project development in district 2, or fixtures
approved through an alternate submission process for district 1 provided in Ordinance 2014-9-
11B, as amended or may be amended in the future.
(E) Fixtures that may be required for municipal or public safety purposes for matters
concerning emergencies and the safety and welfare of the public.
(6) Accent lighting. Architectural features may be illuminated by up-lighting, provided that the
light is effectively contained by the structure, the lamps are low intensity to produce a subdued
lighting effect, and no glare or light trespass is produced. For flags, statues, public art or other objects
of interest that cannot be illuminated with down-lighting, upward lighting may only be used in the
form of one narrow cone spotlight that confines the illumination to the object of interest.
(7) Temporary lighting. Usage of temporary lighting shall conform to the following requirement:
lighting (including strings of lamps/bulbs) for parties, celebrations, and other social gatherings is
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/665
allowed, provided that the overall requirements of this article are met. This type of lighting is
restricted to a duration of three days or fewer and can be used no more than four times per year.
(8) Equivalent applications. The provisions of this article are not intended to prevent the use of any
design, material or method of installation or operation not specifically described herein, provided that
the town has approved such alternative applications. An alternative proposal may be approved if it
provides at least approximate equivalence to the applicable specific requirements of this article or if it
is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this article.
Sec. 3.14.009 Lighting plan
(a) Approval process. In district 2 when the outdoor lighting installation or replacement is part of a
development proposal for which a site plan or plat is required under these regulations, the planning and zoning
commission shall review and recommend approval or disapproval to the town council for the lighting installation
as part of its site plan or platting process. In district 1 lighting plans are submitted in accordance with Ordinance
2014-9-11B, as amended or may be amended in the future. All exterior lighting installations or replacements
shall be required to comply with the requirements of this article and all other applicable town lighting
regulations.
(b) Lighting plans submitted for district 1 or district 2 must conform with this section.
(c) Exterior lighting fixtures, whether attached to a building and/or freestanding, shall be of harmonious
design.
(d) The applicant shall submit to the town sufficient information, in the form of an overall exterior lighting
plan, to enable the town to determine that the applicable provisions will be satisfied. The lighting plan shall
include subsections (1) through (5) below and also conform to subsections (6) through (14) below:
(1) A site plan, drawn to scale, showing buildings, landscaping, parking area, and all proposed
exterior fixtures including lamps, supports, reflectors and other devices.
(2) Specifications for all proposed lighting fixtures including photometric data, designation as
IESNA full cutoff fixtures where required, and other descriptive information on the fixtures.
(3) Proposed mounting height of all exterior mounting fixtures.
(4) Luminance level point by point diagrams showing that the proposed installation conforms to
footcandle lighting level standards.
(5) Drawings of all relevant building elevations showing the fixtures, the portions of the walls to
be illuminated, the illuminance levels of the walls, and the aiming points for any remote light
fixtures.
(6) All exterior floodlights, pole lights, and carriage lights should be designed or retrofitted with
shielding in a manner such that all of the luminous flux falls upon either the surface of the structure
to be illuminated or on the ground wholly within the property on which it is installed.
(7) All new lighting installations shall include timers, dimmers, and/or sensors to reduce overall
energy consumption and eliminate unneeded lighting when required.
(8) When an outdoor lighting installation is being modified, extended, expanded, or added to, the
entire outdoor lighting installation shall be subject to the requirements of this article and all other
applicable town lighting regulations, and shall be reviewed by the town manager or his or her
designee.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/665
(9) Expansions, additions, or replacements to outdoor lighting installations shall be designed to
avoid harsh contrasts in color and/or lighting levels.
(10) Electrical service to outdoor lighting fixtures shall be underground.
(11) Proposed lighting installations for district 2 that are not covered by the special provisions in
this article may be approved only if the planning and zoning commission and town council find they
are designed to minimize glare, do not direct light beyond the boundaries of the area being
illuminated or onto adjacent properties or streets, and do not result in excessive lighting levels.
Proposed lighting installations for district 1 that are not covered by the special provisions in this
article are addressed in Ordinance 2014-9-11B, as amended or may be amended in the future.
(12) In the case of flags, statues, or other top-of-pole mounted objects which cannot be illuminated
with down-lighting, upward lighting may be used only in the form of one narrow-cone spotlight
which confines the illumination to the object of interest.
(13) Shielding requirements. In district 2 full cutoff shielding is required on undirected light
sources greater than 1,500 lumens, and for directed or focused light sources with a spot output of 900
lumens or greater. Full cutoff shielding requirements for district 1 are addressed in Ordinance 2014-
9-11B, as amended or may be amended in the future.
(14) Light trespass. The amount of stray light from fixtures within a property on the vertical planes
at a point 1.5 meters (4.88 feet) inside of a residential property line adjacent to the property shall be
limited to a maximum of 0.20 footcandles in district 2. Light trespass requirements for district 1 are
addressed in Ordinance 2014-9-11B, as amended or may be amended in the future.
(e) Lighting plans written according to the requirements listed in subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d) of this
section shall contain descriptive data sufficiently complete to enable the plans' examiners to readily determine
whether compliance has been met. If such plans do not enable this ready determination by reason of the nature
or configuration of the proposed devices, fixtures or lamps, the applicant may be required to submit analyses and
data performed and certified by a recognized testing laboratory as evidence of compliance.
(f) Should any outdoor light fixtures or the type of light source therein be changed after the plan has been filed
and approved, a change request must be submitted to the town for approval. The lighting plan change request
must be received by the town prior to the change and it must contain adequate information to assure compliance.
Sec. 3.14.010 Street lighting
Street lighting requirements can be found in chapter 3 (building regulations), article 3.16 (streets and sidewalks), section
3.16.037 (street lighting) of the town code.
Sec. 3.14.011 Parking lot lighting
(a) Parking lot lighting shall be designed to provide the minimum lighting necessary to ensure adequate
vision, security and comfort in parking areas, and to not cause glare or direct illumination onto adjacent
properties or streets.
(b) Unless a different kind of fixture is specifically approved by the town council as part of a development site
plan approval process, all lighting fixtures serving parking lots shall have total shielding of the light source at a
cutoff angle of less than 90 degrees and be located so that the bare lightbulb, lamp or light source is completely
shielded from the direct view of an observer five feet above the ground at the point at which the cutoff angle
intersects the ground.
(c) All parking lots which are used after dark shall be illuminated beginning not later than one-half hour after
sunset, continuing to provide lighting throughout the hours of normal business operation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/665
(d) Parking area lighting standards in the various lighting districts are as shown in table 1.
Table 1. Parking Lighting Standards
District 1 District 2
Maximum mounting height*
Attached to a building 20 ft. 20 ft.
Freestanding 35 ft. 20 ft.
Maximum permitted maintained average horizontal
illumination at ground level
** 2.0 fc
* Mounting height is the vertical distance between the ground and the bottom of the lighting fixture.
** See Ordinance 2014-9-11B, as amended or may be amended in the future.
Sec. 3.14.012 Outdoor performance facilities and recreational activities
(a) Generally. Outdoor nighttime performance events and recreational activities (concerts, athletic contests,
driving ranges, etc.) have unique lighting needs. Illumination levels vary, depending on the nature of the event.
The regulations in this section are intended to allow adequate lighting for such events while minimizing sky
glow, reducing glare and unwanted illumination of surrounding streets and properties, and reducing energy
consumption.
(b) Design plan. A lighting design shall be submitted which shows in detail the proposed lighting installation.
The design plan shall include a discussion of the lighting requirements of various areas and how those
requirements will be met.
(c) Dual system. The main lighting of the event (spotlighting or floodlighting, etc.) shall be turned off no more
than 30 minutes after the end of the event. A low-level lighting system shall be installed to facilitate patrons
leaving the facility, cleanup, nighttime maintenance, etc. The low-level lighting system shall provide an average
horizontal illumination level, at grade level, of no more than 3.0 footcandles.
(d) Primary playing areas. Where playing fields or other special activity areas are to be illuminated, lighting
fixtures shall be specified, mounted, and aimed so that their beams fall within the primary playing area and
immediate surroundings, and so that no direct illumination is directed off of the site.
(e) Parking areas. Lighting for parking areas shall meet the requirements suggested elsewhere in this article
and additional requirements for district 1 provided in Ordinance 2014-9-11B, as amended or may be amended in
the future.
(f) Pedestrian areas. Areas intended solely for pedestrian circulation shall be provided with a minimum level
of no less than 0.1 footcandles and no more than 0.2 footcandles. A uniformity ratio of average illumination to
minimum illumination shall not exceed 4:1.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/665
(g) Security lighting. Security lighting shall meet the requirements elsewhere in this article and additional
requirements for district 1 provided in Ordinance 2014-9-11B, as amended or may be amended in the future.
Sec. 3.14.013 Security lighting
(a) Definition. For the purposes of this section, security lighting is defined as exterior lighting other than
road/street, parking lot or recreational activity/facility lighting which is provided for the following purposes:
(1) Lighting intended to reduce risk (real or perceived) of personal attack.
(2) Lighting intended to discourage intruders, vandals, or burglars, and to protect property.
(b) Standards for all lighting districts.
(1) All security lighting fixtures shall be shielded and aimed so that illumination is directed only
within the owner's property boundaries and not cast on other areas. In no case shall lighting be
directed above a horizontal plane through the top of the lighting fixture, and the fixture shall include
shields that prevent the light source or lens from being visible from adjacent properties and
roadways. The use of general floodlighting fixtures shall be prohibited unless they meet the shielding
requirements of this article and additional requirements for district 1 provided in Ordinance 2014-9-
11B, as amended or may be amended in the future.
(2) Security lighting may illuminate vertical surfaces (e.g., building facades and walls) up to a
level eight feet above grade or eight feet above the bottoms of doorways or entries, whichever is
greater.
(3) Security lighting fixtures may be mounted on poles located no less than ten feet from the
perimeter of the property boundary.
(4) Security lights intended to illuminate a perimeter (such as a fence line) shall include motion
sensors and be designed to be off unless triggered by an intruder located within five feet of the
perimeter. The zone of activation sensors must be within the property boundaries of the property
wishing to be illuminated.
(5) Security lights shall combine timers with dusk-to-dawn photocells to ensure lights are on only
when it is dark.
(6) Security lighting standards in the various lighting districts are as shown in table 2.
(7) In addition to the application materials set forth in the general provisions of this article,
applications for security lighting installations shall include a written description of the need for and
purposes of the security lighting, a site plan showing the area to be secured and the location of all
security lighting fixtures, specifications of all fixtures, the horizontal and vertical angles in which
light will be directed, and adequate cross-sections showing how light will be directed only onto the
area to be secured.
Table 2. Security Lighting Standards
District 1 District 2
Maximum mounting height*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/665
Attached to a building 20 ft. 20 ft.
Freestanding 35 ft. 20 ft.
Maximum permitted maintained average horizontal
illumination level at ground level
not > 4.0 fc not > 0.8 fc
* Mounting height is the vertical distance between the ground and the bottom of the lighting fixture.
Sec. 3.14.014 Lighting of building facades and landscaping
When buildings having symbolic, historic or architectural significance are to be illuminated, a design for the illumination
shall be approved as part of a lighting plan by the planning and zoning commission and town council or approved in
accordance with requirements for district 1 provided in Ordinance 2014-9-11B, as amended or may be amended in the
future. The following provisions shall be met:
(1) The maximum illumination on any vertical surface or angular roof surface shall not exceed 5.0
footcandles.
(2) Lighting fixtures shall be carefully located, aimed, and shielded so that no light is directed onto
adjacent streets or roads.
(3) Lighting fixtures mounted on the building must be of harmonious design with the primary
facade.
(4) To the extent practicable, lighting fixtures shall be directed downward (i.e., below the
horizontal) rather than upward.
(5) In district 2 when landscaping is to be illuminated in a new project development, the planning
and zoning commission and town council shall approve a landscape lighting plan submitted as part of
the project's site plan requirements that shows the location of all lighting fixtures and what
landscaping is to be illuminated. The landscape lighting plan must demonstrate that the installation
will not generate excessive light levels, cause glare, or direct light beyond the landscaping into the
night sky. Reference Ordinance 2014-9-11B, as amended or may be amended in the future, for
regulations pertaining to district 1.
Sec. 3.14.015 Illuminated signs
It is the intent of this section to allow illuminated signs but to ensure that they do not create glare or unduly illuminate the
surrounding area. All signs must also comply with the requirements of the town's sign ordinances. The applicant shall
provide sufficient technical and design information to demonstrate that the following provisions are met:
(1) Externally illuminated signs.
(A) The average level of illumination on the vertical surface of the sign shall not exceed 3.0
footcandles, and the uniformity ratio (the ratio of average to minimum illumination) shall not
exceed 2:1.
(B) Lighting fixtures illuminating signs shall be carefully located, aimed, and shielded so that
light is directed only onto the sign facade.
(C) Light fixtures illuminating signs shall be of a type such that the light source (bulb) is not
directly visible from adjacent streets, roads, or properties.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/665
(D) Fixtures used to illuminate externally illuminated signs shall be top mounted and directed
downward (i.e., below the horizontal).
(2) Internally illuminated signs.
(A) Internally illuminated signs are prohibited within district 2.
(B) Regulations pertaining to internally illuminated signs in district 1 can be found by
referencing Ordinance 2014-9-11B, as amended or may be amended in the future.
Sec. 3.14.016 Walkways, bikeways, sidewalks and parks
Where special lighting is to be provided for walkways, bikeways, sidewalks or parks, the following requirements shall
apply:
(1) The walkway, pathway, sidewalk, or ground area shall be illuminated with bollards.
(2) Lighting fixtures shall be designed to direct light downward, and light sources shall have an
initial output of no more than 900 lumens in district 2. Reference Ordinance 2014-9-11B, as amended
or may be amended in the future, for regulations pertaining to district 1.
Sec. 3.14.017 Canopies and service islands
(a) Lighting levels on service islands and under canopies (e.g., at vehicle fueling stations) shall be adequate to
safely facilitate the activities taking place in such locations. Lighting of such areas shall not be used to attract
attention to the businesses. Signs allowed under the appropriate sections of these regulations shall be used for
that purpose.
(b) Areas on the apron away from the service islands used for parking or vehicle storage shall be illuminated
in accordance with the requirements for parking areas set forth elsewhere in this code.
(c) Areas around the service islands and under canopies shall be illuminated so that the average maintained
illuminance is not more than 20 footcandles.
(d) Light fixtures mounted on canopies shall be recessed so that the lens cover is recessed or flush with the
bottom surface (ceiling) of the canopy.
(e) Lights shall not be mounted on top of a canopy, and the sides (fascias) of the canopy shall not be
illuminated except for specifically illuminating only the signs or logos identifying the facility.
(Ordinance 2017-26 adopted 12/5/17)
ARTICLE 3.15 NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT AND TREE PROTECTION
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.15.001 Title
This article shall be known as and may be referred to as the natural resources management ordinance. (1998
Code, sec. 96.01)
Sec. 3.15.002 Purpose and intent
The purpose of this article is to promote site planning which furthers the preservation of mature trees and natural
areas, to protect trees during construction, to facilitate site design and construction which contribute to the long7/
15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/665
term viability of existing trees and to control the removal of trees when necessary. It is the further purpose of this
article to achieve the following broader objectives:
(1) Prohibit the indiscriminate clearing of property.
(2) Protect and increase the value of residential and commercial properties within the town.
(3) Maintain and enhance a positive image for the attraction of new business enterprises to the
town.
(4) Protect healthy quality trees and promote the natural ecological, environmental and aesthetic
qualities of the town.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.02)
Sec. 3.15.003 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning. Words and terms used in this article, but not defined in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed thereto in the zoning ordinance or other ordinances of the town. Words and terms defined in
two ordinances shall be read in harmony unless there exists an irreconcilable conflict, in which case the
definition contained in this article shall control.
Agricultural use. The use of land to produce plant or animal products, such as the growing of crops, raising and
pasturing of livestock or farming, for commercial purposes and in such quantities so as to be a commercially
viable and profitable operation, with only such periods of dormancy or non-use as are normal and reasonable
pursuant to recognized and generally accepted land management practices. It does not include the processing of
plant or animal products after harvesting or the production of timber or forest products.
Buildable area. That portion of a building site exclusive of the required yard areas on which a structure or
building improvements may be erected and including the actual structure, driveway, parking lot, pool and other
construction as shown on a site plan.
Building pad. The actual foundation area of a building and the area within six feet of the foundation that is used
for construction and grade transition.
Clear-cutting. The removal of all of the trees or a significant majority of the trees within an area.
Critical root zone (CRZ). The area of undisturbed natural soil around a tree defined by a concentric circle with a
radius equal to the distance from the trunk to the outermost portion of the dripline. (See appendix A at the end of
this article.)
Cut/fill. Areas where the natural ground level has been excavated (cut) or fill brought in.
Drip line. A vertical line run through the outermost portion of the canopy of a tree and extending to the ground.
(See appendix A at the end of this article.)
Landscape administrator. The town engineer or his or her designated representative.
Limits of construction. A delineation on the graphic exhibit which shows the boundary of the area within which
all construction activity will occur.
Municipal/public domain property. Means, for example, the town hall, public parks, county property, Corps of
Engineers property, state right-of-way, libraries, fire stations, water tower sites or similar properties.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/665
Protective fencing. Chain-link fence, wire fence, orange vinyl construction fencing, snow fencing or other
similar fencing with a four-foot approximate height.
Selective thinning. The removal of selected trees from within a densely forested area.
Tree. Any self-supporting woody perennial plant which will attain a trunk diameter of two inches or more when
measured at a point four and one-half feet above ground level and normally an overall height of at least 15 feet
at maturity, usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches. It may appear to have several stems or
trunks as in several varieties of oaks.
Tree board. The town tree board, which is hereby created and established. This board shall be the planning and
zoning commission unless otherwise appointed by the town council.
Tree, marginal. A tree which the town has determined may or may not be worthy of preservation depending on
the individual characteristics of the tree. (See appendix C at the end of this article.)
Tree, park. Trees in public parks and all areas owned by the town to which the public has free access as a park.
Tree, protected.
(1) A quality tree that has a diameter of four inches or greater;
(2) An understory tree that has a diameter of two inches or greater; and
(3) A marginal tree that has a diameter of six inches or greater that the landscape administrator has
determined should be saved due to individual characteristics and/or location of the tree.
Tree, quality. A tree which the town has determined typically has significant positive characteristics worthy of
preservation. (See appendix C at the end of this article.)
Tree, street. A tree, or any part of the tree trunk, located on land lying within the public right-of-way.
Tree topping. The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's
crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
Tree, understory. A tree which the town has determined has significant positive characteristics worthy of
preservation and that does not typically attain great size. (See appendix C at the end of this article.)
(1998 Code, sec. 96.03)
Sec. 3.15.004 Penalty
(a) (1) Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who:
(A) Cuts down, destroys, removes, moves or effectively destroys through damaging any
protected tree without first obtaining a tree permit from the town, where required;
(B) Does so in violation of the tree permit; or
(C) Fails to follow the tree replacement procedures set forth in this article;
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined $100 per diameter
inch of the tree(s) removed, altered, or damaged, not to exceed $500 per incident.
(2) The unlawful replacing, cutting down, destroying, removing, moving or effectively destroying
through damaging of each protected tree shall constitute a separate offense and each offense shall
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/665
subject the violator to the maximum penalty set forth herein for each tree.
(b) Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any other provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not to exceed $500 for each
incident.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.99)
Sec. 3.15.005 Conditions for issuance of building permit
No building permit shall be issued unless the applicant signs an application or permit request which states that
all construction activities shall meet the requirements of this article. The building official shall make available to
the applicant a copy of this article or a condensed summary of the relevant aspects pertaining to the type of
permit requested. (1998 Code, sec. 96.20)
Sec. 3.15.006 Conditions for approval of developer's agreement
The town shall not approve a developer's agreement unless it provides that all construction activities shall meet
the requirements of this article. (1998 Code, sec. 96.21)
Sec. 3.15.007 Conditions for acceptance of public improvements
No acceptance of public improvements shall be authorized until all fines for violations of this article have been
paid to the town or otherwise disposed of through the municipal court. No acceptance of public improvements
shall be authorized until all replacement trees have been planted, appropriate payments have been made to the
tree reforestation fund, or an affidavit has been submitted in accordance with the requirements set forth in
section 3.15.078(b). (1998 Code, sec. 96.22)
Sec. 3.15.008 Conditions for issuance of certificate of occupancy
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all fines for violations of this article have been paid to the town
or otherwise disposed of through the municipal court. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all
replacement trees have been planted, appropriate payments have been made to the tree reforestation fund, or an
affidavit has been submitted in accordance with the requirements set forth in section 3.15.078(b). (1998 Code,
sec. 96.23)
Sec. 3.15.009 Fiscal security
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 3.15.005 through 3.15.008, public improvements may be accepted
and certificate of occupancy may be issued before all trees have been replaced if a fiscal security is posted in an
amount equal to the prevailing rate for installed trees with a one-year guarantee, plus 15% to cover
administrative costs. (1998 Code, sec. 96.24)
Sec. 3.15.010 Variances
(a) The town council may authorize variances to any restriction set forth in this article, including but not
limited to the alteration of trees, mitigation requirements, and tree placement, or any other aspect involved in the
preservation of trees. In granting any variance, the town council shall seek a recommendation from the planning
and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission and the town council shall consider the following
factors in making the recommendation or acting on the requested variance:
(1) Whether a literal enforcement of the regulations will create an undue hardship or an
unreasonable practical difficulty on the applicant;
(2) Whether the situation causing the unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty is unique to the
affected property and is not self-imposed;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/665
(3) Whether a reasonable accommodation or alternative solution can be made to accomplish the
desired activity without the alteration of the tree;
(4) Whether the variance will injure and will be wholly compatible with the use and permitted
development of adjacent properties;
(5) Whether the increased development costs caused by preserving the tree create an undue
hardship on the development of the site;
(6) Whether there is any identified adverse effect of the alteration on erosion, soil moisture,
retention, flow of surface waters, and drainage systems;
(7) Whether there is any substantial impact to the buffering of residential areas from the noise,
glare, and visual effects of nonresidential uses;
(8) Whether the tree interferes with a utility service;
(9) Whether the proposed tree replacement procedures adequately mitigate the alteration of the
tree;
(10) Whether the alteration adversely affects the public health, safety or welfare; and
(11) Whether the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purpose of this
article to the greatest degree reasonably possible.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.25)
(b) A person may request a variance from this article by filing the request with the landscape administrator.
Any request for variance shall be accompanied by a completed application and a nonrefundable filing fee in the
amount specified for board of adjustment variances in section A3.000 of the fee schedule in appendix A to this
code. (1998 Code, sec. 96.25; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 3.15.011–3.15.040 Reserved
Division 2. Tree Removal Permit
Sec. 3.15.041 Required
No person, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, remove, move or effectively destroy through damaging
any protected tree situated on property regulated by this article without first obtaining a tree removal permit,
unless otherwise specified in this article. (1998 Code, sec. 96.04)
Sec. 3.15.042 Responsibility for review; appeals
(a) The landscape administrator shall be responsible for the review and approval of all requests for tree
removal permits submitted in accordance with the requirements specified herein.
(1) Deferrals. The landscape administrator may defer the approval of a tree removal permit to the
tree board at his or her discretion.
(2) Appeals. Any decision made by the landscape administrator may be appealed to the tree board.
(b) Any decision made by the tree board may be appealed to the town council. The decision of the town
council shall be final.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.05)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/665
Sec. 3.15.043 Administrative procedures; submittal requirements; fee; expiration
(a) Administrative procedures. The landscape administrator shall establish administrative procedures
necessary to facilitate the implementation and enforcement of this article.
(b) Request for permit. A request for a tree removal permit must be submitted and approved prior to the
removal of any protected tree in the town unless the tree is exempt under a provision of this article. The request
must state the reason the applicant is requesting tree removal.
(c) Fee. All tree removal permits shall be accompanied by a payment made to the town in the amount
specified by the town council in a fee schedule.
(d) Required documents. A tree survey, submitted in accordance with the requirements of appendix D at the
end of this article, is required for all permit requests. Additionally, a construction plan, in accordance with
appendix E at the end of this article, shall be required for new residential and commercial construction and must
include the items referenced in this article and its appendices.
(e) Expiration. Permits for tree removal issued in connection with a building permit or site plan shall be valid
for the period of that building permit's or site plan's validity. Permit(s) for tree removal not issued in connection
with a building permit or a site plan shall become void 180 days after the issue date on the permit.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.06)
Sec. 3.15.044 Action on application
The issuance of a tree removal permit shall be based on the following criteria:
(1) Whether or not a reasonable accommodation or alternative solution can be made to accomplish
the desired activity without the removal of the tree.
(2) The cost of preserving the tree.
(3) Whether the tree is worthy of preservation. Trees listed as marginal trees in appendix C at the
end of this article are usually not considered worthy of preservation, but this shall depend upon the
individual characteristics of the tree.
(4) The effect of the removal on erosion, soil moisture, retention, flow of surface waters and
drainage systems.
(5) The need for buffering of residential areas from the noise, glare, and visual effects of
nonresidential uses.
(6) The extent, if any, that the tree interferes with provision of a utility service.
(7) Whether the proposed tree replacement pursuant to the tree replacement requirements hereof
adequately mitigates the removal of the tree.
(8) Whether the removal affects the public health, safety or welfare.
(9) Whether the requirement places an unreasonable burden on the development.
(10) Whether extraordinary hardship or practical difficulty will result from strict compliance with
these regulations and/or the purpose of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an
alternative proposal.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.07)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/665
Secs. 3.15.045–3.15.070 Reserved
Division 3. Standards and Requirements
Sec. 3.15.071 Clear-cutting
The clear-cutting of land as defined in this article is prohibited. (1998 Code, sec. 96.08)
Sec. 3.15.072 Selective thinning and removal of underbrush
(a) Selective thinning. The removal of selected trees from within a densely forested area, when done in a
professionally accepted manner, shall be allowed as a single permit upon approval by the landscape
administrator. Approval will only be granted when the landscape administrator determines that the selective
thinning is being done in a manner that would enhance the environment and likelihood of survival for the
remaining trees.
(b) Removal of underbrush. The landscape administrator may issue a permit allowing the clearing and
grubbing of brush located within or under the drip lines of protected trees subject to reasonable conditions to
insure the maximum protection for the trees. The permit holder shall clear or grub by hand or with mowers or
other methods deemed appropriate by the landscape administrator to protect adjacent and nearby protected trees.
The use of dozers, loaders, or other heavy earth-moving equipment to clear or grub brush located within or
under the drip lines of protected trees is prohibited.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.09)
Sec. 3.15.073 Protection of roots when trees are removed near protected trees
Where protected tree removal is allowed through an exemption or pursuant to a tree removal permit and the root
system is intertwined with protected trees which are intended to be saved, the tree shall be removed by flush
cutting with the natural level of the surrounding ground. Where stump removal is also desired, stump grinding
shall be allowed, or, upon approval of the landscape administrator, a trench may be cut between the two trees
sufficient to cut the roots near the tree to be removed, thereby allowing removal of the remaining stump without
destruction of the root system of the saved tree. (1998 Code, sec. 96.10)
Sec. 3.15.074 New construction
All new developments that have not yet made application to the town for development or plat approval as of the
effective date of this article shall be subject to the requirements for tree protection and replacement set forth
herein.
(1) Residential subdivisions. In a residential subdivision, all protected trees that the landscape
administrator determines must be altered in order to install utility lines within public right-of-way or
utility easements or drainage easements as shown on an approved final plat, or to achieve the cut/fill
drainage as designated on the master drainage construction plan and approved by the town engineer,
shall be exempt from the tree replacement and tree protection requirements of this article. Any
protected trees within these areas that the landscape administrator determines do not have to be
altered shall be subject to the tree protection requirements, but not to the tree replacement
requirements, of this article. All other areas of the subdivision shall be subject to both the tree
replacement and the tree protection requirements, and all other provisions of this article. Utility and
street layouts, however, may be altered during plan review by the town engineer in order to save
specimen trees.
(2) Single-lot residential development. In a single-lot residential development, all areas within the
footprint of a building pad site, driveways, public sidewalks, patios, septic tank and lateral utility
lines, parking area, and pool and associated deck area shall be exempt from the tree replacement and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/665
tree protection requirements of this article when conducted in compliance with sections 3.15.041,
3.15.072, 3.15.073, 3.15.079, and 3.15.080. All other areas of the lot shall be subject to both the tree
replacement and the tree protection requirements, and all other provisions of this article, unless
exempted by other provisions of this article.
(3) Nonresidential development. All areas within street rights-of-way, utility or drainage easements
as shown on an approved final plat, areas designated as cut/fill on the master construction plan
approved by the landscape administrator, plus fire lanes, parking areas and building pad as shown on
an approved site plan shall be exempt from the tree protection and replacement requirements
specified herein. Utilities, fire lanes, parking areas and street layouts, however, may be altered during
plan review by the town engineer in order to save specimen trees.
(4) Permit requirements. A tree removal permit shall not be required for removal of a protected
tree within an area noted in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. However, a permit must be
obtained prior to the removal of any other protected tree on the property.
(5) Landscape administrator review.
(A) Residential development. A developer shall be required to furnish a tree survey showing
all proposed improvements (for example, rights-of-way, easements, lot patterns, cut/fill and the
like) with the submittal of a site plan, development plan, preliminary plat or final plat,
whichever occurs first. The tree survey shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements
set forth in appendix D at the end of this article and shall be prepared on a sheet drawn to an
appropriate scale to adequately show individual tree locations or on a computer disk in dxf,
dwg, dgn, or other format acceptable to the landscape administrator.
(B) Nonresidential development. A developer shall be required to furnish a tree survey
showing all proposed improvements (for example, rights-of-way, easements, lot patterns,
cut/fill, fire lanes, parking areas and building pads and the like) with the submittal of a site plan,
development plan, construction plan, plot plan or building permit application, whichever occurs
first. The tree survey shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements set forth in
appendix D at the end of this article and shall be prepared on a sheet drawn to an appropriate
scale to adequately show individual tree locations or on a computer disk in dxf, dwg, dgn, or
other format acceptable to the landscape administrator.
(C) Consultation with landscape administrator. It is highly recommended that the developer
consult with the landscape administrator and submit the required tree survey for review as early
as possible so as to minimize changes in preliminary or final plats and to determine that there is
adequate area for the proposed improvements after tree protection and replacement have been
taken into consideration.
(D) Procedures. The landscape administrator will evaluate the required tree survey to
determine whether the developer has made a good-faith effort to save as many protected trees as
possible. The administrator will forward review comments to the planning and zoning
commission for consideration regarding denial or approval of the development. If the review
involves a document that normally does not require the approval of the planning and zoning
commission, the administrator will follow the procedures in sections 3.15.041 through
3.15.044.
(6) Parking areas. When a nonresidential development consists of extra parking spaces beyond
110% of the minimum parking spaces required by the zoning ordinance, the developer shall be
required to replace a percentage of the trees removed or make a payment into the tree restoration
fund. The replacement trees shall be calculated by multiplying the total diameter of trees removed in
all parking spaces by the ratio of the extra parking spaces to the total number of parking spaces (total
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/665
diameter of trees removed x extra parking spaces/total parking spaces). The replacement trees shall
be provided in accordance with section 3.15.078.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.11)
Sec. 3.15.075 Homestead and agricultural property
(a) Homestead property. The owner of property that is used for an individual residence or homestead shall be
exempt from the tree protection and replacement requirements specified herein as long as the tree is located
within a total area of two acres surrounding the owner's residence and the residence is used as a homestead.
(b) Agricultural property. The owner of property which is zoned AG (agricultural) and actively used for
agricultural purposes shall be permitted to remove up to seven protected trees per calendar year without
obtaining a permit. Protected trees removed in excess of seven will require permits. It is not the intent of this
article to prohibit the clearing of land for legitimate agricultural use. The property owner shall request the
landscape administrator to make an on-site inspection of the property to be cleared and provide the landscape
administrator the purpose for the clearing. If the landscape administrator determines the clearing of land to be
for a legitimate agricultural reason, he or she will issue a tree removal permit.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.12)
Sec. 3.15.076 Municipal/public domain property, rights-of-way and easements
All construction and maintenance activities within municipal/public domain property or rights-of-way or
easements held by the town, franchised utility companies or other entities shall be subject to the requirements for
tree protection and replacement specified as follows:
(1) Removal of protected trees. A tree removal permit shall not be required for removal of a
protected tree. However, no construction or maintenance activity that may cause the removal of a
protected tree shall begin until construction plans showing protected trees to be removed and the
location of replacement trees have been approved by the landscape administrator.
(2) Acceptable trees. The landscape administrator shall maintain a list of trees acceptable for
planting along streets and within parks and other public areas. Trees other than those listed as
acceptable may only be planted upon approval of the landscape administrator.
(3) Street tree spacing. The spacing of street trees shall be in accordance with recommendations of
the landscape administrator and article 14.02 (zoning) of the town's Code of Ordinances. Closer
spacing or group plantings may be approved by the landscape administrator in unique situations and
when recommended by a registered landscape architect. All trees planted along or within public
rights-of-way or easements where the drip line of the projected mature tree falls within asphalt or
concrete pavements shall be installed with adequate root barriers at a three-foot minimum depth to
prevent moisture-seeking roots from growing under pavements.
(4) Public tree care. The town shall have the right to plant, prune and maintain street trees and park
trees within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be
necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of the public
properties. The town may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in
an unsafe condition, or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas
lines, water lines or other public improvements, or which is affected with any injurious fungus,
disease, insect or other pest.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.13)
Sec. 3.15.077 Exemptions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/665
A tree removal permit and tree protection and replacement requirements shall not be required under any of the
following circumstances. The burden of proof of a qualified exemption is upon the remover of a tree. An
exemption pursuant to subsections (1) through (4) of this section shall be granted by the landscape administrator
prior to removal of any tree. Exemptions will be granted for any of the following reasons:
(1) Preexisting conditions. All construction activities for which final construction plans and
building permit applications have been submitted prior to the effective date of this article shall be
exempt.
(2) Diseased trees. The tree is diseased, damaged beyond the point of recovery or in danger of
falling as determined by a certified arborist prior to the removal of the tree. The removal of a
diseased tree by the town or an individual is required to reduce the chance of spreading the disease to
adjacent healthy trees. Any protected trees that are proposed for removal due to damage or disease
will require the submission of a letter from a certified arborist that verifies the necessity of their
removal to protect property or other trees.
(3) Public safety. The tree endangers the public health, welfare or safety and immediate removal is
required if determined by the landscape administrator or a certified arborist.
(4) Utility service interruption. The tree has disrupted a public utility service due to a tornado,
storm, flood or other act of God. Removal shall be limited to the portion of the tree reasonably
necessary to reestablish and maintain reliable utility service.
(5) Landscape nurseries. All licensed plant or tree nurseries shall be exempt from the requirements
of this article as they pertain to those trees planted and growing on the premises of the licensee that
are so planted and growing for sale or intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of the
licensee's business.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.14)
Sec. 3.15.078 Tree replacement
(a) Requirements. In the event that it is necessary to remove a protected tree as specified in sections 3.15.074
through 3.15.076, the party (other than franchised utility companies) removing the tree shall be required to
replace the protected trees being removed with quality trees as defined herein. A sufficient number of trees shall
be planted to equal or exceed the diameter (measured at four and one-half feet above ground level) of each tree
removed. (See appendix B at the end of this article.) This mitigative measure is not meant to supplant good site
planning. Tree replacement will be considered only after all design alternatives which could save more existing
trees have been evaluated and reasonably rejected. The replacement trees shall be a minimum three-inch
diameter measured at four and one-half feet above ground, and seven feet in height, when planted.
(b) Procedures; warranty. At the time of review, the time of replacement and the location of the new trees will
be determined by the landscape administrator. The replacement trees shall be located on the subject site
whenever possible. However, if this is not feasible, the landscape administrator has the authority to allow the
planting to take place on another property, including public property. Franchised utility companies shall be
exempt from this requirement. If the landscape administrator approves the planting of replacement trees more
than 30 days after the removal of protected trees, the applicant shall provide the landscape administrator with an
affidavit that all replacement trees will be planted within six months. Any replacement tree required by this
article must be covered by a one-year warranty that is acceptable to the landscape administrator.
(c) Tree reforestation fund. In a densely forested area, the applicant, upon approval of the landscape
administrator, may make a payment into the tree reforestation fund in lieu of planting the replacement tree on the
subject site. The funds shall be used only for purchasing and planting trees on public property or acquiring
wooded property which shall remain in a naturalistic state in perpetuity.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/665
(1998 Code, sec. 96.15)
Sec. 3.15.079 Tree protection during construction
A major purpose of this article is to protect all protected trees which are not required to be removed to allow
approved construction to occur. The following procedures are required:
(1) Construction plan requirements. All construction plans shall include the requirements set forth
in appendix E at the end of this article.
(2) Prohibited activities in root zone. The following activities shall be prohibited within the limits
of the critical root zone of any protected tree subject to the requirements of this article:
(A) Material storage. No materials intended for use in construction or waste materials
accumulated due to excavation or demolition shall be placed within the limits of the critical root
zone of any protected tree. However, this restriction shall not apply to material storage in areas
exempt from the tree protection and replacement requirements (for example, the building pad,
driveway, patio, parking lot and the like).
(B) Equipment cleaning; disposal of liquids. No equipment shall be cleaned or other liquids
deposited or allowed to flow over land within the limits of the critical root zone of a protected
tree. This includes, without limitation, paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar or similar
materials.
(C) Attachments. No signs, wires or other attachments, other than those of a protective
nature, shall be attached to any protected tree.
(D) Vehicular traffic. No vehicular and/or construction equipment traffic or parking shall take
place within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree other than on an existing
street pavement. This restriction does not apply to single incident access within the critical root
zone for purposes of clearing underbrush, establishing the building pad and associated lot
grading, vehicular traffic necessary for routine utility maintenance or emergency restoration of
utility service or routine mowing operations.
(E) Grade changes. No grade changes shall be allowed within the limits of the critical root
zone of any protected tree unless adequate construction methods are approved by the landscape
administrator or grading as directed by the town's drainage inspector.
(F) Impervious paving. No paving with asphalt, concrete or other impervious materials in a
manner which may reasonably be expected to kill a tree shall be placed within the limits of the
critical root zone of a protected tree except as otherwise allowed in this article.
(3) Trees considered preserved. A protected tree shall be considered to be preserved only if a
minimum of 75% of the critical root zone is maintained at undisturbed natural grade and no more
than 25% of the canopy is removed due to building encroachment.
(4) Requirements prior to construction. The following procedures shall be followed on all types of
construction projects (including residential subdivisions, commercial, multifamily, industrial
developments, residential builders and municipal/public):
(A) Tree flagging or marking. Trees that are approved by the landscape administrator for
removal shall be flagged with bright fluorescent orange vinyl tape wrapped around the main
trunk or marked with bright fluorescent orange paint at a height of four feet or more such that it
is very visible to workers operating construction equipment. This shall not include the flagging
or marking of all protected trees adjacent to rights-of-way within approved residential
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/665
subdivisions during the construction of the roadway. Trees that are not flagged or marked shall
be saved and protected by fencing in accordance with the requirements in subsection (4)(B) of
this section.
(B) Protective fencing. In those situations where a protected tree is so close to the
construction area that construction equipment might infringe on the root system or is within 20
feet of the construction area, protective fencing shall be required between the outer limits of the
critical root zone of the tree and the construction activity area. Four-foot-high protective
fencing shall be supported at a maximum of ten-foot intervals by approved methods. All
protective fencing shall be in place prior to commencement of any site work and remain in
place until all exterior work has been completed.
(C) Bark protection. In situations where a protected tree remains in the immediate area of
intended construction, the tree shall be protected by enclosing the entire circumference of the
tree with 2-inch x 4-inch lumber encircled with wire or other means that do not damage the tree.
The intent here is to protect the bark of the tree against incidental contact by construction
equipment.
(5) Permanent construction methods.
(A) Boring. Where it is not possible to trench around the critical root zone of a protected tree,
boring of utilities under the protected tree shall be required. The length of the bore shall at least
be the width of the critical root zone and the depth of the bore shall at least be 24 inches.
(B) Grade change. In situations where the grade change within the critical root zone of a
protected tree exceeds the limits noted in subsection (2) of this section, the procedures noted in
the town standard detail sheet shall be required.
(C) Trenching. All trenching shall be designed to avoid trenching across the critical root zone
of any protected tree. Although this section is not intended to prohibit the placement of
underground services such as electric, phone, gas and the like, the placement of these utilities is
encouraged to be located outside of the critical root zone of protected trees. Irrigation system
trenching shall be placed outside of the critical root zone with only the minimum required
single head supply line allowed within that area placed radially to the tree trunk.
(D) Root pruning. All roots two inches or larger in diameter which are exposed as a result of
trenching or other excavation shall be cut off square with a sharp medium tooth saw and
covered with pruning compound within two hours of initial exposure.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.16)
Sec. 3.15.080 Tree pruning
(a) Generally. No protected tree should be pruned in a manner which significantly disfigures the tree without
proper cause or in a manner which would reasonably lead to the death of the tree.
(b) Allowed pruning. The landscape administrator may approve pruning of a protected tree in cases where
protected trees must be strategically pruned to allow construction or demolition of a structure. When allowed, all
pruning shall be in accordance with this section, approved arboricultural techniques, and the recommendations
of appendix F at the end of this article. This section is not intended to require a tree permit for reasonable
pruning performed or contracted to be performed by the owner of the tree when unrelated to construction
activity.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.17)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/665
(c) Required pruning. Trees shall be pruned so as to avoid causing a hazard to public places, including public
streets and other public rights-of-way. Any tree, the canopy of which extends over any part of a public right-ofway,
shall be maintained to provide a minimum clearance of eight feet above any sidewalk, trail, or other public
walkway, and 14 feet above any public street, road, or alley. (Ordinance 2007-12-4A adopted 12/4/07)
(1) It shall be the duty of any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control
of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the town on which trees are located to keep and
maintain any tree located thereon pruned, in compliance with section 3.15.079 and this section. Such
owners shall also promptly remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees and any dead, broken or
decayed limbs which constitute a threat or danger to the safety of the public.
(2) It shall be the duty of any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control
of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the town to keep and maintain any and all trees,
shrubs, bushes, grasses, weeds, or any other vegetation located on the property in such a manner that
the growth of the same (including the branches, limbs and roots of any such vegetation) does not
interfere with pedestrian travel, vehicular line of sight and travel, or the provision of public services.
(d) Tree topping. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or town department to top any
street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or
certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be
exempted from this subsection at the determination of the landscape administrator.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.17)
Sec. 3.15.081 Location of planted trees
(a) Interference with overhead utility lines. Trees shall not be planted within an area such that the mature
canopy of the tree will interfere with then-existing or approved overhead utility lines.
(b) Proximity to utility lines. Trees shall not be planted within an area such that the mature critical root zone
of the tree will interfere with then-existing or approved underground public utility lines (including water lines,
wastewater or stormwater drainage lines, sewer lines, transmission lines or other utilities), or such that the
installation and/or maintenance of such utility lines will in reasonable probability require activity in the mature
critical root zone of such tree. Shrubs will be permitted outside of the minimum clearance of surface electrical
facilities established by the franchised electrical company.
(c) Proximity to fire hydrants. No trees shall be planted within ten feet of a fire hydrant.
(d) Street corners. No tree shall be planted closer than 25 feet to any street corner, measured from the point of
nearest intersecting curbs or curblines, or other pavement in the absence of curbs.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.18)
Sec. 3.15.082 Uses requiring large areas of open space
(a) In addition to the criteria found in section 3.15.044, the tree board shall have the authority to review and
grant a tree removal permit for any private land use that is deemed acceptable to the tree board when such use
usually requires large areas of open space.
(b) In granting the tree removal permit, the tree board is authorized to impose conditions on approval that are
deemed necessary by the tree board to carry out the purpose and intent of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 96.19)
Secs. 3.15.083–3.15.100 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/665
Division 4. Tree Care Program
Sec. 3.15.101 Created
There is hereby created and established a tree care program to provide full power and authority over the care of
all trees, plants and shrubs located within public rights-of-way, parks and public places and aids in the proper
growth of a landscape program to enhance the beauty of the town.
Sec. 3.15.102 Duties of landscape administrator
(a) The landscape administrator and/or his/her designees shall have the responsibility to plant, prune, maintain
and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the public right-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares,
parks, and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry
and beauty of such public grounds. The landscape administrator and/or his/her designees in appropriate cases,
and upon consultation with a property owner, may remove or prune a tree on private property which threatens
the safety of those who may use a town street or town park.
(b) The landscape administrator and/or his/her designees may recommend the removal of any tree or part
thereof that threatens the safety of any person or by which by reason of its location or nature threatens any
electric, telephone, gas or any municipal water or sewer line or any public improvement, or any tree which is
affected by any injurious fungus, insect or other pest disease.
Sec. 3.15.103 Prohibitions
(a) No person shall remove, destroy, or cause the removal or destruction of a tree on town property or in any
town park without first having obtained written permission for such removal or destruction from the landscape
administrator.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to attach any cable, wire, rope, sign or any other
object to any town tree, plant or shrub without the written permission from the landscape administrator.
Sec. 3.15.104 Tree board
The details of the tree board are as follows:
(1) The tree board shall consist of the members of the planning and zoning commission.
(2) Board members shall be appointed to two-year staggered terms and serve without
compensation.
(3) The planning and zoning commission chairperson shall serve as the board chairperson.
(Ordinance 2009-5-5C adopted 5/5/09)
(4) The board shall meet at least once per calendar year. All stated meetings shall be open to the
public. The landscape administrator may schedule additional meetings as needed. (Ordinance 2013-8-
6B adopted 8/6/13)
(5) The duties of the tree board shall include:
(A) To promote the protection of healthy trees and provide guidelines for the replacement
and/or replanting of trees necessarily removed during construction, development and
redevelopment;
(B) To uphold the rules and regulations governing the protection and preservation of native
or established trees within the town;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/665
(C) To study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or periodically update a written plan for
the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposal of public trees and
shrubs on town property;
(D) Coordinating and promoting Arbor Day activities;
(E) Submitting an annual application to renew the Tree City USA designation; and
(F) Other duties that may be assigned by the town council.
(Ordinance 2009-5-5C adopted 5/5/09)
APPENDIX A. TREE EXHIBIT
Critical root zone (CRZ): The area of undisturbed natural soil around a tree defined by a concentric circle with a
radius equal to the distance from the trunk to the outermost portion of the dripline.
Drip line: A vertical line run through the outermost portion of the canopy of a tree and extending to the ground.
(1998 Code, ch. 96, app. A)
APPENDIX B. DIAMETER MEASUREMENT
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/665
Diameter measurement: The diameter of a tree shall be measured as shown above. The diameter of a tree shall
be the total diameter of the largest trunk plus half the diameter of each additional trunk.
(1998 Code, ch. 96, app. B)
APPENDIX C. TREES
Quality Trees
Common Name Botanical Name Identification Notes
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/665
American Elm Ulmus americana Double-serrate margins, oblique base
Austrian Pine Pinus nigra Two needles
Bald Cypress Taxodium distichum Feather-like foliage, fall color
Bigelow Oak Quercus sinuata breviloba Small acorn, smooth 2"–4"; lobed
Black Jack Oak Quercus marilandica Leathery 3"–7" leaf, no lobes
Black Walnut Juglans nigra Black bark, Spherical yellow-green
walnuts
Bur Oak Quercus macrocarpa Large acorn, leaf border at end
Caddo Maple Acer Barbatum ‘Caddo' Five-lobed leaf
Cedar Elm Ulmus crassifolia Deciduou, 1"–2" dark green leaves
Chinese Pistache Pistacia chinensis 3" sickle leaflets, fall color
Chinquapin Oak Quecus muhlenbergii Oblong 4"–6" serrated leaf
Lacebark Elm Ulmus parvifolia Small dark serrated green leaves
Live Oak Quercus virginiana 1-1/2" dark green pointed leaves
Mexican Buckeye Ugnadia, speciosa Feather foliage, pink flowers multi-trunked
Pecan Carya illinoensis Pecan fruit, compound leaves
Post Oak Quercus stellata Deep lobes, rounded tip on leaf
Red Cedar Juniperus virginiana Native, pyramidal shape
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/665
Shumard Red Oak Quercus shumardii Deep pointed lobes in leaves
Southern Magnolia Magnolia grandiflora Large evergreen leaf, white flower
Sweetgum Liquidambar styraciflua Star-shaped leaf
Texas Hickory Carya texana Five leaflets, 1"–2”
Texas Red Oak Quercus texana Vertical multi-trunk shape
Western Soapberry Sapindus drummondii 18" compound leaf, 1/2" clear fruit
White Ash Fraxinus americana 8"–13" leafs, 2"–4" oval leaflets
Marginal Trees
Common Name Botanical Name Identification Notes
Black Willow Salix nigra Forking near base, long thin 5"–15"
Bois d'Arc Maclura pomifera Bumpy spherical fruit 7"–15" diameter,
Horse-Apple
Boxelder Acer negundo V-shaped samaras, feather compounded
Buckthorn Rhamnus, caroliniana Egg-shaped, pointed tipped leaves
Chittamwood Bunelia lanuginosa Blue-black berries, thorn tipped twigs
Cottonwood Populus deltoides Deep fissures in bark, heart-shaped leaf
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/665
Deodar Cedar Cedrus deodara Large pyramidal evergreen
Common Name Botanical Name Identification Notes
Hackberry Celtis occidentalis Asymmetric coarse leafs, small berries
Honeylocust Gleditsia triacanthos Lacy foliage, thornless variety only
Japanese Black Pine Pinus thunbergii Twisted growth, dark green needles
Locust Robinia pseudoacacia 2" oval paired leaflets, 7–19 leaflets per
leaf
Mesquite Prosopis glandulosa Lacy open foliage, 10" bean fruit
Red Mulberry Moris rubra 1" red berries, 3"–5" rough top leaves
Roughleaf Dogwood Cornus drummondii 4"oval drawn out tip leaves, cream flowers
Slash Pine Pinus elliotti Tall cylindrical shape
Sugarberry Celtis laevigata Light gray bark, alternately serrated
Sumac Rhus lanceolata Odd pinnately compound, oblong
Sycamore Plantinus occidentalis Ovate 4"–8" wide and lobed
Toothache Zanthoxylum hirsutum Rounded shrub, curved prickles
Understory Trees
Common Name Botanical Name Identification Notes
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/665
Cherry Laurel Prunus caroliniana Glossy evergreen foliage, shrubby
Eves Necklace Sophora affinis Dull green tear-drop shaped leaf
Golden Raintree Koelrutaria paniculata Yellow flower, panicled fruit
Mexican Plum Prunis mexicana White flower, exfoliating bark, thorns
Persimmon Diospyros virginiana Thin, smooth, pale grey bark
Possumhaw Holly Ilex decidua Showy orange/red fruit, deciduous
Redbud Cercis canadensis Purple/white flower
River Birch Betula nigra White flaky bark
Rusty Blackhaw Viburnum nufidulum Glossy, dark green leaves, white flowers
Wax Myrtle Myrica cerifera Light olive-green leaves, pale blue berries
Yaupon Holly Ilex vomitoria Evergreen, light bark, red fruit
(Ordinance 2012-11-6A adopted 11/6/12)
APPENDIX D. ITEMS REQUIRED ON TREE SURVEY
1. Appropriate title (for example, Tree Removal Exhibit or Tree Survey).
2. Title block, including street address, lot and block, subdivision name, city and date of preparation.
3. North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity.
4. Scale at a size no larger than 1" = 100 [feet] for residential development; scale to be determined by the
landscape administrator for nonresidential and home-building activities.
5. Name, address and phone of owner and person preparing the document.
6. Location of all right-of-way lines and public easements.
7. Location of all buildings, structures, pools, parking and other improvements which are existing or intended
on the lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/665
8. Areas of cut/fill with amount of each shown and flow lines shown.
9. Existing and proposed spot elevations, grades and major contours, along with existing landscaping, streams,
ponds and major natural features.
10. Areas of no disturbance labeled as “No Disturbance Area.” This area must be clearly marked on the plan
and surrounded with protective fencing on the ground. A single incidence removal of underbrush and vines is
allowed.1
11. All protected trees shown individually on the plan.2 Canopy trees six inches or greater in size and
understory trees two inches or greater in size. Trees in close proximity that all have a caliper of less than four
inches may be designated as a group of trees with quantity of quality, marginal and understory trees shown. (See
appendix C.)
12. The location of protected trees must be tied by horizontal control (including dimensions from lot lines or
placed through coordinates determined via survey).
13. All protected trees shown with diameter (four and one-half feet from the ground), common name and
condition.
14. Any proposed replacement trees shown with caliper size, common name of tree and mature size.
15. Graphic representations distinguishing protected trees that will be saved versus those that will be removed.
16. Phasing of tree survey along with phasing of the development is permitted.
(1998 Code, ch. 96, app. D)
APPENDIX E. CONSTRUCTION PLAN REQUIREMENTS
The following shall be required as a part of all construction plans submitted to the town when tree removal or
tree protection is required during any phase of site work or construction:
1. A tree preservation detail sheet shall include the following at a minimum:
(1998 Code, ch. 96, app. E)
a. The requirements of section 3.15.079(2) through (4) shall be noted. (1998 Code, ch. 96,
app. E; Ordinance adopting Code)
b. A graphics legend to be used throughout the plans for the purposes of showing the
following: trees to be flagged, protective fencing, trees requiring bark protection, boring, areas
of cut and fill impacting protected trees.
c. Graphic tree exhibit showing the features of a tree, to include the critical root zone, trunk,
canopy, drip line and method of diameter measurement (per appendices A and B of this article).
d. Graphic exhibits showing methods of protection, to include snow fences, boarded skirts
and the like.
e. Graphic exhibits showing construction methods, to include grade changes, boring,
trenching and the like.
f. Graphic exhibit showing appropriate pruning practices (per appendix F of this article).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/665
2. All practices which will be employed in meeting the requirements of this article shall be shown
graphically on all applicable sheets within the construction plans.
3. Documents as required in appendix D of this article.
(1998 Code, ch. 96, app. E)
APPENDIX F. TREE PRUNING RECOMMENDATIONS
(1998 Code, ch. 96, app. F)
ARTICLE 3.16 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.16.001–3.16.030 Reserved
Division 2. Street Construction
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/665
Part I. In General
Sec. 3.16.031 Authority of town
All construction work within the town or its extraterritorial jurisdiction on any public improvements that will be
dedicated to the town or on any private subdivision street or road that is contained in a subdivision plat shall be
constructed to the satisfaction of the town in accordance with all requirements, rules, regulations and
specifications of the laws of this state and the ordinances and codes of the town. (1998 Code, sec. 97.01)
Sec. 3.16.032 Applicability
The provisions of this division shall apply to any person, corporation, or other business entity doing or causing
such construction work to be done within the town or the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town. The singular
use in this division of the term “developer,” “contractor,” or “subdivider” shall not be limited to that single
classification, and the use of each such term shall also mean any person, corporation, or other entity doing such
work. (1998 Code, sec. 97.02)
Sec. 3.16.033 Plans
The plans and specifications of such construction work shall show in detail the public improvements to be
accomplished under the contract. Where supplementary plans, shop drawings, and detail drawings are necessary,
they shall be furnished by the developer and/or contractor and approved by the town prior to the beginning of the
work involved. All plans shall be prepared by and show the seal of a registered professional engineer licensed to
practice in the state. Approval by the town does not relieve the developer and/or contractor of any responsibility
under the contract. (1998 Code, sec. 97.03)
Sec. 3.16.034 Construction stakes
The developer or contractor will furnish horizontal and vertical controls and set construction stakes for
alignments and grades. (1998 Code, sec. 97.04)
Sec. 3.16.035 Control of materials; testing and final inspection
(a) The developer or contractor shall employ a registered professional engineer or a qualified laboratory
testing agent for each project. Such engineer or agent shall ensure that construction will be in accordance with
the approved plans and specifications. Duties of the engineer or agent will include, but will not be limited to,
inspection, testing compaction, moisture content, and lime application rate of the subgrade, inspection and
testing plasticity index (PI) and lime application rate of the foundation course, and testing application rates,
thickness, density, and inspection of the installation of the roadway surface course. The town, developer and/or
contractor will receive reports of all items, and those not in compliance with the specifications shall have
recommendations for corrective action. The town will have full authority to ensure that the corrective action
required will be made. The developer or contractor will bear the cost of the services of the engineer or agent and
any required testing. Samples and testing results shall be furnished to the town. Material testing shall meet the
state department of transportation (TXDOT) requirements, Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.
(b) All items refer to item numbers in TXDOT standard specifications.
(c) Whenever the public improvements provided for in and contemplated under the contract have been
completed and the final cleanup performed, the developer and/or contractor will notify the town. The town will
conduct the final review, which will be made within 30 days after such notification or as soon thereafter as
practicable. After such final review, if the public improvements are found to be satisfactory, the developer and/or
contractor will be notified. If not satisfactory, the developer and/or contractor will be notified in writing of the
corrective action required for approval.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/665
(d) Where the public improvements consist of concrete pavements with concrete base, the final acceptance
will not relieve the developer from responsibility for the thickness of the concrete, which will be determined by
means of taking cores from pavement at 200-foot intervals. The coring of the pavement will be done within 30
days from the completion of the pavement. The developer will bear the expense of having the pavement cored.
(1998 Code, sec. 97.05)
Sec. 3.16.036 Utility services
(a) All services for utilities shall be made available for each lot in such a manner so as to eliminate the
necessity for disturbing the street and the alley pavement, curb, gutter, sidewalks, and drainage structures when
connections are made.
(b) The subdivider shall provide separate service lines for water and sanitary sewers to each lot or point of
metering.
(c) All water services shall be a minimum of one-inch continuous type K copper with no unions allowed
between the meter and the water main. The meters shall be located at least two feet outside of the curb or edge of
pavement and set to where, when the meter is set, the top of the meter is only eight inches from below final
grade level and centered in a box acceptable by the town and not located in a driveway.
(d) Sanitary sewer service lines shall have a minimum diameter of four inches, shall meet the same
requirements for sanitary sewers described above, shall be constructed from the main to the lot property line
using wyes and necessary bends, and shall have a minimum cover at the property line of four feet, where
possible. All sewer locations shall be ten feet downstream from the center or each lot.
(e) The subdivider shall place a suitable marker at the point where said service lines are stubbed out so that
these lines can be easily located for connection by the town. Suitable markers shall be “W” for water and “S” for
sewer stamped in the top of the curb, or the edge of the pavement if no curb is constructed. Letters shall have a
minimum height of two inches and a minimum width of two inches.
(f) The subdivider shall make arrangements with all other appropriate utility companies for the extension of
their respective utility lines and service to and within the addition and for any costs or refunds of such cost.
(g) All electrical, gas, cable, and telephone service and transmission lines shall be underground on the
opposite side of the road or street right-of-way from the side which a water transmission line has been or is to be
constructed, unless otherwise approved in writing by the town.
(h) All utility companies will notify the town before digging, boring, drilling, and the like.
(i) Sanitary sewer service to a lot of greater than one acre is allowed to use a septic system. The town requires
a perc test to verify proper design.
(1998 Code, sec. 97.07)
Sec. 3.16.037 Street lighting
All street lighting shall conform to the latest edition of the Illuminating Engineering Society Handbook. Full cutoff fixtures
shall be used and lighting levels, as recommended, shall be provided for very light traffic in residential areas, medium
traffic on collector streets, and heavy traffic on thoroughfares. In no instance shall the spacing between streetlights exceed
600 feet. Street lighting in public right-of-way and residential areas will be used for matters of public safety only. Lighting
should always be installed at all intersections and subdivision entrances. The use of sodium vapor lights for street and
parking lot illumination shall not be allowed in the town. Cost of installation of street lighting shall be borne by the
subdivider. (Ordinance 2017-26 adopted 12/5/17).
Sec. 3.16.038 Record drawings (as-built plans)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/665
Within 30 days of acceptance of an improvement or acceptance of a subdivision, the engineer for the developer
shall submit to the town a complete set of drawings of the paving, drainage, water, and sanitary sewer
improvements showing all changes made in the plans during construction and containing on each sheet a “record
drawing” stamp bearing the signature of the engineer and the date. In addition, three reproducible drawings of
the utility plan sheets, containing the record-drawing information, shall be submitted to the town. (1998 Code,
sec. 97.09)
Secs. 3.16.039–3.16.060 Reserved
Part II. Standard Specifications and Details
Sec. 3.16.061 Lime-treated subgrade
(a) The contractor shall rough grade to the proposed top of subgrade as shown on the plans. Areas shall be
proof rolled and any soft areas shall be excavated and replaced with satisfactory material.
(b) Lime slurry shall be type B, grade 1, as specified under TXDOT item 264. Lime shall be applied at a rate
of 6% of the dry weight of the soil. First mixing shall be allowed to moist cure for 48 hours at the proper
moisture content. Final mixing shall begin after the mixture is tested to insure a minimum of 60% passing a no.
4 sieve. Material shall then be compacted to a minimum of 95% standard proctor.
(1998 Code, sec. 97.41)
Sec. 3.16.062 Asphalt paving
(a) Foundation course.
(1) A six-inch crushed stone foundation course shall be placed above the lime-treated subgrade. All
borrow material with a plasticity index (PI) greater than 15 will require the addition of 3% by weight
of lime as specified under section 3.16.061. Borrow material with a PI equal to or less than 15 will
not require any lime treatment. The developer shall submit test reports on the borrow material to the
town. The foundation course shall be compacted to a minimum density of 95% standard proctor.
(2) Two-course surface treatment or alternate type D surface course shall not be applied when the
air temperature is below 60° and is falling, but it may be applied when the temperature is above 50°
and rising. Asphaltic material shall not be placed when general weather conditions, in the opinion of
the engineer, are not suitable.
(b) First course.
(1) Asphaltic materials. The asphaltic materials used shall be AC-5 or AC-10, and shall be applied
at the rate of 0.35 gallons per square yard.
(2) Aggregate. The aggregate used shall be of the type and grade shown and shall be applied at the
rate of 1.0 cubic yard per 70 square yards. Aggregate shall conform to TXDOT item 301, type B,
grade 2.
(c) Second course.
(1) Asphaltic materials. The asphaltic materials used shall be AC-5 or AC-10, and shall be applied
at the rate of 0.35 gallons per square yard.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/665
(2) Aggregate. The aggregate used shall be of the type and grade shown and shall be applied at the
rate of 1.0 cubic yard per 110 square yards. Aggregate shall conform to TXDOT item 301, type B,
grade 4.
(A) The area to be treated shall be cleaned of dirt or other deleterious matter by sweeping or
other approved methods. The asphaltic material shall be applied on the clean surface by an
approved type of self-propelled pressure distributor so as to distribute the material in the
quantity specified, evenly and smoothly, under a pressure necessary for proper distribution. No
traffic or hauling will be allowed over the freshly applied asphalt.
(B) The aggregate shall be immediately and uniformly applied and spread by a self-propelled
continuous feed aggregate spreader. Rolling shall proceed in a longitudinal direction, beginning
at the outer edges and working towards the center.
(d) Alternate surface course. As an alternate to the second course surface treatment, a two-inch deep
application of TXDOT item 340, type D, fine graded surface course, may be installed upon the foundation
course. The minimum in-place density after compaction shall be 97% of the recorded laboratory density.
(1998 Code, sec. 97.42)
Sec. 3.16.063 Streets generally
(a) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all proposed streets shall conform to the
town's thoroughfare plan, and their relationship shall be considered to that of the existing and planned streets, to
the preservation of existing trees and tree thickets, to topographical conditions, and to public convenience and
safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
(b) Where such is not shown in the town's thoroughfare plan for the community, the arrangements of streets in
a subdivision shall:
(1) Provide for the appropriate continuation or completion of existing collector streets and
thoroughfares in surrounding areas;
(2) In the case of residential streets, conform with section 10.02.282 of chapter 10, subdivision
regulation;
(3) Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the town to meet a particular
situation where topographical or other conditions make continuation of or conformance to an existing
street impracticable;
(4) Be aligned so that they will intersect, as nearly as possible, at right angles; and
(5) Preserve existing trees and tree thickets to the extent possible, without prohibiting street
conformance or continuation in a practical manner.
(c) Residential streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged.
(d) Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 200 feet shall be avoided.
(e) Street right-of-way widths shall conform to the following:
Type of Street Minimum Right-of-Way Width
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/665
Major thoroughfare 100 ft.
Collector 80 ft.
Residential 50 ft.
(Ordinance 2014-2-4B, ex. A, adopted 2/4/14)
(f) Half streets shall be prohibited, except where necessary to the reasonable development of the subdivision
in conformance with the other requirements of these regulations. Where the town finds it will be practicable to
require the dedication of additional right-of-way to an existing street adjacent to the area to be subdivided, the
entire right-of-way shall be shown on the plat of the subdivider. Where part of a street is being dedicated along a
common property line, the first dedication shall be one-half of the proposed street right-of-way plus five feet. A
minimum of 24-foot width of pavement shall be constructed within the one-half street right-of-way with proper
drainage (two-way traffic for safety and practicality).
(g) Twelve lots for RE-2 and 24 lots for RE-1 shall face on any street that ends in a cul-de-sac. No parking
shall be allowed in any cul-de-sac and no obstructions shall be built or allowed in a turnaround. The maximum
length of a residential cul-de-sac will be 1,200 feet from the centerline of the intersecting street to the center of
the cul-de-sac.
(h) All streets shall be paved, and the paving shall conform to these regulations.
(i) Street grades shall be established regarding topography, proposed land use, and the facilities in the area
surrounding the land to be subdivided. An absolute minimum grade of one percent will be allowed on concrete
streets.
(j) Street name markers shall be installed in accordance with the prescribed type currently in use by the town,
or an approved equal, as approved by the town manager. Street markers and the erection thereof will be at the
expense of the subdivider.
(k) Residential lots shall not face arterial streets or thoroughfares and driveways or alley pavement cuts shall
not be permitted on arterial streets. Alleys shall be provided along side and rear lot lines on arterial streets for
rear entrance.
(l) (1) The developer shall employ a registered professional engineer or a qualified laboratory
testing agent for each project. Such engineer or agent shall ensure that construction will be in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications. Duties of the engineer or agent will include,
but will not be limited to, inspection, testing compaction, moisture content, and lime application rate
of the subgrade, inspection and testing plasticity index (PI) and lime application rate of the
foundation course, and testing application rates, thickness, density, and inspection of the installation
of the roadway surface course. The town and contractor will receive reports of all items, and those
not in compliance with the specifications shall have recommendations for corrective action. The town
will have full authority to ensure that the corrective action required will be made. The developer will
bear the cost of the engineer or agent and any required testing. Samples and testing results shall be
furnished to the town. Material testing shall meet the state department of transportation (TXDOT)
requirements, Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
(2) All items refer to item numbers in TXDOT Standard Specifications. Items 110 and 132,
Roadway Excavation and Embankment, provide requirements for the construction within which the
contractor shall work so as to conform to lines and grades as shown on the plans.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/665
(3) Whenever the work provided for in and contemplated under the contract has been completed
and the final cleanup performed, the developer will notify the town. The town will conduct the final
review, which will be made within 30 days after such notification or as soon thereafter as practicable.
After such final review, if the work is found to be satisfactory, the developer will be notified. If not
satisfactory, the developer will be notified in writing of the corrective action required for approval.
(4) Where the work consists of concrete pavements of concrete base, the final acceptance will not
relieve the developer from responsibility for the thickness of the concrete, which will be determined
by means of taking cores from pavement at 200-foot intervals. The coring of the pavement will be
done within 30 days from the completion of the pavement. The developer will bear the expense of
having the pavement cored.
(1998 Code, sec. 97.43)
(m) Roadway landscape borders.
(1) Applicability. This subsection (m) applies to the new construction of all roadways, streets, and
highways (collectively, “roadways”) within the town's corporate limits and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction and to new improvements made to existing roadways within the town's corporate limits
and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. For the purposes of this subsection, “new construction” and “new
improvements” does not include routine repair, maintenance or resurfacing of an existing roadway if
such repair, maintenance or resurfacing does not widen or result in any other design modifications to
such roadway. This subsection (m) does not apply to privately owned and maintained roadways or
roadways to which the CPDD streetscape requirements apply.
(2) Intent. The intent of this subsection (m) is to preserve existing tree thickets, and create newly
planted tree groves in natural-appearing clusters, which create a rural edge and definition of streets in
the town.
(3) The width of the roadway landscape border is measured from the outside edge of the street
pavement to the outer line of the rights-of-way, or easements that will allow planting to occur,
whichever is furthest from the edge of the street pavement. These borders are located on both sides of
the street.
(4) The landscaping within the width of roadway landscape borders to which this subsection (m)
applies shall meet the following landscaping requirements:
(A) Tree density. A minimum of six trees are required per 100 linear feet of landscape border
on each side of the street, which may be planted anywhere within the roadway landscape
border. Credit will be given for maintaining existing trees of equal or greater size if they are
listed in appendix C to article 3.15.
(B) Tree size. There shall be a minimum of sixty (60%) percent large trees ranging from 5"–
8" diameter at breast height (DBH), with the remainder being small trees 3"–4" DBH.
Approved landscaping shall conform to the quality and understory trees, as listed in appendix C
to article 3.15, as well as the list of “acceptable trees” maintained by the town's landscape
administrator, that are acceptable for planting along streets, within parks, and other public areas,
as stated in section 3.15.076 of this chapter.
(C) Protected trees. Removal of protected trees, as identified in this chapter, from the width
of the roadway landscape border shall require replacement in accordance with section 3.15.078
of this chapter and shall otherwise comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/665
(D) The requirements of this subsection (m) may be waived as to any portion of roadway by
the town council to the extent that full compliance would clearly result in a roadway hazard
based on visibility requirements at intersections or other such instances that may cause a hazard
on the roadway.
(n) Street median landscape requirements.
(1) Applicability. This subsection (n) applies to the new construction of all roadway, street, and
highway medians (collectively, “medians”) within the town's corporate limits and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction and to new improvements made to existing medians within the town's corporate limits
and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. For the purposes of this subsection, “new construction” and “new
improvements” does not include routine repair, maintenance or landscaping/planting performed
within an existing median if such repair, maintenance or landscaping/planting does not widen or
result in any other design modification to such median. This subsection (n) does not apply to
privately owned and maintained medians to which the CPDD streetscape requirements apply.
(2) Intent. It is the intent of this subsection to ensure that medians resulting from street
construction shall contribute to the rural character of the community through forestation.
(3) The landscaping within medians to which this subsection (n) applies shall meet the following
landscaping requirements:
(A) Tree density. Medians may vary in width, and shall contain a minimum of thirteen (13)
trees per 10,000 square feet of median area.
(B) Tree size. There shall be a minimum of sixty (60%) percent large trees (5"–8") DBH,
with the remainder being small trees (3"–4") DBH, and shall be selected from the “quality and
understory” trees only, as listed in appendix C to article 3.15, also from the list of “acceptable
trees” maintained by the town's landscape administrator as stated in section 3.15.076 of this
chapter.
(C) Tree placement. Tree placement and arrangement shall be in tight clusters and groupings,
tying median and street shoulders together to achieve a complete street corridor that is as
natural, yet rural in appearance as possible.
(D) The requirements of this subsection (n) may be waived as to any portion of median by
the town council to the extent that full compliance would clearly result in a roadway hazard
based on visibility requirements at intersections or other such instances that may cause a hazard
on the roadway.
(Ordinance 2011-3-1A, sec. 3, adopted 3/1/11)
Sec. 3.16.064 Alleys
(a) Alleys may be required in commercial and industrial districts and shall be paved with reinforced concrete
to comply with collector street specifications. The town may waive this requirement where other definite and
assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with
and adequate for the uses provided.
(b) The minimum right-of-way width of an alley shall be 20 feet in industrial and commercial areas. The alley
turnouts shall be paved to the property line and shall be at least two feet wider than the alley paving at that point.
The radii of the turnouts for alleys intersecting thoroughfares shall be 16 feet and shall be ten feet at
intersections with all other streets.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/665
(c) Alley intersections and sudden changes in alignment shall be avoided, but, where necessary, lot corners
shall be cut off at least 15 feet on each tangent to permit safe vehicular movement.
(d) Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but, if unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate
turnaround facilities, as determined by the town.
(e) All alleys shall be paved, and the paving shall conform to these regulations.
(f) Where driveways connect to alleys in commercial and/or industrial areas, fences may be constructed along
the rear lot line of any lot to a point within five feet of a point where the driveway would intersect the alley
pavement at 90°. Fences are optional.
(1998 Code, sec. 97.44)
Sec. 3.16.065 Other improvements
(a) All improvements proposed for any subdivision to be developed under the jurisdiction of this division shall
be furnished and installed by the subdivider in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Public Works
Construction published by the North Central Texas Council of Governments and any amendments thereto.
(b) All improvements, even in previously approved but still unimproved subdivisions, shall conform to the
town's current regulations and specifications for street, drainage, and utility construction. A coring of the streets
may be required by the town.
(1998 Code, sec. 97.45)
Sec. 3.16.066 Concrete paving
(a) Concrete strength.
(1) Concrete curb and gutter. Concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed of a concrete batch
design, providing a 28-day compressive strength of 3,600 pounds per square inch (psi).
(2) Reinforced concrete pavements and monolithic curb. Concrete pavement and monolithic curb
properly and continuously reinforced shall be constructed of a concrete batch design providing the
appropriate 28-day compressive strength. The minimum reinforcement shall be no. 3 deformed bars
spaced at 18 inches center-to-center both ways. Mountable curbs may be used on all residential street
and collector streets in residential areas.
(3) Bridges.
(A) Bridges are considered concrete paving and will abide by paving codes except that an
additional six feet shall be constructed on one side for sidewalks and guardrails.
(B) All bridges must be classified for HS20 trucks and must follow those guidelines found in
the American Association of State Highways and Transportation Officials Standard
Specifications for Highway Bridges.
(b) Pavement thickness.
(1) Residential street construction.
(A) The subdivider shall, at his own cost and expense, pay for constructing all residential
streets within his subdivision and all perimeter streets to a minimum of 26 feet or one-half,
whichever is greater.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/665
(B) A six-inch thickness of 3,600 psi reinforced concrete pavement on six-inch compacted
95% standard proctor density subgrade shall be required. All steel reinforcing shall be deformed
no. 3 bars on 18-inch centers both ways.
(C) Where the plasticity index of the soil is 15 or greater, stabilization of the subgrade, six
inches thick with a minimum six percent hydrated lime by weight as stated by soils
investigation, shall be required. Compaction of the lime-stabilized subgrade shall be to 95%
standard proctor density.
(D) Any proposed pavement section of lesser thickness or alternate materials shall be fully
documented by the design engineer to substantiate the fact that such alternate will provide an
equivalent capacity for the pavement noted above and must be approved by the town.
(E) Coring of the streets at a minimum of 200-foot intervals will be required by the town to
insure proper thickness.
(2) Collector street and commercial or industrial alley construction.
(A) The subdivider shall, at his own cost and expense, pay for constructing all collector
streets and alleys within his subdivision and one-half of all perimeter streets and alleys.
(B) Collector streets and alleys shall be designed and constructed with eight-inch thickness of
3,600 psi reinforced concrete pavement on six-inch compacted 95% standard proctor density
subgrade. All steel reinforcing shall be deformed no. 4 bars on 24-inch centers both ways.
(C) Where the plasticity index of the soil is 15 or greater, stabilization of the subbase with a
six-inch thickness of minimum six percent hydrated lime by weight will be required.
Compaction of the lime-stabilized subgrade shall be to 95% standard proctor density.
(D) Any proposed pavement section of lesser thickness or alternate materials shall be fully
documented by the design engineer to substantiate the fact that such alternate will provide an
equivalent capacity for the pavement noted above and must be approved by the town.
(E) Contouring of the streets at a minimum of 200-foot intervals will be required by the town
to insure proper thickness.
(3) Major thoroughfare construction.
(A) On roadways, adjacent to the proposed subdivision, that are designated to be major
thoroughfares, the subdivider shall be required to construct, at his own cost and expense, onehalf
of the street section with integral curbs on each side.
(B) Where major thoroughfares traverse a subdivision, the subdivider shall be required, at his
own cost and expense, to construct up to a 22-foot-wide section on each side of the centerline of
the roadway.
(C) Thoroughfares shall be designed and constructed with an eight-inch thickness of 4,000
psi reinforced concrete pavement on six-inch compacted 95% proctor density subgrade. An
additional subbase course to prevent pavement pumping may be required if the amount of
heavy truck traffic and associated ESALs is determined to be excessive by the town engineer.
All steel reinforcing shall be deformed no. 4 bars at 24-inch centers both ways.
(D) Where the plasticity index of the soil is 15 or greater, stabilization of the subgrade, six
inches thick with minimum six percent hydrated lime by weight as stated by soils investigation,
shall be required. Compaction of the lime-stabilized subgrade shall be to 95% standard proctor
density.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/665
(E) Any proposed pavement section of lesser thickness or alternate materials shall be fully
documented by the design engineer to substantiate the fact that such alternate will provide an
equivalent capacity for the pavement noted above and must be approved by the town.
(F) Coring of the streets at a minimum of 200-foot intervals will be required by the town to
insure proper thickness.
(4) Alleys. Alleys in industrial and commercial areas shall be a width four feet less than the rightof-
way, two feet off both sides, and follow collector streets specifications (center in right-of-way).
(c) Pavement width.
(1) Residential streets and collector streets.
(A) Residential street paving shall be a minimum of 26 feet in width, measured between the
edge of concrete pavement and/or the faces of curbs.
(B) Collector street paving shall be a minimum of 40 feet in width, measured between the
edge of pavement and/or the faces of curbs, except that the width for collector streets in
industrial and commercial areas must be a minimum of 44 feet in width measured between the
edge of pavement and/or the faces of the curbs.
(2) Alleys. Alley paving shall be 16 feet wide in commercial and industrial areas. Alley turnouts
shall be paved to the property line and shall be at least two feet wider than the alley paving at that
point. Paving radius where alleys intersect residential and collector streets shall be ten feet and,
where alleys intersect thoroughfare streets, the radius shall be 15 feet.
(3) Thoroughfares. The following minimum pavement widths are set by this division for the
construction of thoroughfares as follows:
Thoroughfare
Classification
Minimum
Right-of-Way Width
Minimum Pavement Width
Between Faces of Curbs or
Edge of Pavement
Major thoroughfare 100'
Two 33' traffic lanes divided
by a 15' median
Collector A (commercial) 80' Four 11' traffic lanes
Collector B (residential) 80'
Two 12' traffic lanes and two
8' parking lanes
Residential 65'
26' face of curbs or edge of
pavement
(4) Turn lanes.
(A) The minimum width of a median adjacent to a left turn lane shall be five feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/665
(B) The minimum stacking for a left turn lane should be 60 feet with a 100-foot transition.
(C) Median openings should be a minimum of 60 feet in width.
(5) Street returns.
(A) The minimum radius for all street returns shall be 20 feet.
(B) Returns for driveways on residential streets shall be ten feet. Commercial and industrial
driveway returns shall be a minimum of ten feet and a maximum of 20 feet except in special
cases.
(d) Miscellaneous requirements.
(1) Reinforcing steel. Steel for street and alley paving shall meet ASTM designation A15, A16, or
A408 and be deformed bars.
(2) Sawed dummy joints.
(A) Sawed dummy transverse joints shall be not greater than 20 feet apart and as required by
the town engineer at intersections.
(B) Longitudinal sawed dummy joints shall be required in all pavements where the concrete
is poured in a continuous width of 30 feet or more. The longitudinal dummy joint shall be
located at the one-third point of the width or as directed by the town.
(3) Expansion joints.
(A) Expansion joints shall be placed at distances no greater than 200 feet and shall be
constructed in accordance with the town's standards. Construction joints shall be constructed in
accordance with the NCTCOG joint standard.
(B) Expansion joints shall have no. 5 smooth dowels at 24-inch centers that are acceptable to
the town. Construction joints shall have the reinforcing bars continuous through the joint.
(4) Longitudinal pavement slopes.
(A) The minimum longitudinal standard alley pavement slopes shall be as set forth in section
3.16.063(i).
(B) The maximum longitudinal slopes are as follows:
Type of Street Maximum Slope
Major thoroughfare 6%
Collector A and B 8%
Residential 10%
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/665
(C) Maximum grades for alleys shall be 8:1 within 30 feet of its intersection with a street and
12.5% elsewhere.
(5) Transverse pavement slopes. The transverse pavement slope for all nondivided streets shall
consist of a parabolic curve from the pavement centerline to the gutter. The crown of the parabolic
curve shall be four inches above the gutter grade on residential streets and six inches on collector
streets. For divided streets, the transverse slope shall be as required by the town.
(6) Lime stabilization.
(A) The contractor shall rough grade to the proposed top of subgrade as shown on the plans.
Areas shall be proof rolled and any soft areas shall be excavated and replaced with satisfactory
material.
(B) Lime slurry shall be type B, grade 1, as specified under TXDOT item 264. Lime shall be
applied at a rate of 6% of the dry weight of the soil. First mixing shall be allowed to moist cure
for 48 hours at the proper moisture content. Final mixing shall begin after the mixture is tested
to insure a minimum of 60% passing of no. 4 sieve. Material shall then be compacted to a
minimum of 95% standard proctor.
(1998 Code, sec. 97.46)
Sec. 3.16.067 Sidewalks
(a) Concrete sidewalks, if installed, shall have a width of not less than four feet and thickness of not less than
four inches and shall be constructed of 3,000 psi concrete on both sides of all streets and thoroughfares within
the subdivision. Sidewalks shall be constructed one foot from the property line within the street or thoroughfare
right-of-way or one foot from the dedicated sidewalk easement (when required to accommodate ditch drainage
and the like) and shall extend along the street frontage, including the side of corner lots and block ends.
(b) Sidewalks in commercial areas shall be a minimum width of five feet and extend from the back of the
curb.
(c) All concrete for sidewalks shall be placed on a two-inch sand cushion and shall be reinforced with 6 x 6
no. 10 gauge welded wire fabric.
(d) The longitudinal slope of sidewalks shall be that of the curb adjacent to the sidewalk. The transverse slope
of the sidewalk shall be one-fourth inch per foot starting at the back of the curb. The maximum ground slope
from the edge of the sidewalk on the property line side shall not exceed 12.5% (8:1). If it does exceed 12.5%
(8:1), a retaining wall that is acceptable to the town shall be provided on the property line.
(1998 Code, sec. 97.47)
Sec. 3.16.068 Driveway approaches
(a) A driveway approach is defined as that access or transitional portion of a driveway intended for vehicular
traffic, and running from the street curb line or edge of paving (or rock/gravel) to the property line.
(b) As a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit for construction on property fronting on any
road or street or other approved way, or any road or street or way to be offered or dedicated to the town, an
application must be made for a driveway approach permit on a form available at the town offices and the fee
specified paid to the town.
(1) Upon receipt of the driveway approach permit, the placement and construction of any driveway
approach or other access must be sited and constructed in accordance with specifications required by
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/665
the town department of public works, who shall be the permit grantor and who shall determine when
the specifications have been met; and
(2) File the driveway approach permit is required for each access to be constructed and with
respect to the same lot [sic].
(A) A separate driveway approach permit is required for each access to be constructed and
with respect to each building permit application, except if prior approval has been granted for a
single access to serve two contiguous building lots.
(B) No building permit shall be issued, nor shall any construction or other site improvement,
except for access, be started until all requirements of this section are met.
(C) Nothing in this section shall operate to restrict the issuance of building permits with
respect to building lots which front on state roads or interstate highways, for which driveway
approach permits are issued by those respective agencies; except that the public works
department shall not issue a building permit with respect to any such building lot until it is
confirmed that an appropriate driveway approach permit has been issued by one of those
agencies and remains valid and in force.
(c) Any person changing or altering an already existing driveway approach (i.e., a driveway where a building
permit has been issued in the past) must apply for a driveway approach permit and is subject to the regulations
outlined herein.
(d) Sample driveway approach permit and inspection form.
DRIVEWAY APPROACH PERMIT
Fairview, Texas
This application must be completed in triplicate and filed with the Town Secretary together with the proper filing
fee as provided for in the Town's Master Fee Schedule.
Upon completion this application shall be sent to the Department of Public Works for review of placement and
construction specifications and issuance.
Name of Applicant:
Address: Phone:
Street location of proposed driveway approach:
Sketch of Proposed Access:
(Use reverse side of this form or attach additional pages)
Show street, angle of entry, width of driveway approach, distance to accesses on both side (including streets and
roads), radius of entry, grade of driveway approach, and location and type of drainage.
Map Lot:
Printed Name of Applicant
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/665
Signature and Date
DRIVEWAY APPROACH - FIRST INSPECTION
Date
Granted/Denied (Circle)
Signature
Reasons
DRIVEWAY APPROACH - SECOND INSPECTION
Date
Granted/Denied (Circle)
Signature
Reason(s)
Approved copy filed with Department of Public Works
Date: Public Works' Initials:
(1998 Code, sec. 97.48)
Sec. 3.16.069 Gate and private drive widths
(a) Gates. The minimum width requirement for gates shall be 12 feet and placement shall be at least 20 feet
from the roadway.
(b) Private drives. The minimum width requirement for private drives shall be 12 feet with an additional fourfoot
easement on each side.
(1998 Code, sec. 97.49)
Sec. 3.16.070 Speed humps
That certain nine-page exhibit titled “Town of Fairview Policy Governing the Installation and Removal of Speed
Humps within the Town Limits” and that certain 31-page exhibit, “Guidelines for the Design and Application of
Speed Humps,” attached as exhibits to town Ordinance 94-254, are hereby adopted by reference as the town's
policy governing installation, removal and guidelines for design and application of speed humps. Said Ordinance
No. 94-254, because of its length, shall be maintained as a separate code in the office of the town secretary.
(1998 Code, sec. 97.50)
APPENDIX A. PLATES
PLATE 1.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/665
PLATE 2.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/665
PLATE 3.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/665
PLATE 4.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/665
PLATE 5.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/665
PLATE 6.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/665
(1998 Code, ch. 97, app. A)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/665
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 4.01.001 Sanitary facilities at businesses
(a) Sanitary facilities for the use of patrons and employees shall be maintained at every commercial business
location within the corporate limits of the town.
(b) For the purpose of this section, sanitary facilities shall consist of the following:
(1) An operable permanent flushing toilet shall be located on the premises.
(2) A lavatory shall be located on the premises and shall be equipped with running water.
(3) All toilets and lavatories installed at commercial business locations after the date of passage of
this section shall be connected to a septic or sewer system in accordance with the ordinances of the
town.
(4) The sanitary facilities of any residential dwelling converted to use as a commercial business
location shall be brought into compliance with the then-existing building and plumbing code of the
town.
(c) For the purposes of this section, a commercial business location shall be defined as any building, dwelling,
or other structure located within the corporate limits of the town in which the owners or occupants engage in any
activity for the purpose of earning a profit or other economic benefit. Specifically excluded are buildings,
dwellings, or other structures used solely for agricultural purposes.
(1998 Code, sec. 110.01)
Sec. 4.01.002 Filming permits
(a) All persons who wish to film in the town shall apply for and secure a permit from the town. The filming of
news events and noncommercial filming, and other filming of events as designated by the town manager or his
designee, shall be exempt from the permit requirements.
(b) An application for a film permit shall be in writing, and submitted at least thirty (30) days before the
filming is to begin at a given location. The thirty-day requirement may be waived at the discretion of the town
manager. The application shall state the name of the applicant, the addresses and telephone numbers of the
applicants, the location of filming, and the times of filming, and such other information as the town manager
may require. The application shall also disclose the use of any incendiary devices, fire, motor vehicles, aircraft
and anything else which may create excessive noise or vibration within the town boundary limits.
(c) The permit may be granted subject to such conditions as the town manager may specify, such as delivering
written notice of filming times and locations to all merchants or individuals who are substantially affected by the
filming. The permit may be denied if, in the opinion of the town manager, the locations, hours, or other factors,
such as danger to the public or neighbors, traffic disruption, or noise, make filming as requested unreasonable.
Blasting will be prohibited.
(d) Before a permit shall be issued, proof of liability insurance of $1,000,000.00 minimum shall be submitted
by the applicant.
(e) Before a permit shall be considered, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable permit application fee, in a
minimum of $25.00, with the actual amount to be estimated to cover all town time and expenses.
(f) Failure to obtain a permit prior to filming, or to comply with any or all of the permit conditions, shall
constitute a misdemeanor punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/665
every day of the violation. The town may also enjoin any filming not in accordance with this section or the other
specific requirements specified by the town manager.
(1998 Code, sec. 110.02)
ARTICLE 4.02 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.02.001 Purpose and intent
It is the purpose of this article to regulate the sale of alcoholic beverages within the town in accordance with the
authority granted to local municipalities by the state Alcoholic Beverage Code. The provisions of this article
regulate hours of operation, locations, and minimum distances from schools, churches and other specified land
uses. Additionally, this article establishes a system of local permits and fees implemented to insure that
businesses selling alcoholic beverages within the town comply with local ordinances and regulations. This
article shall not regulate the practice of home brewers or vintners, except to the extent that such home brewers
and/or vintners shall offer their products for sale. (1998 Code, sec. 111.01)
Sec. 4.02.002 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Alcoholic beverage. Alcohol, or any beverage containing more than 0.5% of alcohol by volume, which is
capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted.
Ale. A malt beverage containing more than 4% of alcohol by weight.
Beer. A malt beverage containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume and not more than 4% of alcohol by
weight, and does not include a beverage designated by label or otherwise by a name other than beer.
Home brewer and vintner. A person who prepares, brews, or otherwise makes any wine or beer on his or her
residential property for personal home consumption only, and not for sale for any purpose.
Malt liquor. A malt beverage containing more than 4% of alcohol by weight.
Mixed beverage. One or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or in part of an alcoholic beverage in a
sealed or unsealed container of any legal size for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the
holder of a mixed beverage permit, the holder of a daily temporary mixed beverage permit, the holder of a
caterer's permit, the holder of a mixed beverage late hours permit, the holder of a private club registration
permit, or the holder of a private club late hours permit.
Off-premises. Locations other than those described in this section [in the definition of “premises”], below.
(1998 Code, sec. 111.02)
Permittee. A person who is the holder of a permit provided for in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, or an
agent, servant, or employee of that person. (Ordinance 2008-7-8F, sec. 1, adopted 7/8/08)
Premises. The grounds and all buildings, vehicles, and appurtenances pertaining to the grounds, including any
adjacent premises if they are directly or indirectly under the control of the same person.
Wine and vinous liquor. The product obtained from the alcoholic fermentation of juice of sound ripe grapes,
fruits, berries or honey, and includes wine coolers.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/665
(1998 Code, sec. 111.02)
Sec. 4.02.003 Classification of businesses
Businesses that legally engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages within the town in accordance with the
authority granted by duly passed measures of the local option elections (May 15, 2004) and in accordance with
the state alcoholic beverage control code are classified as one of the following:
(1) Restaurants issued a food and beverage certificate from the state ABC selling mixed beverages
for on-premises consumption only;
(2) Retail businesses engaged in the sale of beer and wine for off-premises consumption only; and
(3) Restaurants or other establishments operating under the state Alcoholic Beverage Code rules
for private clubs.
(1998 Code, sec. 111.03)
Sec. 4.02.004 Hours of operation
This section providing hours of operation applies only as permitted pursuant to section 105.03(c) and (d) of the
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code (the code). All mixed beverage permittees shall have a valid mixed beverage
late hours permit as required by section 29.01 of the code in order to sell and offer for sale mixed beverage
between midnight and 2:00 a.m. on any day. (Ordinance 2015-22 adopted 8/25/15)
Sec. 4.02.005 Location of businesses
(a) Retail businesses engaged in sale of beer and wine for off-premises consumption only. The sale of beer
and wine is permitted only in a zoning district where retail sales are allowed. The minimum distance between
retail stores that offer the sale of beer and wine for off-premises consumption and the following uses are:
(1) Schools (public and private): 300 feet. All measurements of distances are as provided for in
state law (property line to property line and in a direct line across intersections). Day-cares are not
included in the definition of schools.
(2) Churches: 300 feet. All measurements of distances are as provided for in state law (along the
property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across
intersections).
(3) Hospitals: 300 feet. All measurements of distances are as provided for in state law (along the
property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across
intersections).
(b) Restaurants issued food and beverage certificate selling mixed beverages for on-premises consumption
only. The sale of mixed beverages in a restaurant by food and beverage certificate holders is allowed in any
zoning district where restaurants are allowed. The holder of a permit under this subsection shall not be required
to meet distance requirements as set forth in subsection (a) above.
(1998 Code, sec. 111.08)
State law references–Authority of city to prohibit sale in residential areas, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code; secs. 109.31, 109.32;
sales near church, school or hospital, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 109.33.
Secs. 4.02.006–4.02.030 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/665
Division 2. Permit*
Sec. 4.02.031 Required; procedures
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, distill, brew, import, transport, store for purposes of
sale, distribute or sell any beer, wine or mixed beverages within the town unless such person has obtained a town
permit from the office of the town secretary.
(b) Any person, save and except for home brewers and vintners, wishing to manufacture, distill, brew, import,
transport, store for purposes of sale, distribute or sell any beer, wine or mixed beverages must complete a town
permit application and pay the application fee as set forth in section 4.02.032.
(c) The town secretary shall submit each application to the appropriate town departments, as determined by
the town manager, to ensure that the application complies with all town ordinances and regulations, including
this article.
(d) After approval by all necessary town departments, the application shall be deemed approved and the town
secretary shall issue a town permit upon payment by the applicant of the initial permit fee as set forth in section
4.02.032.
(e) Applications and permits shall be kept on file in the town secretary's office.
(1998 Code, sec. 111.04)
Sec. 4.02.032 Application fee; initial permit fee
(a) An application fee in the amount of $75.00 shall be charged by the town secretary for accepting any initial
permit application. No permit application may be accepted unless accompanied by the application fee.
(b) The town initial permit fee shall be equal to one-half of the state fee required by the state alcoholic
beverage commission of every person that may be issued any state permit or license for the manufacture,
distilling, brewing, importing, transporting, storing, distributing or sale of any beer, wine or mixed beverage,
unless a different fee is allowed or required by state law. No town permit may be issued unless the initial permit
fee is received.
(c) The town secretary shall issue a receipt for the application fee and initial permit fee and keep a record of
the same in the town secretary's office.
(1998 Code, sec. 111.05)
Sec. 4.02.033 Renewal; renewal fee
(a) All permits shall be renewed annually. All permits shall terminate at midnight on the day before the
anniversary date of their issuance, and no permit shall be issued covering a term longer than one year.
(b) The town shall require payment of an annual permit renewal fee by all establishments selling alcoholic
beverages within the town. The permit renewal fee shall be equal to one-half of the state fee required by the state
alcoholic beverage commission of every person that may be issued any state permit or license for the
manufacture, distilling, brewing, importing, transporting, storing, distributing or sale of any beer, wine or mixed
beverage, unless a different fee is allowed or required by state law.
(c) The town secretary may cancel a permit if a permittee fails to pay the permit renewal fee. The town
secretary shall send notice of such cancellation to the address on file with the permit application.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/665
(d) A permittee who sells an alcoholic beverage without first having paid the permit renewal fee under this
section commits a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $200.00.
(1998 Code, sec. 111.06)
ARTICLE 4.03 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.03.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them by this
article. All terminology used in this article and not specifically defined herein, shall retain its meaning in
conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor
body or if not defined therein the latest volume of Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary.
Charitable entities. Entities furthering philanthropic, religious or other nonprofit objectives, including for the
benefit of poor, needy, sick, refugee or disabled persons; the benefit of any church or religious society, sect,
group or order; the benefit of a patriotic or veterans association or organization; and, the benefit of any fraternal,
social or civil organization, or the benefit of any educational institution. Charitable entities shall not be construed
to include entities or individuals furthering the direct benefit of the individual engaging in the solicitation.
Charitable entities shall not be construed to include the entities furthering any political group or political
organization which is subject to financial disclosure under state or federal law.
Consumer. An individual who acquires real or personal property, services, money, or credit for personal, family
or household purposes.
No solicitation sign. A legible sign or placard not less than three inches by four inches in size placed in a
conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to a premises, with lettering not less than two-thirds of an inch
in height, and containing the words “no solicitors,” “no solicitation,” “no trespassing,” “no peddlers,” “no
advertisements,” “no handbills,” or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of such
premises do not desire to have any solicitation made, information delivered or communicated, or handbills left
upon the premises of the residence.
Parkway. The area between the edge of the designated street and the adjacent owner's property line and
including any public easement.
Religious organization. An organization that is dedicated to the support or promotion of a church, religious
society, or any other religious sect, group, or order.
Sidewalk. Any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.
Solicitation. Conduct within the town's corporate limits whereby a solicitor attempts to engage in or engages in
the following activities:
(1) Either orally or in writing, asks for a ride, employment, property, financial aid, money, or any
article representing monetary value, for any purpose;
(2) Whether orally or in writing, peddles, sells or offers to sell goods, services, publications, or
subscriptions;
(3) Whether orally or in writing, takes orders for any goods or services for future delivery;
(4) Distributes without remuneration goods, services, publications, or subscriptions;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/665
(5) Requests signatures on a petition or canvasses for opinions for a survey;
(6) Delivers handbills or circulars door-to-door for the solicitation of money, products, services or
other items of pecuniary value (an offer of membership in any organization is expressly excluded
from the meaning of “solicitation”); or
(7) The act of asking, begging, pleading or in any other such manner, communicating, whether
orally, by written, and/or printed material, hand signing or by any other method, direct or implied, by
an individual or group of individuals for the purpose of receiving or obtaining money, alms, gifts or
items of value, real or intrinsic for said individual, for said group of individuals or for a profit
organization or a nonprofit organization; individual; person or more than one person; organization;
couple; family; relationship; joint venture; joint stock company; partnership; club; company;
corporation; business trust; establishment; religious institution or religion; association, or the like or
chapter or affiliate thereof, for the purposes of giving, use, sustenance, purchase, barter or any other
such form.
Solicitor. Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, association, trust, society, religious
organization, league, or other legal entity (including any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent, or similar
representative) attempting to engage in or engaging in any act of solicitation as that term is defined in this
article.
Street. The right-of-way for a street and the portion of the street that is paved, designated, or used for vehicular
traffic, and all areas dedicated to public use for public street purposes, which include parkways, alleys,
sidewalks, drainage ditches and utility easements.
Town. The town of Fairview, Texas.
Town permit officer. The town secretary or the town secretary's designee.
Traffic island. A barrier within a street or roadway to exclude vehicles, designated for the purpose of separating
or directing streams of vehicular traffic.
Sec. 4.03.002 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense,
and each and every day such violation shall continue be deemed to constitute a separate offense, unless
otherwise specifically set forth in this code. Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required
for proof of any offense defined by this article.
Sec. 4.03.003 Responsibility for acts of solicitors
The recipient of a permit or named applicant shall be responsible for the acts of his/her authorized
representatives or solicitors listed in permit application in connection with solicitation activities. In this regard,
the recipient of the permit shall actively supervise all persons listed in the permit application, which supervision
shall include but not be limited to remaining within the corporate town limits during all solicitation activity and
responding promptly (within 10 minutes) to calls by town representatives relative to the solicitation activity
which may include responding to an on-site complaint from a citizen.
Sec. 4.03.004 Exemptions
(a) The following persons engaged in the activities set out in subsections (1) and (2) below shall first register
with the town permit officer by filling out a form to be promulgated by the town in accordance with the
provisions of this article and by furnishing proof of actual engagement in such activity in the town, and the town
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/665
permit officer shall issue to such person a registration certificate exempting him or her from the terms and
conditions of this article and from paying fees therefor, namely:
(1) Public utility companies or others operating under a franchise granted by the town; and
(2) Insurance salespeople, real estate salespeople and others professionals licensed by the state and
acting in their professional capacities.
(b) The following individuals and entities need not apply for a permit, register with the town permit officer or
the police department, nor pay permitting fees:
(1) Persons under the age of 13 participating in solicitation related to children's activities,
including but not limited to Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, and Big Brothers and Sisters, to the extent that
they are actively supervised by a parent, guardian or other adult person, at least 18 years of age, who
is responsible for the wellbeing and appropriate behavior of the child;
(2) Religious organizations, charitable entities and political organizations and their representatives
communicating or distributing information, handbills or pamphlets only for the purpose of
communicating issues of general interest to the public (a donation received as a result of the
distribution of information, handbills or pamphlets does not affect this exemption);
(3) Ordinary commercial travelers who sell or exhibit for sale goods, wares or merchandise to
persons selling and dealing in the same types of sale goods, wares or merchandise;
(4) Persons making regular delivery of newspapers or magazines or other items which have been
subscribed to by the persons receiving them or by occupants of the premises to which they are
delivered; and
(5) Any federal, state or local governmental unit, official or authority performing governmental
functions or those functions that such unit is legally required to perform.
Sec. 4.03.005 Bond
Each person engaging in solicitation activities requiring cash deposits or taking orders on delivery purchases
(COD) or who requires a contract of agreement to finance the sale of any goods, services or merchandise for
future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future, shall furnish to the town a cash bond in the amount
of $5,000.00, naming the applicant for the permit as principal, in a form approved by the city attorney. The bond
shall be in full force and effect for one year from the date of issuance of the permit, unless otherwise extended
by demand of the town due to the revocation of the permit, or an anticipated delivery date beyond 12 months, in
order to protect the citizens of the town from potential losses associated with such solicitations.
Sec. 4.03.006 Affirmative defense
It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article if the person is occupying the public right-ofway
for the purpose of selling newspapers or publications or other printed material which deal with the
dissemination of information or opinion; however, this defense is not available if said act occurred upon the
paved surface or shoulder of any public street, highway or road.
Sec. 4.03.007 Privately displayed no soliciting signs on residential premises
(a) Whether or not exempted from the permitting or registration requirements of this article, every person
upon going onto any residential premises shall first examine the premises to determine if there exists upon or
near the main entrance to the premises any no solicitation sign as defined in this article. If such a sign exists, the
person shall abide by such notice and immediately depart from the premises without:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/665
(1) Ringing the doorbell, or rapping or knocking upon the door, windows, entrances or walls or
otherwise create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the
premises, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant and engaging in or attempting to
engage in solicitation; or
(2) Distributing, placing, or depositing any type of handbill or pamphlet or disturbing the occupant,
unless the visit is the result of a request made by the occupant.
(b) Subsection (a) of this section does not prohibit an employee of a commercial carrier attempting to deliver
goods previously ordered and addressed to the premises or a neighboring premises, provided that such person
solely delivers or leaves notice of attempted delivery of such goods and does not attempt any act of solicitation.
(c) No person, other than the owner or occupant of the premises, shall remove, deface, or render illegible, a
“No Solicitation” card placed upon the property of the occupant.
(d) Any person who has gained entrance to a premises, or audience with the occupant, whether invited or not,
shall immediately depart from the premises without disturbing the occupant further when requested to leave by
the occupant.
Sec. 4.03.008 Prohibited location, activities and conduct
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation in the following places within the corporate
limits of the town:
(1) On the paved, traveled surface of any public street, parkway, alley or traffic island;
(2) Within 25 feet of the following facilities: ATM machines; entrances and exits of banks, credit
unions, or other financial institutions; exterior public pay telephones; self-service car washes; selfservice
fuel pumps; or public transportation stops;
(3) Any residence, business or other premises which shall exhibit in a no solicitation sign as
defined by this article; or
(4) Any place that results in blockage, obstruction or hindrance of the free flow of traffic in the
lawful use of the street or free passage of pedestrians in the lawful use of the sidewalk.
(b) No solicitation shall be directed to occupants of motor vehicles moving or stopped in traffic on a public
street, parkway or alley.
(c) It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in solicitation that:
(1) Misrepresents the purpose of the solicitation;
(2) Misrepresents the affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation;
(3) Continues efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual informs the solicitor that he
does not wish to give anything to or buy anything from that solicitor;
(4) Represents the issuance of any permit or registration under this article as an endorsement or
recommendation by the town of the solicitation; or
(5) Results in the solicitor remaining on property after the property owner, or the property owner's
designee, representative or agent, has instructed the solicitor to leave.
(d) No solicitor, or person working on his or her behalf, shall shout, make an outcry, blow a horn or whistle, or
use any sound device, including any sound amplifying system, upon any of the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/665
other public places of the town, or otherwise be in violation of any regulations the town has adopted regarding
excessive noise.
(e) No person shall engage in solicitation through the delivery of handbills or circulars by placing said
handbills or circulars on motor vehicles, public utility posts, or other locations such that the same constitutes
littering under chapter 365 of the Texas Health and Safety Code. It is presumed that the person or business
whose address or telephone number is listed in the notice, poster, paper, or device, or who is otherwise named,
described, or identified in the notice, poster, paper, or device, is the person or business who committed the
violation, either personally or through an agent or employee.
(f) Notwithstanding any other provision in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to allow children 13
years of age or younger to engage in solicitation, unless such children are actively supervised by a parent,
guardian or other adult person at least 18 years of age. For purposes of this article, “actively supervised” means
that the adult person shall be within 100 feet of all children 13 years of age or younger for whom the adult
person is responsible at all times when the children are engaged in solicitation.
Sec. 4.03.009 Prohibited times
No person shall engage in solicitation at a private residence in the town on any day other than during times that
are one-half hour after sunrise and one-half hour before sunset, unless the intended transaction is the result of a
request made to such person by the occupant of such private residence. There shall be no solicitations at a
residential premises on a Sunday, New Years Day, Fourth of July, Memorial Day (observed), Labor Day
(observed), Thanksgiving, or Christmas Day, unless the intended solicitation is the result of a request made to
such solicitor by the occupant of such private residence.
Sec. 4.03.010 Consumer's right to cancel
(a) A solicitor shall provide to the consumer in writing the right to cancel a solicitation transaction made in
person or by telephone in which the consideration exceeds $25.00, until midnight of the third business day after
the day on which the consumer signs an agreement or offer to purchase in a solicitation transaction. For purposes
of a telephone solicitation, date of transaction means the day that the consumer receives the goods, services, or
realty purchased in a solicitation transaction.
(b) If the consumer chooses to cancel the solicitation transaction, notification by mail shall be considered
given at the time mailed as evidenced by the postmark; notification by telegram shall be considered given at the
time filed for transmission; and notification by any other writing shall be considered given at the time delivered
to the merchant's designated place of business.
(c) It shall be unlawful for a solicitor to refuse to allow the customer to cancel the solicitation transaction.
(d) Cancellations authorized, and the procedure and notice requirements set forth in chapter 39 of the Texas
Business and Commerce Code, as it may be amended, are applicable to this article, for transactions applicable
thereunder.
Sec. 4.03.011 Health certificate for food vendors
The town permit officer, before issuing permits to merchants of goods of edible quality, shall confirm that the
applicant for said permit has successfully met all the requirements for and secured a health certificate or permit
from the town health officer and county health officer in accordance with the regulations of the Texas
Department of State Health Services. Failure of an applicant to have secured such a health certificate shall be
grounds for denial of a permit.
Sec. 4.03.012 Public disclosure
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/665
All applications, whether or not a permit has been issued, shall be a public record and shall be available for
inspection by members of the public during regular business hours, and copies may be obtained at cost.
Secs. 4.03.013–4.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.03.031 Required
(a) Within the corporate limits of the town, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation under
this article without having first obtained a permit therefor from the town.
(b) Each person engaged in solicitation must have a permit issued under the terms of this article, and such
permit shall be personal to the applicant and shall not be reproduced nor assigned nor transferred to any other
person. Any such attempted transfer or reproduction is a violation of this article and shall render the permit void.
(c) Each permit shall expire as of the date noted thereon, which date shall be in accordance with the
provisions of this article, and such permit shall indicate the hours when solicitation within the town is permitted
in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to represent in connection with any solicitation that the issuance of a
permit, certificate of registration or identification card by the town constitutes an endorsement thereof.
(e) It shall be unlawful for a solicitor to engage in solicitation for a purpose other than that set out in the
application upon which a permit was issued.
(f) A permit shall not be issued to any person under 13 years of age.
(g) Solicitation shall be deemed to have occurred when attempted or completed, regardless of whether the
solicitor receives any contribution or makes any sale.
Sec. 4.03.032 Application
Every applicant for a permit shall unless otherwise excepted apply for a permit from the town permit officer.
Each application required by this article shall be in writing, under oath, notarized and shall set out the following:
(1) The full legal name of the applicant;
(2) The full address of the applicant's permanent residence and any current temporary address;
(3) The applicant's home and business telephone numbers;
(4) Whether the person represents a partnership, corporation or association; and:
(A) The business address and telephone number of the applicant;
(B) If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal business address and
telephone number of each partner;
(C) If a corporation, the person applying shall state whether it is organized under the laws of
the state or is a foreign corporation, and must show the mailing address, business location,
telephone number, name of the individual in charge of the principle office of such corporation,
and the names and addresses of all officers and directors or trustees of said corporation, and, if a
foreign corporation, the place of incorporation; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/665
(D) If an association, the application shall show the association's principal business address
and telephone number, if any, and shall show names and principal business or residence
addresses and telephone numbers of all members of the association unless they exceed 10 in
number, in which case the application shall so state and the person applying may alternatively
list the names and principal business or residence addresses and telephone numbers of the
officers and directors or trustees of the association. If the association is part of a multistate
organization or association, the mailing address and business locations of its local office, or if it
has none, its principle place of business;
(E) Name and address of each person intended to engage in solicitation under the permit;
(5) The full legal names, mailing address and telephone numbers of all individuals who will be in
supervision, charge or control of any solicitation;
(6) The kind, type and character of goods or services proposed to be offered for sale, including the
name brand, manufacturer and distributor of goods and commodities and the name, publisher and
distributor of all books, magazines or periodicals to be offered for sale;
(7) Names, mailing addresses and telephone numbers of five persons as references, excluding
relatives and persons living with the applicant;
(8) How often the applicant intends to solicit during the term of the permit;
(9) The time period within which the solicitation is to be made, giving the date of the beginning of
solicitation and its projected conclusion;
(10) A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation is to be attempted or
accomplished;
(11) The names of any cities and counties where the applicant has worked or been employed
within the previous six months;
(12) Whether the applicant, or any solicitor listed in the application, has ever been convicted of a
felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or violence against another person;
(13) The applicant's state driver's license number or a state-approved identification card number of
applicant and each solicitor; and
(14) The Social Security number of applicant and each solicitor.
Sec. 4.03.033 Attachments
In addition to any other requirements for permit application, there shall be attached to each application for a
permit, the following:
(1) Two recent photographic likenesses of the applicant's face, and any solicitor soliciting under
said permit, which photographs shall not exceed one inch square in size;
(2) A certificate or letter from the president, vice-president, general manager, sales manager,
assistant sales manager or district or area manager of the company for which the applicant works,
sells or solicits stating that the applicant is an employee and/or agent of such company;
(3) A reference to a recognized financial rating publication, which reference shall show the page
on which the company's or firm's financial standing can be found; or a letter or a certificate from an
association or organization which has as its purpose the protection of citizens of the United States
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/665
against illegal or unsavory business practices stating that the firm or company is a member in good
standing of such association or organization;
(4) In the event that the applicant is an individual who does not intend to engage in solicitation for
any firm or company, letters of recommendation from two citizens of the applicant's permanent city
or county of residence; and
(5) A photocopy of an applicant's unexpired driver's license, state-approved identification card,
military identification card or passport.
Sec. 4.03.034 Solicitors identification cards
The town permit officer shall issue identification cards for each solicitor approved for a permit. Each
identification card issued by the police department shall bear the name of the applicant, the application number,
the name of the solicitor, or agent, and the expiration date of the permit, and it shall have printed prominently
thereon in red: “This identification card is not an endorsement of the solicitation by the town or any of its
officers or employees. It is the duty of every person to verify all information given to you by this solicitor.” The
applicant shall provide, by a separate list, the names and addresses of all agents or employees for whom
identification cards are to be issued.
Sec. 4.03.035 Application fee
The application shall be accompanied by a $50.00 fee for the original solicitor or applicant, plus a $35.00 fee for
each additional solicitor working for the original solicitor or applicant, for the investigation and administration
of the provisions of this article. This fee shall be paid to the town permit officer. In addition, the applicant shall
pay a $15.00 fee for each identification card issued.
Sec. 4.03.036 Investigation of applicant
It shall be the duty of the town's chief of police, or his/her authorized designee, to secure a background check
through any lawful means on each applicant, and all other persons listed on the application before issuance of a
permit, which investigation may include but is not necessarily limited to personal interviews with named
individuals, warrant and criminal background checks, verification of references and information contained
within the application.
Sec. 4.03.037 Issuance
A permit applied for under this article shall be issued by the town permit officer within 10 days after the
application is completed and filed, unless it is determined that the applicant has provided false or incomplete
information on its application, failed to pay the application fee, or is in violation of any requirement or
prohibition of this article. A permit requested under this article shall be issued for the length of time requested,
not to exceed six months. An expired permit may be renewed under the same terms and conditions as the
original application and subject to the same fees and application submission requirements.
Sec. 4.03.038 Form
Each permit shall be printed in black except that the following shall be printed prominently thereon in red: “The
issuance of the permit is not an endorsement by the town or any of its officers or employees.” Each permit shall
bear a permit number, which is the same as the file containing the application filed by the applicant.
Sec. 4.03.039 Display
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation without carrying the identification card and
displaying the permit required, by this article on his or her person, in plain view, while engaged in solicitation.
Sec. 4.03.040 Exhibiting
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/665
Every solicitor shall identify himself or herself as a salesperson upon approaching a citizen in a public place or
at a private dwelling and explain the purpose of the solicitation.
Sec. 4.03.041 Revocation
(a) If, after the permit required by this article has been issued, the town police chief, or his/her authorized
designee, finds that the permit was obtained by false representation in the application, or the permit has been
reproduced or transferred or assigned to another person or the applicant has led someone to believe the permit is
an endorsement of the applicant's product or service by the town, or in the event of fraud or misrepresentation by
the permit holder, or in the event of conviction of the permit holder of a felony or a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude, or in the event the permit holder has failed to furnish the items required by this article, such
permit may be revoked by the police department or its authorized designee.
(b) If a police officer, code enforcement officer or building official has probable cause to believe that a
solicitor has engaged in prohibited conduct as set forth in this article, the officer may revoke the permit of the
permit holder.
(c) If more than one complaint of misconduct by a solicitor or group of solicitors working for the same
company is received, the permit may be immediately revoked by the town without any refund of permitting fees
paid.
Sec. 4.03.042 Appeal from denial or revocation
Should a permit be denied or revoked, the applicant or permit holder may appeal that action to the town council
by submitting a letter to the town secretary within 10 days to complain of that action. A hearing of the denial or
revocation will then be scheduled for the next regular meeting of the town council, or a special meeting of the
town council, to be held within 15 days of the appeal. The town council shall render a decision on the appeal
within one day of the date of the hearing. The hearing shall be an administrative hearing. Adherence to formal
rules of evidence shall not be required. The decision of the town council shall be final and binding. No new
application for a permit will be considered for six months after denial or revocation, unless said denial or
revocation is without prejudice or is conditional and the conditions have been satisfied as determined by the
town police chief.
(Ordinance 2010-4-6C, sec. 2.01, adopted 4/6/10)
ARTICLE 4.04 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Sec. 4.04.001 Purpose and intent
It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the public health, safety and
welfare, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the harmful location and concentration of
sexually oriented businesses within the town and to minimize the deleterious secondary effects of sexually
oriented businesses both inside such businesses and outside in the surrounding communities. The provisions of
this article have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials or performances, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the
intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented materials, entertainment or
performances to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize
the distribution of obscene material. This article, including but not limited to its penalty provisions, is intended
to apply to all individuals, groups of two or more individuals, proprietorships, partnerships, corporations, limited
liability companies, associations, or other legal entities.
Sec. 4.04.002 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/665
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Achromatic. Colorless, lacking in saturation or hue, without limitation, grays, tans and light earth tones shall be
included, but white and black and any bold coloration that attracts attention shall be excluded from the definition
of achromatic.
Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images, and where the images so displayed are distinguished
or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult audio or video center. Any place that provides its goods or services to any customer offsite or remotely -
such that no customers physically enter the premises of the building - and any of the following activities occurs:
(1) Inbound or outbound telephone or other audio communications in which a topic or purpose of
the communication between an occupant of the premises and a third party is the discussion or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or is otherwise pornographic in
nature and consideration for same is charged by the business;
(2) Video or audio broadcasting, whether live, delayed, by film, by tape recording or otherwise, of
specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas or pornographic material and consideration for
same is charged by the business; or
(3) Filming, taping or otherwise creating video or audio recordings, including but not limited to,
films, movies, videotapes, DVD's, audiotapes or compact discs, that are broadcast, sold,
manufactured or distributed for consideration and off-site distribution and which display specified
sexual activities, specified anatomical areas, or pornographic material.
Adult bathhouse. An establishment where all or a portion of its business is offering baths and/or showers with
other persons present who are in a state of nudity, in a semi-nude condition, or displaying specified anatomical
areas.
Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features or
allows the provision of live sexually oriented entertainment to its customers or which holds itself out to the
public as an establishment where sexually oriented entertainment is available, but such definition shall not
include any sexually oriented use prohibited by this article. Signs, advertisements or an establishment name
including verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to “adult
entertainment,” “strippers,” “showgirls,” “exotic dancers,” “gentleman's club,” “XXX” or similar terms, shall be
considered evidence that the establishment holds itself out to the public as a sexually oriented cabaret or
nightclub.
Adult media. Any media distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult media store or adult retail store. Any store with adult media or adult merchandise for sale and/or rent, and
to which any of the following applies:
(1) The sale and/or rental of adult media or adult merchandise constitutes more than a negligible
part of the business or attraction of the establishment, taking into consideration any of the following:
(A) The value realized from the sale and/or rental of adult media and/or adult merchandise;
(B) The floor area devoted to adult media and/or adult merchandise;
(C) The amount of inventory constituting adult media and/or adult merchandise; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/665
(2) The business advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a “XXX,” “adult,” “sexually
oriented,” or similar type of adult media store.
Adult merchandise. Means and includes any of the following categories of merchandise:
(1) Lingerie presented in combination with other merchandise contained within this definition;
(2) Leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic
practices;
(3) Condoms or sexual lubricants presented in combination with other merchandise contained
within this definition;
(4) Sexually oriented novelties; and
(5) Adult media.
Adult motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
(1) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with
closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities (this definition does not include lodging facilities
that offer adult media via commercial cable or satellite services on room televisions as ancillary
television programming if such lodging facilities are not described under subsections (2), (3) or (4) of
this definition);
(2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10 hours;
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is
less than 10 hours or allows the tenant or occupant to have a weekly or monthly rental of the room
for the purposes of providing sexually oriented entertainment; or
(4) Is marketed as or offered as “adult,” “XXX,” “couples,” “sexually oriented,” or similar lodging
facility.
Adult motion picture theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion
picture, videos, DVD's, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depictions or descriptions of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
Adult theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features
or allows the provision of live sexually oriented entertainment to its customers or which holds itself out to the
public as an adult theater, but such definition shall not include any sexually oriented use or practice prohibited
by this article. Signs, advertisements or an establishment name including verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual
stimulation or gratification or by references to “adult entertainment,” “XXX theater” or similar terms, shall be
considered evidence that the establishment holds itself out to the public as an adult theater.
Adult video viewing kiosk or booth. Any kiosk, booth, cubicle, stall, or compartment that is designed,
constructed, or used to hold or seat customers and is used for presenting videos or viewing publications by any
photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other means or medium (including, but not limited to, film, video
or magnetic tape, laser disc, CD-ROM's, books, DVD's, magazines or periodicals) to show images of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by customers therein. The term “booth,” “arcade
booth,” “preview booth,” and “video arcade booth” shall be synonymous with the term adult video viewing
kiosk or booth.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/665
Attached wall sign. A sign attached to or painted onto an exterior wall of the main building or structure of a
sexually oriented business.
Chief of police. The chief of police for the town or his or her designee.
Employee. A person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time,
part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is designated an employee, independent contractor, agent
or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said
business. Employee does not include a person on the premises exclusively for repair or maintenance of the
premises or equipment on the premises, or exclusively for the delivery of goods to the premises.
Entertainer. A person paid to provide entertainment to customers at a sexually oriented business; entertainment
may consist of dancing, singing, modeling, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with
customers whereby the entertainer is paid any form of remuneration directly or indirectly for such conversations.
Escort. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another
person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease or specified sexual
activities for another person.
Escort agency. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts
as one of its business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
Establish or establishment. When used as a verb, means and includes any of the following:
(1) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any
sexually oriented business;
(3) The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business;
or
(4) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
License. Refers to both a sexually oriented business license and a sexually oriented business employee license,
unless otherwise specified.
Licensee. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee license, a
person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business.
Manager. A person designated by the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to be responsible for the
operation of such business at a particular location at a particular time; when the owner, proprietor, or other
principal in the business is present, such person may be considered the manager.
Manager's station. An office or place within a structure allowing for a manager to have visual observation of
places and persons within the structure as required and defined within this article.
Media. Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, film, videotape or
videotape production, or pictorial representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that is
or may be used as a means of communication. Media includes but shall not necessarily be limited to books,
newspapers, magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, CD-ROMS, DVD's, other magnetic media, and
undeveloped pictures.
Minor. A natural person under the age of 18 years.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/665
Nude model studio. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical
areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by
other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Nude model studio shall not include a proprietary
school licensed by the state or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public
taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are
transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
(1) That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates
a person in a state of nudity or semi-nude is available for viewing;
(2) Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of
the class; and
(3) Where no more than one model who is in a state of nudity or is semi-nude is on the premises at
any one time.
Nudity or a state of nudity. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft
or cleavage with less than a fully opaque (meaning nontranslucent) covering, the showing of the female breast
with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple or areola, or the showing of the covered male
genitals in a discernibly aroused state.
On-site card. The personal photographic identification card for an employee issued by the chief of police that
must be provided by the employee to the manager or on-site manager in charge of the sexually oriented business
as set forth herein.
Operates or causes to be operated. To cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to
be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part
owner, or licensee of the business.
Operator. Any person who has managerial control of the on-site, day-to-day operations of a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether that person is a designated operator of the sexually oriented business.
Person. An individual, a group of two or more individuals, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, association, or other legal entity or organization.
Personal card. The personal photographic identification card for an employee issued by the chief of police that
must be displayed on the employee as set forth herein.
Principal. Over 35% of customers, volume of sales, stock in trade, display areas, or presentation time, or any
combination thereof in any three-month increment period beginning from the date of issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. Stock in trade shall be measured with all titles or objects available on the premises for sale or rental,
including those that are identical being considered a separate title or object.
Property. A tract of real property or multiple tracts of real property under joint ownership or control.
Residential use. A single-family, townhouse (or town home), condominium, duplex, triplex, fourplex, mobile
home, manufactured housing (or manufactured home), or multiple-family dwelling and further includes:
(1) Senior housing;
(2) A residential tract as defined in section 14.02.020 of this code; or
(3) Those uses listed in section 14.02.684(1) of this code.
Sadomasochistic practices. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is clothed, nude or semi-nude, or the
condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed nude or semi7/
15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/665
nude.
Semi-nude or in a semi-nude condition. The showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top
of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the
entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human
female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the
nipple or areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
Sexual encounter center. A business or commercial enterprise that for any form of consideration:
(1) Any form of physical contact, including massage, by a person of the buttock, anus, male
genitals, female genitals, or female breast of another person for the primary purpose of sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification and regardless of whether any of the persons is in a state of nudity
or semi-nude; or
(2) Body painting of the buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast of another
person, whether those of the patron or employee, for the primary purpose of sexual stimulation or
sexual gratification and regardless of whether any of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
Sexual encounter centers do not include any massage establishment lawfully registered under Texas
Occupations Code, chapter 455, as amended, at which services are only provided by persons
registered as a massage therapist under Texas Occupations Code, chapter 455, as amended.
Sexually oriented business.
(1) An adult arcade, adult audio or video center, adult media store, adult retail store, adult video
viewing kiosk or booth, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort
agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center or other commercial enterprise a principal
business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of devices or any
other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer. Sexually
oriented businesses do not include:
(A) A bookstore, movie theater, or video store, unless that business is an adult media store,
adult motion picture theater, or adult audio or video center;
(B) A business operated by or employing a licensed psychologist, licensed physical therapist,
licensed athletic trainer, licensed cosmetologist, or licensed barber engaged in performing
functions authorized under the license held; or
(C) A business operated by or employing a licensed physician or licensed chiropractor
engaged in practicing the healing arts.
(2) A sexually oriented business may have other business purposes that are not those of a sexually
oriented business or related to a sexually oriented business. Such other business purposes will not
serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as a sexually oriented
business so long as one of its business purposes is a sexually oriented business.
Specified anatomical areas.
(1) The human male genitals in a discernibly aroused state, even if completely and opaquely
covered; or
(2) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, vulva, anus, anal
cleft, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
Specified criminal activity. Any of the following offenses:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/665
(1) Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; aggravated promotion of prostitution, compelling
prostitution; obscenity, obscene display or distribution; sale, distribution or display of harmful
material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; employment harmful to children as described by
Texas Penal Code, section 43.251; possession, promotion, or distribution of child pornography;
public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity;
sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault; incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway
child; molestation of a child; gambling; offenses involving necrophilia or bestiality; or distribution of
a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above as well as criminal attempt,
conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses, under the criminal or penal
statutes of the states, country, county or municipality for which:
(A) Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
the terms of community supervision, probation, parole or deferred disposition or the date of
release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
(B) Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of conviction or
the date of release from the terms of community supervision, probation, parole or deferred
disposition or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
(C) Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
the terms of community supervision, probation, parole or deferred disposition or the date of
release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses
occurring within any 24-month period.
(2) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the
applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
Specified sexual activities. Means any of the following:
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female
breasts;
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including but not limited to, intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
(3) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections
(1) and (2) of this definition.
Substantial enlargement. The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the floor
areas exist on:
(1) The date the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect; or
(2) For any premises not used as a sexually oriented business on the date the ordinance from which
this article is derived takes effect, the date an application for a license to use the premises as a
sexually oriented business is received by the town designating the floor area of the structure or
proposed structure in which the sexually oriented business will be conducted, regardless of any
subsequent changes in applicants, licenses, owners, or operators of the premises or the sexually
oriented business.
Town. The Town of Fairview, Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/665
Town manager. The town manager for the town or his or her designee.
Transfer of ownership or control. Includes any of the following:
(1) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities or ownership interests which constitutes a direct, indirect, legal,
equitable or beneficial controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar
means; or
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device to which a transfer of any
ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon
the death of the person possessing the ownership of control.
Sec. 4.04.003 Classification
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(1) Adult arcades;
(2) Adult audio or video center;
(3) Adult bathhouses;
(4) Adult cabarets;
(5) Adult video viewing kiosk or booth;
(6) Adult media stores or adult retail stores;
(7) Adult motels;
(8) Adult motion picture theaters;
(9) Adult theaters;
(10) Escort agencies;
(11) Nude model studios; and
(12) Sexual encounter centers.
Sec. 4.04.004 Separation distances related to sexually oriented businesses
(a) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in
any zoning district other than as allowed by the town's zoning ordinance as set forth in chapter 14 of this code,
as amended, and including any applicable regulations adopted by reference therein.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated, within the town's corporate
limits, a sexually oriented business on any property located within 1,200 feet of any of the following uses or
areas that are located within the town's corporate limits (or any of the following proposed uses for which a final
plat has been approved and filed as of record):
(1) Property upon which a religious institution, church, synagogue, mosque, temple or structure
that is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities or property owned by, or
for the benefit of, a religious organization that intends to use the property for such purposes if the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/665
property is the subject of a project for which any development rights have vested under chapter 245
of the Texas Local Government Code or if such ownership and intent has been registered with the
town in accordance with section 4.04.026 of this article;
(2) Property upon which a public or private educational facility, including but not limited to, child
day-care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools,
intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuing education schools, special education schools, junior colleges, colleges
and universities (“schools” or “facilities” include the school grounds and related athletic or other
facilities regularly visited by students);
(3) Property any part of which is within:
(A) A zoning district zoned in whole or in part for any residential use under the town's zoning
ordinance, as amended; or
(B) An area designated for residential use or future school on the town's 2005 comprehensive
plan, as amended, or the town's future land use plan, as amended;
(4) Property upon which is located a public park or recreational area which has been designated for
park or recreational activities, including but not limited to, a park, playground, swimming pool, golf
course, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, or other similar public land - or commonly
or privately owned or controlled open-space land or land dedicated for open-space purposes - within
the town any of which is under the control, operation, or management of a governmental entity,
political subdivision, type A or type B development corporation, public improvement district,
municipal management district, homeowner's association, condominium association, or other similar
entity or organization (such property does not include nature trails, hiking trails, pedestrian or bicycle
paths, or wilderness areas except to the extent such trails, paths, or areas are located within the
boundary lines of a public park or recreational area that has been designated for park or recreational
activities);
(5) Property devoted to a residential use or property developed for residential use;
(6) Property upon which is located an entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards
children or family entertainment;
(7) Property upon which there is any premises or use licensed pursuant to the state's alcoholic
beverage code or upon which there is any premises or use that is the subject of a pending application
for a license or permit governed by the state's alcoholic beverage code;
(8) Property upon which a business or establishment is open or operates 24 hours a day;
(9) Property upon which is located any use listed in section 14.02.684(4)–(9) of this code;
(10) Property upon which is located a hospital, medical or dental clinic or similar medicallyoriented
land use; or
(11) Property upon which is located a meeting place for a nonprofit civic organization with
members who are minors such as YMCA, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts and similar organizations that
include a primary purpose resulting in the regular gathering of children and minors on such property.
(c) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated, within the town's corporate
limits, a sexually oriented business within 1,200 feet of the right-of-way of U.S. Highway 75/Central
Expressway or within 500 feet of the right-of-way of any of the following roadways located within the town's
corporate limits:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/665
(1) FM Road 2786 (Stacy Road);
(2) FM Road 1378;
(3) State Highway 5 (Greenville Avenue); and
(4) County Road 326.
(d) A person commits an offense if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial
enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,200 feet of another
sexually oriented business.
(e) A person commits an offense if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance
of more than one classification of sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof,
or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof
containing another sexually oriented business.
(f) For the purpose of subsection (b) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, between the point on the property line of the property upon which a
sexually oriented business is operated (or proposed to be operated) to the point on the property line of the
property upon which one or more of the uses listed in subsection (b) exist (or are proposed to exist under any
type of permit application) that results in the shortest distance between said property lines.
(g) For the purpose of subsection (c) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, between the point on the property line of the property upon which a
sexually oriented business is operated (or proposed to be operated) to the point on the boundary of the right-ofway
in question that results in the shortest distance between the property line and the edge of said right-of-way.
(h) For purposes of subsection (d) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political
boundaries, between the respective points on the property lines of each property used (or sought to be used) as a
sexually oriented business that results in the shortest distance between said property lines.
(i) The existence or location of one or more jurisdictional boundary lines of a municipality, county or other
political subdivision shall not affect the measurement of the distance requirements of this article.
(j) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating prior to the effective date of this article that is in
violation of one or more subsections of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming
use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless sooner terminated for any reason,
including but not limited to, suspension or revocation of license, or voluntary discontinuance for a period of 30
days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered except that the use
may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,200 feet of one
another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first lawfully
established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established
business is nonconforming.
(k) A sexually oriented business that is properly licensed under this article and is otherwise lawfully operating
as a conforming use (“conforming sexually oriented business”) is not rendered a nonconforming use by the
subsequent:
(1) Location or expansion of a use listed in subsection (b) of this section within 1,200 feet of the
conforming sexually oriented business;
(2) Enlargement or expansion of any of the roadways or rights-of-way listed in subsection (c) of
this section within 500 feet (or within 1,200 feet in the case of U.S. Highway 75/Central Expressway)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/665
of the conforming sexually oriented business; or
(3) Location or expansion of another sexually oriented business within 1,200 feet of the
conforming sexually oriented business.
(l) Subsection (k) of this section applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an
application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or been revoked. If subsection (k) of this section
applies to a conforming sexually oriented business, said conforming sexually oriented business is not in
violation of subsections (b), (c) or (d) of this section if the location of said conforming sexually oriented
business would violate the distance requirements set forth in said subsections (b), (c) or (d) solely because of the
subsequent location or expansion of a use, roadway, or right-of-way listed in said subsections (b), (c) or (d).
(m) A person commits an offense if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance
of a sexually oriented business within any tax increment financing zone, public improvement district or road
district established by the town.
(n) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated, within the town's corporate
limits, a sexually oriented business on property that is located:
(1) Within 500 feet of the center of the channel of Sloan Creek, Wilson Creek, or the associated
tributaries of said waterways; or
(2) Between 500 feet and 1,200 feet from the center channel of Sloan Creek, Wilson Creek, or the
associated tributaries of said waterways, unless the premises of such sexually oriented business -
including but not limited to all structures and parking areas - are visually screened with screening
construction materials, landscaping materials or a combination of such materials in a configuration
that is at least eight feet in height from ground level and that adequately creates a visual buffer of the
premises of the sexually oriented business from view from any vantage point of a pedestrian standing
or walking on the ground within 500 feet of the center of the channel of said waterways.
(o) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated, within the town's corporate
limits, a sexually oriented business on property that is within 1,200 feet of a nature trail, hiking trail, pedestrian
or bicycle path, or wilderness area if such trail, path or area has been designated for public use, unless the
premises of such sexually oriented business - including but not limited to all structures and parking areas - are
visually screened with screening construction materials, landscaping materials or a combination of such
materials in a configuration that is at least eight feet in height from ground level and that adequately creates a
visual buffer of the premises of the sexually oriented business from any vantage point of a pedestrian standing or
walking on the ground on any such trail, path or area.
(p) Before a license may be issued for operation of a sexually oriented business, the applicant must submit to
the town's planning department a site plan demonstrating compliance with all distance requirements and
restrictions in this section, and, to the extent that either or both of subsections (n) or (o) are applicable, a site
plan and construction plans showing compliance with said subsections. The requirements for submission of
plans under this subsection are cumulative of any requirements or regulations relating to site plans or
constructions plans under other ordinances or regulations adopted by the town.
Sec. 4.04.005 License required
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a sexually oriented business in the town without
a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the town pursuant to this article for the premises at which the
sexually oriented business is operating, or to operate such business after such license has expired or has been
revoked or suspended by the town.
(b) It is unlawful for any person, entertainer, server, employee, manager, operator or owner to knowingly
perform any work, service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an unlicensed sexually oriented
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/665
business.
(c) It is unlawful for any person who owns, manages or operates a sexually oriented business to have an
employee or to employ a person, regardless of the nature of the employment, who works for the sexually
oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the town pursuant to this
article.
(d) It is unlawful for any person to obtain employment, regardless of the nature of the employment
relationship, with a sexually oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee
license pursuant to this article.
(e) It is unlawful for any person to fail to have at least one manager, who has a sexually oriented business
employee license and who is responsible for ensuring compliance with this article, on-duty and working at any
time the sexually oriented business is open for business.
(f) The failure to post a sexually oriented business license in the manner required herein shall be prima facie
evidence that such business has not obtained such a license. In addition, it shall be prima facie evidence that any
entertainer, employee, manager or owner who performs any business, service or entertainment in a sexually
oriented business in which a sexually oriented business license is not posted in the manner required herein had
knowledge that such business is not licensed.
(g) To the extent a sexually oriented business is permitted under this article, a separate license is required for
each separately defined type of sexually oriented business. A sexually oriented business license shall be issued
only for the one sexually oriented business use listed on the application. Any change in the type of sexually
oriented business use shall invalidate the sexually oriented business license and require the licensee to obtain a
new license for the change in use. The establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented
business in the same building, structure or portion thereof is prohibited.
(h) Each sexually oriented business license and each sexually oriented business employee license shall expire
one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application for renewal. Application for
renewal shall be made at least 30 business days prior to the expiration date, and when made less than 30 business
days before the expiration date, the license will still expire on its expiration date. When the town denies renewal
of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to
denial, the town finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant
may be granted a license if at least 90 business days have elapsed since the date the denial became final.
(i) Sexually oriented business licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses are nontransferable.
Sec. 4.04.006 License application and fees
(a) An application for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license
shall be submitted to the chief of police on a form provided by the town and shall be sworn to as true and
correct.
(b) All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this article. The application may request
and the applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the town to determine
whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this section.
(c) Only a person who is an officer of or who has an ownership interest in, a sexually oriented business may
apply for a sexually oriented business license. An individual wishing to operate a sexually oriented business
must sign the application as the applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
entity other than an individual, then each individual having the power to control or direct its operations, each
individual who is an officer and/or each individual having a 20% or greater ownership interest in the sexually
oriented business must sign the application for a license as the applicants. Such persons include, but are not
limited to, general partners, officers, directors, and controlling shareholders or owners. Each applicant must be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/665
qualified under this article and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. Each
application must be sworn to be true and correct by each applicant.
(d) The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the following information
and be accompanied by the following documents:
(1) If the applicant is:
(A) An individual, the individual shall state such person's legal name and any aliases and
submit proof that such person is at least 18 years of age;
(B) A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, the date of its formation,
evidence that the partnership is in good standing under the laws of the state and if not a Texas
partnership, its state of formation, the names and capacity of all partners and officers, whether
the partnership is general, limited or otherwise, a copy of the partnership agreement or
certificate of partnership, if any, and the official name and address to be used for process of
service on the partnership; and/or
(C) A corporation, limited liability company or other legal entity, the entity shall state its
complete name, the date of its incorporation or formation, evidence that the entity is in good
standing under the laws of the state of formation and if not a Texas entity, the state of
incorporation or formation, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and controlling
stockholders or owners, and the name of the registered agent and the address of the registered
office for service of process.
(2) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that
of the applicant; the application must:
(A) State the sexually oriented business's fictitious name or business owner's fictitious name;
and
(B) Submit the required registration and assumed name documents.
(3) Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, and
jurisdiction of each conviction, and the date of release from confinement, if applicable.
(4) Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license -
governed under this article or other similar sexually oriented business provisions previously adopted
by the town or adopted by another city or county - denied, suspended or revoked, including the name
and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or
revoked, the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person
residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal
stockholder or owner of a corporation or other legal entity that is licensed under this article whose
license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the
sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, and the date of
denial, suspension or revocation.
(5) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds any other licenses under
this article or other similar sexually oriented business regulations from another city or county and, if
so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses.
(6) The classification of the sexually oriented business for which the applicant is seeking the
license. A sexually oriented business may only have one classification to be eligible for a license.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/665
(7) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the
property, street address, telephone number, if any, and the dates a notice sign was posted as required
by this article or state law.
(8) The applicant's mailing address and residence address.
(9) For each applicant, a copy of a valid state driver's license with photo, or a valid state
identification card with photo. The originals of the required forms of identification shall be presented
to the chief of police for inspection prior to the issuance of a license.
(10) The applicant's driver's license number and state of issuance.
(11) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including all entrances, exits,
doorways and windows, a statement of total floor space occupied by the business, prepared and
sealed by an architect or engineer, drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of
the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
(12) A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days prior to application by
a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing
sexually oriented businesses within 1,200 feet of the property to be certified; the property lines or
boundaries of the uses, rights-of-way, and locations described in sections 4.04.004(b) and (c) of this
article and their respective distances from the property to be certified. For purposes of this article, a
use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence or owned by such type of user at
the time an application is submitted.
(13) A statement whether the applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is delinquent in
payment to the town of taxes, fees, fines or penalties.
(e) The completed application for a sexually oriented business employee license shall contain the following
information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:
(1) The applicant's name or any other name (including “stage” names) or aliases used by the
individual.
(2) Age, date, and place of birth.
(3) Height, weight, hair and eye color.
(4) Present residence address and telephone number.
(5) Present business address and telephone number.
(6) A copy of a valid state driver's license with photo, or a valid state identification card with
photo. The originals of the required forms of identification shall be presented to the chief of police
for inspection prior to the issuance of a license.
(7) Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
(8) A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's
fingerprints on a form provided by the town. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be
paid by the applicant.
(9) A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five years immediately
preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously
operated or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state, or country, has ever had a
license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/665
professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such
denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and
describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial,
revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application.
(10) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of one or more specified criminal
activities as defined in this article and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place
and jurisdiction of each conviction, and the date of release from confinement, if applicable.
(11) A statement whether the applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is delinquent in
payment to the town of taxes, fees, fines or penalties.
(f) All employees of a sexually oriented business existing prior to the passage of this article must submit an
application for a sexually oriented business employee license required by this article no later than 60 days from
the effective date of this article and any employee failing to do so shall not continue to work on the premises of a
sexually oriented business if he/she fails to submit an application within 60 days or if the application for license
is denied. Any person who fails to timely submit an application for a license as required by this subsection, or
any person operating sexually oriented business who allows an employee to continue working who is not in
compliance with this subsection or who fails to receive a license shall be considered to be in violation of this
section.
(g) Each application for a sexually oriented business license, or renewal thereof, shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application fee of $3,000.00. Each application for a sexually oriented business employee license,
or renewal thereof, shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $500.00. An application shall not
be considered filed until the required fee is paid and the application is complete in all respects and all
information and documentation required by the application form has been submitted.
(h) Each applicant shall sign a waiver and authorization form authorizing the chief of police to request on
behalf of the applicant criminal history from the state's department of public safety and other appropriate state
and federal agencies. The applicant shall pay all fees and costs associated with such request for criminal history.
(i) Each license issued by the chief of police shall include two photographic identification cards, a personal
card and an on-site card.
(j) If any personal card or on-site card is lost or stolen, the holder thereof shall immediately notify the chief of
police and request a replacement, which shall be issued for a fee of $100.00 within three days following
verification of the identity of the holder.
Sec. 4.04.007 Notice of intent sign posting requirements
The following requirements apply for posting a sign concerning intent to locate sexually oriented businesses.
(1) An applicant for a sexually oriented business license for a location for which a sexually
oriented business license has not previously been issued shall post an outdoor sign at the location in
compliance with Texas Local Government Code, section 243.0075, as amended, not later than the
60th day before submitting the application for a sexually oriented business license.
(2) The sign shall comply with the following and Texas Local Government Code, section
243.0075, as amended:
(A) The sign must be at least 24 by 36 inches in size;
(B) All letters must be at least two inches in height and one and one-half inches in width for
each letter on the sign;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/665
(C) The sign shall state that a sexually oriented business is intended to be located on the
premises;
(D) The sign shall provide the name and business address of the owner and operator;
(E) All required information must be presented in both English and Spanish;
(F) All required information must read horizontally from left to right; and
(G) The sign shall be prominently posted such that it is clearly legible from the public rightof-
way.
(3) The operator of a proposed sexually oriented business shall separately notify the town's
planning director and the town's chief of police, by certified mail or hand delivery, when a sign is
posted at the intended location of the business in compliance with Texas Local Government Code,
section 243.0075, as amended. The notification must be in the form of a sworn statement indicating
the location of the sign and the date it was posted and must be received by the chief of police and the
planning director within five days after the posting of the sign. If the chief of police and the planning
director receive the notification within five days after the sign was posted, the 60-day posting period
required by Texas Local Government Code, section 243.0075 shall be deemed to begin on the posting
date. If the notification is received by the chief of police or the planning director more than five days
after the sign was posted, the 60-day posting requirement shall be deemed to begin on the date the
chief of police verifies the sign has been posted.
(4) When a sign is posted at a proposed location of a sexually oriented business and the proposed
location is not in violation of the distance requirements set out in this article on the posting date, the
sexually oriented business will be eligible to qualify as a conforming use solely with regard to the
distance requirements and if said sexually oriented business becomes a conforming use it will not be
rendered nonconforming by any location, subsequent to the posting of the sign, of any of the uses or
locations described in sections 4.04.004(b), (c) or (d) within 1,200 feet of the posted location.
(5) Subsection (4) above of this section does not apply if:
(A) A completed application for a license for a proposed sexually oriented business is not
filed with the chief of police within 20 days after the expiration of the 60-day posting
requirement under Texas Local Government Code, section 243.0075, as amended;
(B) The application for a license is withdrawn or denied;
(C) The notification requirements of subsection (2) above are not met; or
(D) The sexually oriented business does not begin operations within six months of being
issued a license under this article.
Sec. 4.04.008 Issuance of license
(a) Upon the filing of a complete application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the chief of
police shall issue a temporary license, valid for 30 business days, to said applicant. If the sexually oriented
business employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null and
void. The application shall then be referred to the appropriate town departments for an investigation to be made
on such information as is contained on the application. The investigation shall be completed within 25 business
days from the date the completed application was filed. Upon completion of the investigation, the chief of police
shall issue a license, not later than 30 business days from the date the completed application was filed, unless it
is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following are true:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/665
(1) The application contains false, fictitious or fraudulent information or the applicant has failed to
provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;
(2) The applicant is a minor;
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity;
(4) The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business
prohibited or unlicensed by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular
provision of this article;
(5) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the town
within two years of the date of the current application;
(6) The license application fee and/or costs required by this article have not been paid; or
(7) The applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is delinquent in payment to the town
of taxes, fees, fines or penalties.
(b) Sexually oriented business licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses issued pursuant to
this article shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the
chief of police that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal activity or committed any act
during the existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The
renewal of a sexually oriented business license shall be subject to the payment of a license renewal application
fee of $1,500.00 and the renewal of a sexually oriented business employee license shall be subject to the
payment of a license renewal application fee of $250.00.
(c) Upon the filing of a complete application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be
referred to the appropriate town departments for an investigation to be made on such information as is contained
on the application. The investigation shall be completed within 25 business days from the date the completed
application was filed. Upon completion of the investigation, the chief of police shall issue a license not later than
30 business days from the date the completed application was filed, unless it is determined by a preponderance
of the evidence that one or more of the following are true:
(1) An applicant is a minor;
(2) An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is delinquent in payment to the town
of taxes, fees, fines or penalties, including but not limited to those related to the sexually oriented
business or the property on which the sexually oriented business is located;
(3) The application contains false, fictitious or fraudulent information or the applicant has failed to
provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;
(4) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been denied a license by the
town to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 calendar months or whose
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 calendar
months;
(5) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity;
(6) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the
town's police department, fire department, planning department, building official, engineer, public
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/665
works manager, health department or other town department or applicable governmental agency as
being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances;
(7) The license application fee and/or costs required by this article have not been paid; or
(8) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any
of the provisions of this article, the town's zoning ordinance, as amended, the town's 2005
comprehensive plan, as amended, the town's future land use plan, as amended, or any other
applicable town code provisions, ordinances or other regulations, as amended.
(d) The sexually oriented business license, if issued, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to
whom it is issued, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business and the classification for
which the license is issued. All sexually oriented business licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or
near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time the establishment
is occupied or open for business. A sexually oriented business license is only valid for the premises for which it
was issued. The sexually oriented business employee license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the applicant. The holder of a sexually
oriented business employee license shall have the license available for inspection at the premises where such
person is working pursuant to the authority granted under the license. The holder of a sexually oriented business
license shall be responsible for verifying that each employee holds a valid sexually oriented business employee
license and for maintaining copies of such employee licenses on the premises.
(e) A sexually oriented business license shall be issued to permit only one of the classifications listed in
section 4.04.003 of this article, except that no license shall be issued to permit any proposed sexually oriented
business prohibited under section 4.04.017.
Sec. 4.04.009 Inspection
(a) As a condition for the issuance of a license, an applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the
town administration, police department, fire department, planning department, building official, engineer, public
works manager, health department or other town department or other applicable governmental agency to inspect
the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it
is occupied or open for business.
(b) A licensee or person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an
offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the town as set forth in
subsection (a) above at any time the sexually oriented business is occupied or open for business and at other
reasonable times upon request.
Sec. 4.04.010 Suspension
(a) The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days if the chief of police
determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article, the town's zoning ordinance, as
amended, the town's 2005 comprehensive plan, as amended, the town's future land use plan, as
amended, or any other applicable town code provisions, ordinances or other regulations; or
(2) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this
article.
(b) A sexually oriented business may not operate while the sexually oriented business license issued for that
business is suspended. The holder of a sexually oriented business employee license may not work on the
premises of a sexually oriented business while that employee's license is suspended, except if allowed after
appeal under section 4.04.012.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/665
Sec. 4.04.011 Revocation
(a) The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 4.04.010 occurs and the
license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
(b) The chief of police shall revoke a license if the chief of police determines that:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the
application process;
(2) A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the
premises of the sexually oriented business or failed to report such activities to the police;
(3) A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises of the sexually oriented
business or failed to report such activities to the police;
(4) A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the
licensee's license was suspended;
(5) Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed
premises;
(6) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the town of taxes, fees, fines or penalties, including but
not limited to those related to the sexually oriented business or the property on which the sexually
oriented business is located; or
(7) A manager, having a sexually oriented business employee license, responsible for ensuring
compliance with this article is not on-duty and working at any time the premises is open for business.
(c) When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee
shall not be issued a license for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to
revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant
may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
Sec. 4.04.012 Appeal
(a) Any applicant for a license who is denied a license or the holder of any license that is suspended or
revoked shall have the right to appeal such decision to the town manager. The appeal may be made by filing with
the town manager within 10 business days after notice of the denial, suspension or revocation has been received,
a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal and the name, mailing address, facsimile
number and/or email address, and telephone number to be used by the town to provide notice of an appeal
hearing as required by subsection (b), below.
(b) The town manager shall provide for a hearing on such appeal and shall notify the appellant and chief of
police in writing of the date, time and location of such hearing at least seven calendar days prior to the hearing,
unless appellant agrees in writing to a shorter period. The appeal shall be decided on the basis of a
preponderance of the evidence. For purposes of this article, notice by facsimile or hand delivery shall be
considered delivered on the date of fax, or delivery, if faxed or delivered prior to 5:00 p.m. (local time of the
recipient), and if after 5:00 p.m. it shall be considered delivered on the next day. Notice sent by U.S. mail shall
be deemed delivered on the second day following deposit in the United States mail.
(c) The decision of the town manager shall be made no later than 30 business days after receipt of notice of
the appeal unless waived by the appellant. The decision of the town manager is final.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/665
(d) If the appellant being denied a license renewal holds an unrevoked, unsuspended license for the preceding
year, such person shall be permitted to continue to operate under the existing license until a final decision is
made by the town manager under this section, unless the chief of police determines from evidence or
information presented to it that continued operation or work by the appellant would constitute a continuing and
imminent threat to the public welfare; however, if said license expired prior to the denial of the renewal, the
license shall be considered expired and the appellant may not use the expired license.
(e) An appellant appealing the suspension or revocation of a license may continue to use such license until a
final decision is made by the town manager, unless the town manager determines from evidence or information
presented to him/her that continued operation or work by the appellant would constitute a continuing and
imminent threat to the public welfare.
(f) The decision of the town manager may be appealed to the state district court of the county. An appeal to
the state district court must be filed within 30 days after notice of the decision of the town manager is delivered
to the applicant or licensee in accordance with this article. The applicant or licensee shall bear the burden of
proof in court. The filing of an appeal to state district court stays a suspension or revocation of the license, or
denial of renewal of a license that was valid on the date the application for renewal was submitted, pending a
judicial determination of the appeal by the trial court.
Sec. 4.04.013 Transfer of license
A licensee commits an offense if the licensee transfers or attempts to transfer a license to another person or
entity, or operates a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than at the
address for which the license was issued.
Sec. 4.04.014 Additional regulations for adult media stores and adult retail stores
Adult media stores or adult retail stores shall be subject to the following additional standards:
(1) Separate room. If a business offers for sale or rent other media or merchandise, any adult media
or adult merchandise shall be kept in a separate room physically and visually separate from the
remainder of the store by an opaque wall reaching at least eight (8) feet high or to the ceiling,
whichever is less. In buildings that have adjoining areas of differing floor or ceiling heights, such as
an area with a connected mezzanine or elevated floor area, any such opaque wall must be constructed
in a manner such that any adult media or adult merchandise shall be physically and visually separate
from the remainder of the store.
(2) Access. If a business offers for sale or rent other media or merchandise, access to the room
containing any adult media or adult merchandise shall be through a solid door, accessed by an
electronic-control device controlled and monitored by an employee through direct visual control.
(3) Location. If a business offers for sale or rent other media or merchandise, the entrance to the
room containing any adult media or adult merchandise shall be located so that it is as far as
reasonably practicable from media and/or merchandise likely to be of interest to children.
(4) Room size. Any room wherein any adult media or adult merchandise is offered for sale or rent
shall be in an area containing at least six hundred (600) square feet and having no walls, dividers,
curtains, screens, shades or other similar devices to obscure any part of the room from being
monitored by a manager, unless it is to separate the adult media or adult merchandise from nonadult
media/merchandise.
(5) On-site entertainment prohibited. At no time shall the store provide any type of sexually
oriented on-site entertainment or show any type of sexually oriented electronic imagery on the
premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/665
(6) Displays. No displays of adult media, adult merchandise or sexually oriented images shall be
visible from outside the room containing sexually oriented media and/or merchandise or from the
exterior of the business.
(7) Lighting. Any business that offers for sale or rent sexually oriented media and/or sexually
oriented merchandise shall be well lit at a lighting level of at least 30 footcandles measured three feet
from the floor.
(8) Monitoring. Activities in any room having adult media or adult merchandise shall be monitored
at all times by a manager through direct line of site or live video.
Sec. 4.04.015 Additional regulations pertaining to adult motion picture theaters and adult arcades
Adult motion picture theaters and adult arcades shall be subject to the following additional standards:
(1) Presentation area. All screenings of motion pictures, videos or other media and the use of all
arcade machines and devices shall occur in one or more rooms open to all customers of the
establishment and each such room shall contain at least 1,000 square feet of floor area. No walls,
dividers, curtains, screens, shades or other similar devices shall be used to obscure any part of the
room to which any customer has access.
(2) Lighting. The lighting level in the area occupied by customers shall be at least five footcandles
as measured at the floor.
(3) Seating. Shall consist of individual, theater-style chairs (maximum seat width 20 inches), with
solid arms separating the chairs. No couches, benches, portable chairs, beds, loose cushions or
mattresses, or other forms of seating shall be provided. Separate spaces for wheelchairs shall be
provided in accordance with the applicable provisions of the building code and the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
(4) Adult media/adult merchandise. No adult motion picture theatre shall sell or rent any adult
media or adult merchandise.
Sec. 4.04.016 Additional regulations for adult cabarets and adult theaters
Adult cabarets and adult theaters shall be subject to the following additional standards:
(1) Room. All customer-related activities and entertainment shall take place in one or more rooms
of at least 600 square feet and in a room that has an unobstructed view by all persons from any part of
such room.
(2) Stage. All adult cabaret entertainment shall take place on a stage elevated at least 18 inches
above the surrounding floor area, with a minimum area of 100 square feet, and with a horizontal
separation of at least 60 inches between the edge of the stage and the nearest space to which
customers have access. The horizontal separation shall be physically enforced by a partial wall, rail,
or other physical barrier measuring a minimum of four feet in height.
(3) Access. Managers, entertainers and persons responsible for security shall prohibit any person
other than an entertainer to occupy the stage area.
(4) Tip. All tips for sexually oriented entertainment shall be collected in containers that are
accessible to customers and located at least 10 feet from the stage area.
(5) Lighting. The lighting level in the area occupied by customers shall be at least 15 footcandles
as measured three feet from the floor.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/665
(6) Seating. Shall consist of chairs or open benches; no couches, beds, loose cushions or
mattresses, or other forms of seating shall be provided or used by customers.
(7) Adult merchandise or media. No adult cabaret shall allow on its premises any adult media or
adult merchandise.
Sec. 4.04.017 Sexual encounter centers and similar establishments prohibited
(a) Sexual encounter centers, adult bathhouses, adult motels, escort agencies, nude modeling studios, and
adult video viewing kiosks or booths are prohibited. No license shall be issued for the operation of any such
establishment.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person owns, operates or causes to be operated a sexual encounter
center, adult bathhouse, adult motel, escort agency, nude modeling studio, or adult video viewing kiosk or booth.
Any person in control of the premises shall be presumed to be operating such establishment.
Sec. 4.04.018 Additional regulations applying to operations and conduct of all sexually oriented
businesses
(a) It shall be an offense for a person who is physically in or on the premises of a sexually oriented business to
knowingly and intentionally:
(1) Appear or be in a state of nudity;
(2) Appear or be semi-nude or in a semi-nude condition; or
(3) Depict specified sexual activities.
(b) Manager's identification. Each manager or entertainer shall conspicuously display his personal card upon
his person at all times while acting as an entertainer or manager of or in a sexually oriented business and said
manager's name shall be posted in a conspicuous, easily viewable location, at eye level, at the main cash register
for such business and lighted in a manner for ease of inspection.
(c) On-site card. Each manager or entertainer shall provide his on-site card to the manager or on-site manager
in charge of the sexually oriented business to hold while the manager or entertainer is on the premises of the
sexually oriented business.
(d) Employee rosters. All sexually oriented businesses shall maintain a current list of all employees along with
their completed employment application and photo readily accessible for inspection within the premises.
(e) Interior observation. The interior of all sexually oriented businesses shall be configured in such a manner
that offers an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises excluding restrooms.
(f) Exterior display. No sexually oriented business shall be conducted in any manner that permits the
observation of sexually oriented entertainers engaged in sexually oriented entertainment or any depiction
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any exterior source by display,
decoration, sign, show window or other opening.
(g) Specified criminal acts and specified sexual activities prohibited. No owner, manager, employee,
entertainer or customer shall engage in any specified criminal act or any specified sexual activity in or on the
premises of a sexually oriented business.
(h) A building or space that a sexually oriented business occupies may not contain less than a minimum total
of 6,000 square feet, and must otherwise comply with all town maximum height requirements and setbacks and
all other local, state and federal regulations. To the extent that this provision conflicts with any other buildingrelated
regulation, ordinance or code provision adopted by the town, the most restrictive provision shall govern.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/665
Sec. 4.04.019 Regulations regarding minors and persons under the age of 21
(a) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly allows a minor to enter or be on the premises of a
sexually oriented business. It shall be unlawful for any minor to enter or be on the premises of a sexually
oriented business.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of 21 who is not a
licensee as defined in section 4.04.002 of this article to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented
business unless the person under the age of 21 is at least 18 years of age and such person's presence is:
(1) Only at times other than the hours of operation set forth in section 4.04.020 of this article; and
(2) For the exclusive purpose of repairing or maintenance of the premises or equipment on or in
the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
(c) It shall be unlawful for a person under the age of 21 who is not a licensee as defined in section 4.04.002 of
this article to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business, except as allowed under subsection (b),
above.
Sec. 4.04.020 Hours of operation
No sexually oriented business may remain open at any time except between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00
midnight Monday through Saturday, and 12:00 p.m. (noon) and 12:00 midnight on Sunday.
Sec. 4.04.021 Alcoholic beverage sales and consumption prohibited
It shall be an offense for any person that maintains, owns, or operates a sexually oriented business to serve or
offer for sale for consumption - or permit to be consumed - alcoholic beverages anywhere on the premises of the
sexually oriented business.
Sec. 4.04.022 Signs and exterior portions
(a) A person commits an offense if the person allows:
(1) The merchandise or activities of the sexually oriented business to be visible from any point
outside the premises;
(2) Any exterior portion of the premises of a sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, or
any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, graphics or pictorial representations of any
manner except for the words or letters allowed under subsection (b), below;
(3) Any sign to exist that does not comply with any of the town's sign regulations as they exist or
may be amended; or
(4) Any exterior portion of the premises of a sexually oriented business to be any color other than a
single achromatic color, unless the following conditions are met:
(A) The premises is part of a commercial multi-unit development; and
(B) The exterior portions of each premises or unit in the commercial multi-unit development,
including the exterior of the sexually oriented business, are the same color as one another or are
colored in such a way as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the
commercial multi-unit development.
(b) A sexually oriented business is limited to one attached wall sign with an area not exceeding that calculated
by multiplying the lease space frontage by two feet, and in no case greater than 100 square feet in area. Off7/
15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/665
premises signs calling attention to the existence or location of an SOB within the town are prohibited. No sign
visible from any point outside the premises shall contain photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial
representations of any manner, and may contain only:
(1) The name of the establishment; and/or
(2) One of the following phrases:
(A) Adult arcade;
(B) Adult audio or video center;
(C) Adult cabaret;
(D) Adult media store;
(E) Adult retail store;
(F) Adult theater;
(G) Adult motion picture theater.
(3) A person commits an offense by installing or causing to be installed any sign in violation of
this section or by allowing the continued display of an unlawful sign.
(4) Should any part of this section conflict with the town's sign regulations as amended, the more
restrictive provision of any relevant portion of either this section or the town's sign regulations as
amended shall govern to the exclusion of any less restrictive rules or regulations.
(c) No sexually oriented business shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any
material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specifies anatomical areas by display,
sign, show window or other opening from any public view.
Sec. 4.04.023 Security
(a) At all times a sexually oriented business is open and for an hour after closing, there shall be located and
actively patrolling on the outside premises and parking areas of the sexually oriented business a person whose
duty shall be to assist in maintaining order and to report criminal activity or behavior and such person shall be
either a:
(1) Licensed peace officer hired by and working for the sexually oriented business who holds a
valid and current license (in good standing) issued by the state commission on law enforcement
officer standards and education; or
(2) Commissioned security officer hired by and working for the sexually oriented business in
accordance with and under a letter of authority as set forth in the Texas Occupations Code, section
1702.181, as may be amended or recodified.
(b) If a sexually oriented business elects to hire a commissioned security officer to provide security under
subsection (a), above, the sexually oriented business shall establish and operate a security department as
referenced in Texas Occupations Code, section 1702.181 and in accordance with other applicable law, as may be
amended or recodified.
(c) Parking areas surrounding a sexually oriented business shall be continually monitored by video by
employees of the sexually oriented business and said recordings from security cameras shall be maintained for a
period of at least 30 days.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/665
Sec. 4.04.024 Injunction
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or who
violates this article is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations.
Sec. 4.04.025 Penalty and enforcement
(a) Whenever a person does an act that is prohibited, fails to perform an act that is required, or commits an act
that is made an offense by any provision of this article or any other town ordinance regulating sexually oriented
businesses, the violation is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00, or other applicable law. A person
violating a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the
violation is committed, continued, or permitted.
(b) Except where otherwise specified, a culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense
under this article.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under section 4.04.018(a) that a person appearing in a state of nudity or in a
semi-nude condition did so in a modeling class operated:
(1) By a proprietary school, licensed by the state; or a college, a junior college, or a university
supported entirely or partly by governmental taxation;
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
(A) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that
indicates a person is available for viewing who is in a state of nudity or is semi-nude;
(B) Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in
advance of the class; and
(C) Where no more than one model who is in a state of nudity or is semi-nude is on the
premises at any one time.
Sec. 4.04.026 Registration of ownership and intent by religious institution
(a) Any of the persons referenced under section 4.04.004(b)(1) of this article may register ownership and
intent with the town by filing with the director of the town's planning department a notice of registration, which
must:
(1) Include a statement that the person seeking the registration owns the property sought to be
registered and that the person intends to use the property for one or more of the uses listed under
section 4.04.004(b)(1) of this article and said statement must be signed - under oath before a notary
public - by a duly authorized representative of person;
(2) Contain a metes and bounds legal description of said property; and
(3) Specify the date upon which it is expected that a use(s) listed under section 4.04.004(b)(1) of
this article is to commence.
(b) A notice of registration is not a valid registration for the purposes of this article unless and until it is signed
by the town's director of planning or other designee of the town manager, with a notation of the date of the
registration (the “registration date”).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/665
(c) A registration granted under this article expires and is no longer valid after the expiration of five years
after the registration date unless progress has been made toward the completion of any improvements or
facilities necessary for the intended use(s) of the property. For the purposes of this section, “progress” means
that:
(1) Any required development application for the property has been submitted to any regulatory
agency, including but not limited to the town;
(2) A good-faith attempt has been made to file with such regulatory agency an application for any
permit necessary to commence the intended use(s);
(3) Costs have been incurred for developing the property for the intended uses including, without
limitation, costs associated with roadway, utility, and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve,
in whole or in part, the project in the aggregate amount of five percent of the most recent appraised
market value of the real property on which the project is located;
(4) Fiscal security is posted with such a regulatory agency to ensure performance of an obligation
required by the regulatory agency; or
(5) Utility connection fees or impact fees for the project have been paid to a regulatory agency.
(d) A registration granted under this section may be renewed - or a new registration may be granted after the
expiration of the original registration - for one additional period of five years under the same procedures set
forth under subsections (a) and (b) regardless of whether any progress has been made with respect to
development of the project for its intended use(s).
(e) A registration granted under this section is not required for the development of any property, does not vest
any property rights or other rights in the holder of a registration, and is not transferable except if transferred as
part of the sale or conveyance of the property in which case the registration remains applicable only to the
property for which it was originally granted.
Sec. 4.04.027 Amendments
Section 4.04.004 of this article may be amended only after compliance with the procedure required to amend a
zoning ordinance. Other sections of this article may be amended by vote of the town council without any
requirement for review or recommendation by the town's planning and zoning commission.
(Ordinance 2011-12-6C adopted 12/6/11)
ARTICLE 4.05 ALARM SYSTEMS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.05.001 Findings
(a) The town council hereby finds and determines that it is necessary and in the best interest of the town and
its citizens to require an annual limit on false alarms.
(b) The town council hereby finds and determines that it is necessary and in the best interest of the town and
its citizens to establish procedures and fees for false alarms.
(c) Texas Local Government Code, ch. 214, subch. F, provides for the regulation of burglar alarms by
municipalities.
Sec. 4.05.002 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/665
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Alarm site. A location or premises served by an alarm system.
Alarm system. A device or system that transmits a signal intended to summon police or other emergency services
of the town. The categories of alarm systems are robbery, burglary, fire, emergency medical assistance, and
emergency assistance/personal distress. Includes an alarm designed to emit an audible signal on the exterior of a
structure that may or may not be monitored by an alarm system company. Does not include an alarm installed on
a vehicle, unless the vehicle is used for a habitation at a permanent site, or an alarm designed to alert only the
inhabitants within the structure.
Alarm system company. Any person or company that sells, installs, services, monitors, or responds to burglar
alarm signal devices, burglar alarm television cameras, still cameras or any other electrical, mechanical, or
electronic device used to prevent or detect burglary, theft, shoplifting, pilferage, or other losses of that type; to
prevent or detect intrusion; or primarily to detect and summon aid for other emergencies, and includes person
relaying alarm notifications.
Burglar alarm. An alarm system designed to provide notification of unauthorized intrusion.
Calendar year. The annual time period beginning on January 1st and ending December 31st.
Director. The police chief or fire chief or his or her authorized representative.
Emergency assistance/personal distress alarm. An alarm system designed to provide notification of an
emergency other than a robbery, burglary, fire, or emergency medical [assistance].
Emergency medical assistance alarm. An alarm system which summons emergency medical assistance.
False alarm. An alarm system's transmission of a signal to summon an emergency response to the alarm site, if
found by the responding individual(s) or by a director to be false in accordance with section 4.05.007 of this
article.
Fire alarm. An alarm system, including but not limited to a manual fire alarm box, automatic fire detector,
water-flow switch or other device, designed to provide notification of a fire or fire signature.
Fire department. The fire department, to include mutual aid response agencies and other responding law
enforcement agencies.
Local alarm. An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible from the exterior of a structure.
Panel alarm. An alarm system that is directly monitored by the police communications department.
Police department. The police department, to include mutual aid response agencies and other responding law
enforcement agencies.
Robbery alarm. An alarm system designed to provide notification of a robbery by means of a device designed to
be purposely activated by an individual.
Sec. 4.05.003 Penalty
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not exceeding $50.00, and ordered to pay applicable court
costs. Each continuing day's violation under this article shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions
imposed under this article shall not preclude the town from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The town retains
all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/665
Sec. 4.05.004 Responsibilities of property owner or occupant
(a) Generally. A property owner and/or occupant with an alarm system must:
(1) Adjust or modify the sensory mechanism of his or her alarm system to suppress false
indications of force so that the alarm system will not be activated by impulses due to:
(A) Transient pressure changes in water pipes;
(B) Flashes of light;
(C) Wind noise caused by the rattling or vibrating of doors or windows;
(D) Vehicular noise adjacent to the installation; and/or
(E) Other forces unrelated to actual emergencies.
(2) Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that ensures proper operation of
the alarm system. It is the responsibility of the alarm permit holder to properly maintain the alarm
system to prevent false activations. Should an alarm site have more than three activations within 30
days, an inspection of the alarm system will be required, by a licensed repairman. The director must
receive a written copy of the repairman's findings of the inspection within 30 days from the date of
the inspection.
(3) If a property owner/occupant or an emergency contact person is contacted to inspect an
unsecured building or residence, and fails to respond to the scene in the allowed time of 30 minutes
from time of call to secure the building or residence, the town is not responsible for loss and/or
damage.
(b) Automatic alarm notifications. A property owner/occupant whose alarm system transmits automatic alarm
notifications directly to the town over the normal telephone system shall:
(1) Transmit the alarm in the form and content specified by the town;
(2) Transmit over telephone lines designated for such use;
(3) Design the system so that it will notify the property owner/occupant, or his or her designated
agent, when an alarm is transmitted to the town;
(4) Furnish the town with the name, address, and telephone number of a licensed alarm company
responsible for correcting any alarm malfunction that may occur.
(c) Reporting alarm signals though relaying intermediary person. A property owner/occupant shall not report
his or her signals through a relaying intermediary person that does not meet the requirements of this article.
Sec. 4.05.005 Responsibilities of persons relaying alarm notifications
(a) A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the town shall:
(1) Send notification of an alarm to the owner by an individual;
(2) Keep his or her business premises locked and secured at all times;
(3) Allow an inspection of his or her business premises by authorized agents of the town at any
time;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/665
(4) Report alarms only to a telephone number, or numbers, designated by the town;
(5) Send alarm notifications to the town in a manner and form determined by the town;
(6) Maintain sufficient staff to ensure that valid alarms are relayed immediately to the town;
(7) Inform their customers of permit requirements; and
(8) Relay current permit numbers with all alarm notifications.
(b) An alarm system company may not be assessed (per the Texas Occupations Code) a service fee for
incorrect permit number(s) relayed to the town with an alarm notification.
Sec. 4.05.006 Local alarms
(a) A person in control of a local alarm must:
(1) Adjust the mechanism so that an alarm signal will sound for no longer than 20 minutes after
being activated;
(2) Display in a prominent exterior location an identification notice provided by the director.
(b) A person in control of a local alarm or alarm system that causes an alarm notification to be sent directly to
the town shall adjust or modify the mechanism so that upon activation the system will transmit only one alarm
signal and will not transmit another alarm signal without first being manually reset at the alarm site.
Sec. 4.05.007 Determination of false alarms
(a) The town shall not consider an alarm notification to be false if it determines that the alarm was caused by:
(1) A natural or manmade catastrophe;
(2) Severe weather that causes physical damage to the premises;
(3) Vandalism;
(4) Telephone line outage;
(5) Attempted entry or attempted robbery; or
(6) In high-risk of loss of life occupancies where a fire alarm was:
(A) Caused by undetermined means; or
(B) Caused by conditions not under control of the building management such as manual false
alarms or smoking.
(b) An alarm cannot be determined to be false alarm unless the town or responding law enforcement agency
arrives at the address of the alarm within 30 minutes of its notification and the agency responding determines
from an inspection of the interior or the exterior of the premises that the alarm was false.
(c) The determination of the director in classifying an alarm notification as false or actual is final.
Sec. 4.05.008 Service fees for false alarms
(a) Payment; late charge. A property owner must pay any service fee assessed under the provisions of this
section within 30 days after receipt of notice that it has been assessed by the director. If the assessed fees become
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/665
90 days delinquent, a 10% late charge will be added.
(b) False alarms. For each alarm system requiring a person to hold a permit, that person will be assessed a fee
for each false alarm in excess of five false alarms by that alarm system during any calendar year. This fee will be
$50.00 for each such false alarm.
Secs. 4.05.009–4.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.05.031 Application; issuance; transfer
(a) Each application for a permit required under this article must contain the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the permit holder and be
responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of the fees, if
applicable, as assessed under this article.
(2) The street address of the property on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated.
(3) Classification of the alarm site as either residential, commercial, multifamily, or governmental
unit.
(4) Any business name or title used for the premises on which the alarm system is to be installed or
operated.
(5) The name of two other persons who have agreed to respond to an alarm in the event the permit
holder is not available.
(6) Any other information required by the director which is necessary for the enforcement of this
article.
(b) Application for a permit under the provisions of this section constitutes a grant of approval for members of
the police department to conduct a search for intruders or the fire department to conduct a search for injured or
ill persons in the interior of any building on the alarm site found to be unsecured when responding to the alarm
site as a result of an alarm notification.
(c) Any false statement or misrepresentation of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of
obtaining an alarm permit or renewal, or while making a change thereto, shall be sufficient cause of refusal to
grant, or revocation of, a permit under this section.
(d) Upon receipt of a completed application form for a permit, the director shall issue a permit unless there is
cause to believe the equipment responsible for initiating an alarm will not be maintained or operated in
accordance with this article or the applicant will not comply with each provision of this article. Burglary/robbery
panel alarms will be limited to financial institutions.
(e) An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person. However, the individual(s) designated to respond
to an alarm or relay an alarm may be changed. A permit holder must inform the director of any change that alters
the information listed on the permit application. No fee will be assessed for such changes.
(f) For purposes of this section, information contained in the permit application will be used for law
enforcement purposes and will become part of the police department's records. Therefore, all information
contained in any permit application shall be deemed confidential, pursuant to Tex. Gov't Code, ch. 552 and
House Bill No. 859 (73rd Texas Legislature), and said information contained in the permit application shall not
be subject to public disclosure.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/665
Sec. 4.05.032 Fees
(a) There shall be a fee of $50.00 assessed for each installation of a residential alarm permitted under section
4.05.031.
(b) There shall be a fee of $100.00 assessed for each panel alarm installed in each commercial establishment
under section 4.05.031.
(c) Alarm system permits and panel alarm permits must be renewed each year during the month of January,
with a renewal fee of:
(1) $50.00 for each alarm system or panel alarm in commercial establishments; and
(2) $25.00 for each residential alarm system or panel alarm.
Sec. 4.05.033 Denial or revocation
The director may deny, revoke or refuse to renew a permit if the alarm system in question: (1) has had eight or
more false alarms during the previous 12-month period; or (2) for nonrenewal (including failure to pay required
permit fees). Revocation or refusal to renew may not occur until after the director has provided at least 30 days'
notice to the permit holder. The notice shall be sent to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return
receipt requested, setting forth the reason for such action and advising the applicant or permit holder of the right
of an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the director to the appeal hearing official
(to be designated by the town manager) by filing with the town secretary a written request for a hearing, setting
forth his or her objections to the action of the director, within ten days after receipt of the notice from the
director. The timely filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the town secretary shall stay the action of the
director in denying the issuance of or revocation of a permit until a final decision on the appeal is made by the
appeal hearing official.
Sec. 4.05.034 Penalty for operation without permit
A person commits an offense if he or she operates any alarm system as defined in this article without having a
valid permit in accordance with the provisions of section 4.05.031, and upon conviction in the municipal court
of the town shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $50.00 for each offense and ordered to pay applicable court
costs. Each and every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. It is an
affirmative defense to prosecution that, prior to any resultant court date for the violator, the violator obtains an
alarm permit from the town.
(Ordinance 2013-9-3B adopted 9/3/13)
ARTICLE 4.06 BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT SECURITY
Sec. 4.06.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to require a business establishment that employs or otherwise utilizes private
security officers within the town's corporate limits to disclose certain information to the police department to
assist in coordinating law-enforcement emergency responses related to business establishments and to help
protect the safety of the town's citizens, police and emergency personnel, and the general public in relation to
emergency situations and other law-enforcement activities, to require business establishments to hire peace
officers to provide services related to certain events, and to provide for coordination with the police department
and business establishments that hire peace officers to provide certain services.
Sec. 4.06.002 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them by this
section. All terminology used in this article and not specifically defined herein, shall retain its meaning in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/665
conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor
body or if not defined therein, the latest volume of Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary.
Business establishment. Any private individual, business, company, organization, chamber or other entity that
owns or operates any business or venture, whether or not for profit, located within the corporate limits of the
town where such ownership or operation is for the purpose of conducting–now or in the future–any sales,
services or other transactions that are retail, professional, promotional, civic, commercial or industrial in nature.
Disclosure statement. A statement disclosing information on a form that shall be approved by the police chief
and signed by the owner, operator or manager of a business establishment, and which shall contain the
information required to be disclosed by a business establishment under this article.
Peace officer. A person who is a peace officer under article 2.12, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
Police chief. The police chief for the town's police department.
Police department. The police department for the town.
Private security officer. Any individual employed by a security services contractor or is employed by or
contracts with a business establishment to perform the duties of a security guard, security watchman or security
patrolman.
Town. The town of Fairview, Texas.
Sec. 4.06.003 Limited disclosure of information
(a) Before employing or utilizing a private security officer, a business establishment must provide a disclosure
statement to the police department.
(b) The information required to be set forth on the disclosure statement shall be limited to the following
information related to the business establishment's use of private security officers within the town's corporate
limits:
(1) The number of private security officers under employment or contract;
(2) The name of each private security officer:
(3) The state-issued license number or commission number of the private security officer;
(4) The location(s) or patrol area(s) that each private security officer is assigned to cover on each
premises of the business establishment;
(5) A description of the uniform and other insignia worn by each private security officer, or
whether they are in an undercover capacity; and
(6) The dates and times of services to be rendered by each private security officer.
(c) If any of the information disclosed by a business establishment under this section shall become obsolete or
discovered to be inaccurate at any time due to changed circumstances–including but not limited to the
termination or replacement of a private security officer–then the owner, operator, or manager of each business
establishment must report all data necessary to update or correct the obsolete or inaccurate information by
submitting a new disclosure statement to the police department clearly setting forth the updates or corrections;
provided, however, that if it is impossible to provide the updates or corrections to the police department before
the change that necessitates the update or corrections, then the owner, operator, or manager shall disclose the
data within seven days of the date that the owner, operator, or manager knew or reasonably should have known
of the change.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/665
(d) It is an offense for any business establishment to fail to comply with this section in any manner, and those
who may be charged with such offense include the business establishment and the owner(s), operator(s), or
manager(s) of the business establishment.
Sec. 4.06.004 Circumstances requiring hiring of peace officer
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a business establishment must employ or contract with
a peace officer(s) to perform the services normally performed by a private security officer in relation to the
business establishment's participation in a public event or in a private event held at a public facility that is owned
or leased by a political subdivision of this state.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a business establishment must employ or contract with
a peace officer(s) to conduct a public escort or direct traffic on a public roadway.
(c) Under any circumstances in which a business establishment is required to employ or contract with a peace
officer(s) under subsections (a) or (b) of this section, the business establishment must contact the police chief at
least 15 days in advance of employing or contracting with such peace officer(s) and must employ or contract
with one or more of the peace officers employed by the town to provide the service, or obtain the permission of
the police chief to employ or contract with one or more peace officers that are not employed by the town.
(d) Under any other circumstances in which a business establishment intends to employ or contract with a
peace officer(s) to perform the duties of a security guard, security watchman or security patrolman, the
procedures for employing or contracting with such peace officer(s) shall be the same as subsection (c) of this
section. It shall not be a defense to any prosecution under this article that the person charged did not know or did
not intend to hire a peace officer(s) to perform said duties.
Sec. 4.06.005 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000.00 for each offense,
or the greatest amount allowed under applicable law, whichever is lowest, and each and every separate violation
of this article shall constitute a separate offense, unless otherwise specifically set forth in this code. Allegation
and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for proof of any offense defined by this article.
(Ordinance 2010-12-7E adopted 12/7/10)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 5.01.001 Fire bans
The fire chief shall be fully authorized to examine available data regarding weather, climate, and other
meteorological conditions and, based on his/her interpretation thereof, declare a ban on some or all outdoor fires,
open flames, burning coals, welding, and other practices that could logically cause or significantly contribute to
an uncontrolled grass or other outdoor fire and the unintended destruction of property. (Ordinance 2006-004,
sec. 1, adopted 2/7/06)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/665
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE DEPARTMENT†
Sec. 5.02.001 Composition; compensation of members
(a) The fire department for the town shall be composed of a combination of volunteers, and paid firefighters
who shall be compensated consistent with the budget.
(b) Volunteer firefighters may be reimbursed for their expenses incurred in attending training and firefighting
activities on such basis as the town manager may authorize, and may also be paid the minimum fees, consistent
with state and federal laws, for working overnight shifts.
Sec. 5.02.002 Fire chief
The fire chief of the fire department shall be appointed by the town manager and shall serve at the pleasure of
the town manager.
Sec. 5.02.003 Selection of firefighters and officers
Firefighters and department officers will be selected and promoted by the fire chief, with the advice and consent
of the town manager and may be removed by the fire chief, also with the advice and consent of the town
manager.
Sec. 5.02.004 Rules and regulations
The town manager shall approve the rules and regulations for the administration of the fire department, as well
as standard operating procedures and guides for the department's operation, consistent with the town's Home
Rule Charter.
Sec. 5.02.005 Purchases
The fire department shall purchase such equipment, or make such repairs to its equipment or facilities, and
purchase such firefighting clothing as it deems necessary, within its annual budget allocation and consistent with
town purchasing policies and procedures and state laws.
(Ordinance 2009-11-3A adopted 11/3/09)
ARTICLE 5.03 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 5.03.001 Appointment
The office of fire marshal is hereby created. The fire marshal shall be appointed by the town manager and shall
be properly qualified for the duties of his office. (1998 Code, sec. 33.15)
Sec. 5.03.002 Duty to investigate fires
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this town by
which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire
was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall begin within 24 hours, not including Sunday, of
the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts,
statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be
determined by the investigation required by this article. (1998 Code, sec. 33.16)
Sec. 5.03.003 Taking of testimony; duty when evidence indicates crime
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the
testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/665
relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if he shall be of
the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to
commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall
cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them and shall furnish to the
proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information
obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. (1998 Code, sec.
33.17)
Sec. 5.03.004 Authority to summon witnesses and require production of documents
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which
is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any
book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to
administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. (1998 Code, sec. 33.18)
Sec. 5.03.005 Misconduct of witnesses
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of
said fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under
examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in
the matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter
under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire
marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. (1998 Code, sec. 33.19)
Sec. 5.03.006 Investigations may be private; sequestering witnesses
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and
persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held,
and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other
until they have been examined. (1998 Code, sec. 33.20)
Sec. 5.03.007 Authority to enter premises for fire investigations
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the
duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises
where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall
be exercised only with reason and good discretion. (1998 Code, sec. 33.21)
Sec. 5.03.008 Right of inspection
The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, and
without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into
and upon all buildings and premises within the town, and it shall be his duty, monthly or more often, to enter
upon and make, or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and
public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or structure
which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to
fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger
persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges,
furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which
the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or
unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable
products, ashes, or combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous
in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firefighter or occupants, he
shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner
or occupant of said building or premises. Provided, however, that if said owner or occupant deems himself
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/665
aggrieved by such order, he may, within five days, appeal to the mayor, who shall investigate the cause of the
complaint, and, unless by his authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith
complied with by said owner or occupant. At the end of each month the fire marshal shall report to the state fire
marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with a separate report on each fire in the town during the
month. (1998 Code, sec. 33.22)
Sec. 5.03.009 Maintaining dangerous structure
Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises who shall keep or maintain the same when,
for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to fire, and
which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire and which is so
occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be deemed guilty of a violation.
(1998 Code, sec. 33.23)
Sec. 5.03.010 Maintaining hazardous conditions
Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure, or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same with
an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatever, including
chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire or
health, or safety of persons or property of others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or
premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of explosives,
petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable materials, or
refuse, or with other conditions which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health or property of
others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires; or which shall
create conditions dangerous to firefighters, or occupants of such building, structure or premises other than the
maintainer thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a violation. (1998 Code, sec. 33.24)
Sec. 5.03.011 Notice of violation required prior to prosecution
No prosecution shall be brought under sections 5.03.009 and 5.03.010 of this article until the order provided for
in section 5.03.008 has been given and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same. (1998
Code, sec. 33.25)
Sec. 5.03.012 Continuing violations
Every day's maintenance of any of the conditions prohibited in any of the foregoing sections shall be a distinct
and separate offense. (1998 Code, sec. 33.26)
ARTICLE 5.04 FIRE CODE
Sec. 5.04.001 Adopted
(a) Adoption.
(1) A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the town secretary, being marked
and designated as the International Fire Code, including appendix chapters B and D, as published by
the International Code Council, as amended by the recommended amendments of the North Central
Texas Council of Governments and additional local amendments, for regulating and governing the
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling
and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the town, and providing for the issuance of
permits for hazardous uses or operations, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions
and terms of such International Fire Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council,
as amended by the North Central Texas Council of Governments' recommended amendments and
local amendments–except as otherwise expressly set forth by ordinance–both of which code and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/665
amendments are on file in the office of the town secretary, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out herein.
(2) Copies of the International Fire Code, along with any amendments thereto, are available for
review during normal business hours in the office of the town secretary.
(b) Penalties.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of the code herein adopted, as
amended, and any additional fire protection regulations adopted by the town, shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, fined in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00 for each
violation.
(2) Each day a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense punishable hereunder.
(3) Violations may also be punished by civil penalties imposed after suit. The amount of such civil
penalties shall be the amount up to the maximum allowed by law.
(Ordinance 2014-40 adopted 11/4/14)
ARTICLE 5.05 OPEN BURNING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 5.05.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Open burn. The burning of a bonfire, rubbish fire or other such fire in an outdoor location, and shall include, but
not be limited to, the burning of trash, rubbish or garbage in barrels or pits.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.15)
Sec. 5.05.002 Prohibition
Except as otherwise permitted by this division, it shall be unlawful to conduct an open burn within the corporate
limits of the town. (1998 Code, sec. 92.16)
Sec. 5.05.003 Exemptions
(a) (1) Open burning of tree limbs, brush, leaves, and other such vegetation that grows naturally
on the land and agricultural burns may be conducted on tracts of land containing ten acres or more,
provided a permit has been issued for such open burn in accordance with this division.
(2) This exemption is limited to the burning of tree limbs, brush, leaves, and other such vegetation
that grows naturally on the land and specifically does not include the burning of trash, rubbish and
garbage or building materials such as lumber, shingles, and other such items.
(b) Private home type barbecue grills located on the property of the owner are exempt from the terms of this
division.
(c) Open fires in barbecue pits and grills at picnics, parties and social events if conducted in a pit or grill
approved by the fire chief or his designee are exempt from the terms of this division.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/665
(1998 Code, sec. 92.17)
Secs. 5.05.004–5.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 5.05.031 Generally
(a) A burn permit may be issued by the fire chief or his designee to conduct an open burn that is authorized by
this division on a tract of land containing ten acres or more.
(b) It shall be unlawful, even on a tract of land containing ten or more acres, to conduct an open burn without
first having obtained a burn permit authorized by this division.
(c) It shall be unlawful, during the conduct of a permitted open burn, to violate any of the conditions of the
open burn permit.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.18)
Sec. 5.05.032 Conditions
Burn permits shall be conditioned as follows and shall include any additional conditions that the fire chief or his
designee shall establish based upon the particular request and necessary to protect the public health and safety:
(1) No burning under the permit on days when the ozone alert is in effect.
(2) No burning under the permit before 8:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m.
(3) No burning under the permit when the wind speed or other conditions exist to carry burning
sparks or embers onto adjacent property or onto other combustible materials in the surrounding area.
(4) No burning under the permit when there is a condition of dryness that may tend to make the
burning hazardous.
(5) A capable person must be on fire watch and have water and machinery available necessary to
maintain control of the burn at all times.
(6) The person to whom the permit is issued or his designee must, 30 minutes prior to the start of a
permitted burn, contact the fire department by calling (214) 542-6208 and advise the fire department
of the time they are going to start the permitted burn.
(7) The permit must be maintained at all times by a person in authority at the burn site.
(8) The person to whom the permit is issued shall extinguish the open burn if it becomes a
nuisance to the community or if an unsafe condition exists. The fire chief, fire marshal or any
designated representative of the fire department may, in their sole discretion, make such
determination and order the open burn terminated.
(9) Once a permitted open fire is extinguished it may not be started again without prior clearance
and approval by the fire chief or fire marshal.
(10) A burn permit shall specify and/or approve an area around the material to be burned to serve
as a fire brake.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.19)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/665
Sec. 5.05.033 Application; fee; issuance
An applicant for a burn permit shall make application with the fire chief or his designee and deposit with the
town secretary a permit application fee as established in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. The fire
chief or his designee shall inspect the site and conditions prior to the issuance of the burn permit. If the permit is
denied the fee will not be refunded and will be retained by the town to cover the expense of the inspection. If the
permit is to be issued the fire chief or his designee shall list on the permit any special conditions in addition to
the general conditions stated herein. (1998 Code, sec. 92.20)
ARTICLE 5.06 FIREWORKS*
Sec. 5.06.001 Public displays
The fire marshal shall have power to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for
supervised public displays of fireworks by a jurisdiction, fair association, amusement park, or other
organizations, or for the use of fireworks by artisans in pursuit of their trade. Every such display shall be handled
by a competent operator approved by the fire marshal, and shall be of such character and so located, discharged,
or fired so as not to be hazardous to property or endanger any person. Applications for such permits shall be
made in writing at least ten days in advance of the date of the display to the fire marshal and the state fire
marshal's office and shall contain an approved bond in an amount adequate to protect and [any] permittee against
claims arising from damage to person or property as a result of the display. After such privilege shall be granted,
sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No
permit granted hereunder shall be transferable. Any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded
shall be immediately removed from the town's jurisdiction, or shall be disposed of in a way safe for the
particular type of fireworks remaining. (1998 Code, sec. 92.32)
Sec. 5.06.002 Injunctive relief; right of entry
Notwithstanding any penal provision of this article, the town attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the
town, or the fire marshal, or both, for injunctive relief as may be necessary to prevent unlawful storage,
transportation, retail selling, keeping or use of fireworks within the jurisdiction of the town and to aid the fire
marshal in the discharge of his duties and to particularly prevent any person from interfering with the seizure and
destruction of such fireworks, but it shall not be necessary to obtain any such injunction as a prerequisite to such
seizure and destruction. The fire marshal is hereby authorized to enter any building where unlawful presence of
fireworks is suspected in order to inspect the same for the presence of such fireworks. (1998 Code, sec. 92.34)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 6.01.001 Penalty
A violation of any provision of this chapter for which no other penalty is provided shall be punishable as set
forth in section 1.01.009. (1998 Code, sec. 94.99(A))
ARTICLE 6.02 HEALTH OFFICER
Sec. 6.02.001 Office created
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/665
The office of town health officer is hereby created. (1998 Code, sec. 31.25)
Sec. 6.02.002 Appointment; oath
The town council may elect a qualified person for the office of town health officer by a majority of the vote of
the town council. The town health officer, after appointment, shall take and subscribe to the official oath, and
shall file a copy of such oath and a copy of his appointment with the state board of health. (1998 Code, sec.
31.26)
Sec. 6.02.003 Term of office
The town health officer shall serve until removed by a majority of the votes of the town council, or until his
resignation is accepted by the town council. (1998 Code, sec. 31.27)
Sec. 6.02.004 Duties
The town health officer shall perform such duties as may be required of him by general law and town ordinances
with regard to the general health and sanitation of the town, and perform such other duties as shall be legally
required of him by the mayor, the town council or the ordinances of the town. The town health officer shall
discharge and perform such duties as may be prescribed for him under the directions, rules, regulations and
requirements of the state board of health and the president thereof. He shall be required to aid and assist the state
board of health in all matters of quarantine, vital and mortuary statistics, inspection, disease prevention and
suppression and sanitation within the town. He shall at all times report to the state board of health, in such
manner and form as said board may prescribe, the presence of all contagious, infectious and dangerous epidemic
diseases within the town, and shall make such other and further reports in such a manner and form and at such
times as said board shall direct, touching all such matters as may be proper for said board to direct, and shall aid
said board at all times in the enforcement of proper rules, regulations and requirements in the enforcement of all
sanitary laws, quarantine regulations and vital statistics collection and perform such other duties as the board
shall direct. (1998 Code, sec. 31.28)
ARTICLE 6.03 TOBACCO PRODUCTS*
Sec. 6.03.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Administrative area. The area of an establishment not generally accessible to the public or to a minor, including
but not limited to individual offices, stockrooms, employee lounges, or meeting rooms.
Director. The director of the department designated by the town manager to enforce and administer this article,
or the director's designated representative.
Eating establishment. Any establishment that prepares or serves food or beverages, regardless of whether the
establishment provides seating or facilities for on-premises consumption. The term includes, but is not limited
to, restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order cafes, fast food establishments, luncheonettes, lunchrooms,
soda fountains, food carts, food vending vehicles, and catering establishments.
Employee. Any person who works for hire at a designated indoor area, including an independent contractor with
an assigned indoor location.
Employer. Any person who employs five or more employees.
Enclosed. An area that:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/665
(1) Is closed in overhead by a roof or other covering of any material, whether permanent or
temporary; and
(2) Has 40% or more of its perimeter closed in by walls or other coverings of any material,
whether permanent or temporary.
Hospital. Any institution that provides medical, surgical, and overnight facilities for patients.
Minor. Any individual under 18 years of age.
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, association, or other legal entity.
Public service area. Any area to which the general public routinely has access for municipal services or that is
designated a public service area in a written policy prepared in compliance with this article.
Restaurant bar. Any area of an eating establishment, excluding the dining area:
(1) That is primarily devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on
the premises; and
(2) In which food service, if any, is only incidental to the consumption of alcoholic beverages.
Retail or service establishment. Any establishment that sells goods or services to the general public, including
but not limited to any eating establishment, hotel, motel, department store, grocery store, drugstore, shopping
mall, laundromat, bingo parlor, bowling center, or hair styling salon.
Secondhand smoke. Ambient smoke resulting from the act of smoking.
Smoke or smoking. Inhaling, exhaling, possessing, or carrying any lighted or burning cigar or cigarette, or any
pipe or other device that contains lighted or burning tobacco or tobacco products.
Tobacco product vending machine. Any self-service device that, upon insertion of any coin, paper currency,
token, card, key, or other item, dispenses one or more tobacco products. The term does not include any machine
that is in storage, in transit, or otherwise not set up for use and operation, nor does it include any machine that is
situated on a train, bus, or other public conveyance.
Workplace. Any indoor area where an employee works for an employer, including an administrative area but
excluding:
(1) A domestic residence;
(2) A factory or warehouse where smoking is regulated by another town ordinance or a state or
federal law;
(3) An enclosed room with only one regular occupant; or
(4) Any area that is generally accessible to the public or to a minor and that is regulated under
section 6.03.003.
(1998 Code, sec. 99.01)
Sec. 6.03.002 Penalty
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction be subject to a fine in accordance with the general provisions of the Code of
Ordinances. (1998 Code, sec. 99.99)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/665
Sec. 6.03.003 Smoking prohibited in certain public areas
(a) A person commits an offense if he or she smokes in any of the following indoor or enclosed areas:
(1) Any elevator used by the public.
(2) A hospital or nursing home.
(3) Any facility owned, operated, or managed by the town.
(4) Any retail or service establishment.
(5) Any establishment or area marked with a no smoking sign complying with subsection (b) by
the owner or person in control of the establishment or area.
(6) Any facility of a public primary or secondary school or any enclosed theater, movie house,
library, museum, or transit system vehicle.
(b) The owner or person in control of an establishment or area in which smoking is prohibited under
subsection (a) of this section shall post a conspicuous sign at the main entrance to the establishment or area. The
sign shall contain the words “No Smoking, Town of Fairview Ordinance,” the universal symbol for no smoking,
or other language that clearly prohibits smoking.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) of this section if the person was smoking in a location
that was:
(1) A private residence, except that this defense does not apply when the residence is being used as
a child care facility, adult day care facility, or health care facility;
(2) An administrative area or office of an establishment described in subsection (a)(2), (a)(4), or (a)
(6) of this section if the administrative area or office is physically separated from those areas of the
establishment where smoking is prohibited, except that this defense does not apply if the location was
posted as a nonsmoking area;
(3) A retail or service establishment that:
(A) Derives 90% or more of its gross revenue on a quarterly basis from the sale of tobacco,
tobacco products, or smoking implements; and
(B) Does not open into any other establishment in which smoking is prohibited under this
section;
(4) An unenclosed outdoor seating area of an eating establishment, except that this defense does
not apply if:
(A) The outdoor seating area is adjacent to a playground or play area for children; or
(B) The location was posted as a nonsmoking area by the owner or person in control of the
establishment with a sign complying with subsection (b);
(5) A private rented guest room in a hotel or motel that has been designated as a smoking room by
the owner or operator of the hotel or motel.
(1998 Code, sec. 99.02)
Sec. 6.03.004 Tobacco product vending machines
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/665
(a) A person commits an offense if he owns or allows the display or use of any tobacco product vending
machine upon any property within the town.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the tobacco product vending machine was:
(1) Situated in premises where entry by a minor is prohibited by law;
(2) Situated in a hotel, motel, bar, or restaurant bar;
(3) Located in a workplace with the permission of the employer, provided that:
(A) The employer usually has no person under 18 years of age employed at the workplace;
and
(B) The tobacco product vending machine is situated at a location within the workplace to
which no person other than an employee of the workplace is usually permitted to have access;
or
(4) Located in an eating establishment and equipped with a lock-out device that was installed,
maintained, and operated in compliance with subsections (c), (d), and (e) below.
(c) A lock-out device on a tobacco product vending machine located in an eating establishment must be
installed, maintained, and operated in compliance with this section.
(d) A lock-out device may be electrical or mechanical and must be approved by the director.
(e) An owner, operator, employee, or other person in charge of an eating establishment who is at least 18 years
of age shall:
(1) Install and continuously maintain a lock-out device on a tobacco product vending machine in
good working order;
(2) Require identification from any potential customer of the tobacco product vending machine
who appears to be under 18 years of age;
(3) Physically observe all transactions in which the tobacco product vending machine is used; and
(4) Physically release the lock-out device before each sale from a tobacco product vending
machine.
(1998 Code, sec. 99.03)
ARTICLE 6.04 WEEDS, RUBBISH AND OTHER UNSIGHTLY OR UNSANITARY CONDITIONS*
Sec. 6.04.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Code enforcement officer. The town official duly registered with the state with authority to enforce various
municipal and states codes.
Cultivated. Vegetation that is deliberately grown and currently and continuously maintained by the owner,
occupant, or agent of the property.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/665
Habitable structure. A structure suitable for human habitation or occupation, including but not limited to single
or multifamily residences, hotels, condominium buildings, public buildings, buildings for business, office, retail,
commercial or industrial purposes and enclosed spaces in which individuals congregate for education, worship,
amusement, or similar purposes, or in which occupants are engaged in labor, which is equipped with means of
egress, light and ventilation facilities. A habitable structure includes living quarters for the owners, guests,
renters, or persons regularly employed on the premises, but shall not include other accessory structures such as
detached garages and sheds. Any structure for which a certificate of occupancy is required shall be deemed to be
a habitable structure.
Landscaping improvement. All landscaping borders, structures, containers, appurtenances or other additions to
real property including but not limited to flower beds and those living plant screens in compliance with section
14.02.012 of this code.
Native grass. Grasses that are native to the county as determined by the County's AgriLife Extension Agent for
Horticulture. A list of approved native grasses is found in appendix A at the end of this article and is maintained
by the town's code enforcement officer.
Native wildflowers. Seasonal flowering vegetation native to the county as determined by the County's AgriLife
Extension Agent for Horticulture. A list of approved native wildflowers is found in appendix B at the end of this
article and is maintained by the town's code enforcement officer.
Real property. Includes, but is not limited to, the area on a lot or parcel of land between the sidewalk and the
curb, and includes any area on a lot or parcel of land designated as a utility or drainage easement.
Rubbish. Shall include but not be limited to the debris left upon properties after any building or other structures
on such properties have been:
(1) Destroyed by fire or other calamity and the same not restored to its original or better condition
or removed from the property within 90 days from the date of such destruction;
(2) Intentionally wrecked or demolished by the owner;
(3) Moved from such property to another location; and/or
(4) Vacated by a prior owner or tenant.
Street right-of-way. Includes:
(1) Land dedicated to the town or to public or utility use by plat or by any dedication deed or other
instrument of conveyance, or whether held by the town or the public as an easement, in fee simple, or
otherwise, as well as land that qualifies as a prescriptive easement, or prescriptive right-of-way, for
the construction, use or maintenance of a public street or roadway, and for other public or utility uses
typically associated with streets and roadways, including but not limited to sidewalks and/or adjacent
areas included in such dedication or prescriptive use; and
(2) Private roadways over or upon which the town has any right of access by easement or
otherwise.
Weeds. All vegetation that, because of its height, is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary, but excluding shrubs,
bushes, vines, and trees, and regularly cultivated crops as permitted by a property's zoning district.
Sec. 6.04.002 Penalty
Any person violating the provisions of this article, which violation continues after notice is given as set forth in
this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not to exceed the sum of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/665
$2,000.00 for each offense. This section shall be in addition to and cumulative of the provisions for the
abatement of the nuisance and charging the cost of same against the owner of the premises by the town.
Sec. 6.04.003 Prohibited conditions
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship or any other entity
recognized in law owning, leasing, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property,
improved or unimproved, within the corporate limits of the town, to permit or allow:
(1) Grass or weeds to grow or brush to accumulate on real property to a height greater than 12
inches upon any such real property located within 150 feet of any building, structure, or street rightof-
way.
(2) Exemptions to the maximum height requirement in subsection (1) above, are as follows:
(A) Exemption for landscaping improvements. Grass that is used for a decorative purpose
and that is a part of or that lies within a planned and orderly landscaping improvement to a
property including but not limited to flower beds and those living plant screens in compliance
with section 14.02.012 of this code, provided that said landscaping improvement has a
continuously and well-maintained border that clearly separates the landscaping improvement
from those areas of the property with no landscaping improvement. All grass that is part of or
that lies within a landscaping improvement must be maintained in such a manner as to not
become a nuisance as defined or described in section 8.02.001, et seq. of this code. The town's
code enforcement officer or his or her designated representative shall have the authority to
determine whether or not grass claimed under this exemption is in compliance with the
stipulations outlined within this exemption as well as whether or not the grass is considered a
nuisance as per section 8.02.001, et seq. of this code.
(B) Exemption for native grass areas and native wildflower areas. Certain areas of approved
native grasses found in appendix A at the end of this article and/or approved native wildflowers
found in appendix B at the end of this article, provided that they are cultivated, continuously
maintained, and cut as necessary to maintain proper care of the specific grasses and/or
wildflowers used in the area. This exemption shall only be granted if the area is comprised of at
least 75% of grasses and flowers listed in appendix A and/or appendix B (“the 75%
requirement”), and all portions of said area are at least twenty (20) feet removed from any: (i)
property line shared with a property under different ownership when the property under
different ownership has any permanent habitable structure located within fifty (50) feet of the
side or rear property lines of the property containing the native grass area or native wildflower
area; (ii) street right-of-way; and (iii) easements along public and private roadways. Native
grass and/or native wildflower areas must be maintained in such a manner as to not become a
nuisance as defined in section 8.02.001 of this code. The town's code enforcement officer or his
or her designated representative shall have the authority to determine whether or not the native
grass and/or native wildflower area claimed under this exemption is in compliance with the
stipulations outlined within this exemption as well as whether or not the area is considered a
nuisance as per section 8.02.001 of this code. The 75% requirement and the 20-foot distance
requirements set forth in this subsection (b) shall not apply to property owned or maintained by
the town.
(3) Any trash, rubbish or any other type of objectionable material or unsightly or unsanitary matter
(including, without way of limitation, stacks of old lumber, scrap materials, demolished or partly
demolished buildings or structures, piles of stone, bricks, broken rock, or fence panels) to accumulate
on occupied or unoccupied real property, notwithstanding that such persons did not permit such
accumulation upon such property;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/665
(4) Junked or otherwise inoperable motor vehicles to be stored, parked, or otherwise kept on any
real property not zoned for that specific purpose, except, however, that such vehicles may be stored,
parked, or otherwise kept if they are situated such that they are not visible from any other private
property or from any public property, right-of-way, or easement;
(5) The overnight parking of more than one commercial vehicle at, or on a public street adjacent
to, any residential property; or
(6) The use of outside storage facilities such as PODS, or the storage of materials or products not
normally used or stored outdoors, for a period of more than thirty (30) days in any single calendar
year.
State law references–Authority of municipality to regulate weeds, grass, or other unsanitary matter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code,
sec. 342.004.
Sec. 6.04.004 Duty of property owner to remove weeds and brush
(a) It shall be the duty of any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any
such real property, as provided for herein, to cut and remove all such grass, weeds, brush and other objectionable
or unsightly matter as often as may be necessary to comply with section 6.04.003.
(b) No cut grass, weeds, etc., shall be allowed to accumulate on any public right-of-way nor shall such grass,
weeds, etc., be deposited or allowed to be deposited into the storm sewer or sanitary sewer system.
Sec. 6.04.005 Duty of property owner to remove stagnant water, rubbish, carrion or other unwholesome
matter
It shall be the duty of any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real
property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the town, to keep such property free from
stagnant water, rubbish, trash, filth, carrion or other impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, and to keep the
sidewalks in front of his property free and clear of the same, and, to fill up, drain or regrade any lots, ground or
yards which shall be unwholesome or have stagnant water therein, and to cleanse and disinfect any house,
building, establishment, lot, yard or ground from rubbish, trash, filth, carrion or other impure or unwholesome
matter of any kind.
State law references–Municipal power concerning stagnant water and other unsanitary conditions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code,
sec. 342.001; municipal power concerning filth, carrion and other unwholesome matter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec.
342.003.
Sec. 6.04.006 Notice to remove; removal by town
(a) In the event that any person, corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship or other entity recognized in law
owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied,
improved or unimproved, within the corporate limits of the town fails to comply with the provisions of this
article, the town may give at least ten days' notice in writing to such person of the violation of this article. Such
notice must be given:
(1) Personally to the owner in writing;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address;
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's post office address is unknown:
(A) By publication at least twice within ten consecutive days;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/665
(B) By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which
the violation relates; or
(C) By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the
property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(b) If the owner of property fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this article within ten days of
notice of a violation, the town may go upon such property and do or cause to be done the work necessary to
obtain compliance with this article, and may pay for the work done or improvements made and charge the
expenses incurred in doing or having same done to the owner of such property.
(c) The town may, in the notice of a violation, inform the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested,
that, if the owner of the property commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the
public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the town without further
notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation
covered by a notice occurs within the one-year period, and the town has not been notified by the owner of an
ownership change, then the town without notice may take any action permitted by subsections (a) and (b) of this
section and assess its expenses as provided by this section.
Sec. 6.04.007 Assessment of town's expenses
The actual expenses, including administrative costs, incurred by the town in enforcing the terms and provisions
of this article shall be paid to the town. In the event this amount is not paid, the amount due shall be charged to
and become a lien on the real estate on which the work is done or improvements made.
Sec. 6.04.008 Lien for town's expenses
(a) The town council may assess expenses incurred under section 6.04.006(b) of this article against the real
estate on which the work is done or improvements made.
(b) To obtain a lien against the property, the mayor, town health authority, or other town official designated by
the mayor must file a statement of expenses with the county clerk. The lien statement must state the name of the
owner, if known, and the legal description of the property.
(c) The lien obtained by the town council is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the
rate of 10% on the amount due from the date of expenses incurred by the town.
(d) The lien is inferior only to:
(1) Tax liens; and
(2) Liens for street improvements.
(e) The town council may bring a suit for foreclosure in the name of the town to recover the expenditures and
interest due.
(f) The statement of expenses or a certified copy of the statement is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred
by the town in doing the work or making the improvements.
Sec. 6.04.009 Authority to abate dangerous weeds without notice
(a) The town may abate, without notice, weeds that:
(1) Have grown higher than 48 inches; and
(2) Are an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/665
(b) Not later than the tenth day after the date the town abates weeds under this section, the town shall give
notice to the property owner in the manner required by section 6.04.006(a).
(c) The notice shall contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property;
(2) A description of the violations of the ordinance that occurred on the property;
(3) A statement that the town abated the weeds; and
(4) An explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing about the
town's abatement of the weeds.
(d) The town manager or the manager's designee shall conduct an administrative hearing on the abatement of
weeds under this section if, not later than the thirtieth day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the
property owner files with the town a written request for a hearing.
(e) An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be conducted not later than the twentieth day
after the date a request for a hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written
information relating to the town's abatement of the weeds.
(f) The town may assess expenses and create liens under this section as it assesses expenses and creates liens
under the other provisions of this article. A lien created under this section is subject to the same conditions as a
lien created under section 6.04.008.
(g) The authority of the town described by this section is in addition to the authority granted by section
6.04.002.
State law reference–Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds without notice, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 342.008.
Sec. 6.04.010 Exemptions
Any exemptions from section 6.04.003 by the town manager shall be requested in writing by the applicant. No
exemption to this section shall be issued or renewed by the town manager for a period exceeding 14 days.
APPENDIX A. PERMITTED NATIVE GRASSES
Common Name Botanical Name Color
Little Bluestem Schizachynum scoparium Blue-green stems in August; red by
Sept.
Big Bluestem Andropogon gerardii Blue-green stems; fall foliage
Indian Grass Sorghastrum nutans Blue-green blades, plume-like
golden brown seedhead; deep
orange to purple fall color
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/665
Eastern Grama Tripsacum dactyloides Purple stigmas, orange stamens.
Male and female flowers
Side-Oats Grama Bouteloua curtipendula Purplish oat-like spikelets; bleach to
a tan color in fall
Switch Panicum virgatum Reddish-purple seedhead. Fall color
is pale yellow.
Buffalo Buchloe dactyloides Gray/green; tan in winter
Lindheimer's Muhly Muhlenberiga lindheimeri Seedheads are silvery
Bushy Bluestem Andropogon glomeratus The sheaths surrounding the
racemes take on orange-salmon
color in fall
Inland Sea-Oats Chasmanthium latifolium Blue-green, bamboo-like leaves can
turn bright yellow-gold in sunny
sites in fall
APPENDIX B. PERMITTED NATIVE WILDFLOWERS
Common Name Botanical Name Flower Color
Hummingbird Bush Anisacanthus wrightii Red-orange
Wright's Skullcap Scutellaria wrightii Blue, violet
Angel's Trumpet Daturia wrightii White
Guara Guara lindheimeri Pink, white
Texas Star Daisy Lindheimeri texana Yellow
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/665
Phlox Phlox drummondii White/cream, red, pink, purple
Drummond's Onion Allium drummondii White/cream, pink
Blazing Star Liatris mucronata Purple, pink
Bluebonnets Lupinus sp. White/cream, blue
Indian Paintbrushes Castilleja indivisa Creamy white to pale yellow,
encircled by red/orange leaf-like
bracts
Water Pennywort Hydrocotle umbellata White/cream
Fragrant Water Lily Nymphaea odorata White/cream
Pickerel Weed Pontederia cordata Lavender-blue
Turkscap Malvaviscus drumondii Red
Columbine Aquilegia Yellow
Dale's Variety Heucher Heuchera americana ‘Dale's
Variety'
Yellow
Horsemint Lemon Mint Monarda citrioda White, lavender, pink
False-Mint Dicliptera brachiata Pink, purple
Self-heal Prunella vulgaris Purple
Texas Blue Star Amsonia ciliata Light blue
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/665
Rose Mallow Hibiscus moscheutos White/cream
Mexican Gold Poppy Eschscholzia mexicana Golden yellow, orange
Standing Cypress Ipomopsis rubra Red
Sunflower Helianthus annuus Yellow
Partridge Pea Chamaecrista fasciculata Yellow
Texas Dandelion Pyrrhopappus carolinianus Yellow
Wild Hyacinth Camassia scilloides Purple
Dogtooth Violet Ervthronium alba White
Copper Lily Habranthus texana Habranthus
tubispathus
Dark yellow
Lady's Tresses Spiranthes cernua White
Southern Swamp Lily Crinum americana White/cream
Yellow Star Grass Hypoxis hirsuta Yellow
Orange Butterfly Weed Asclepias tuberosa Orange
Antelope Horn Asclepias asperula Yellow
Striped/White Winecup Callirhoe i. Var. lineariloba White/pink stripes
Globe Mallow Sphaeralcea angustifloia Orange
Standing Winecup Callirhoe digitata White, red, purple
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/665
Heath Aster erocoides White
Willow Leaf Aster Aster praealtus Lavender, light blue
Calico Aster Aster lateriflorus White
Yellow Indian Blanket Gaillardia aestivallis var.
aestivallis
Yellow
Red Plume Gaillardia ‘Red Plume'
pulchella
Red
Fire-Wheel/Indian
Blanket
Gaillardia pulchella Red, yellow
Sundance Blanket Flower Gaillardia aristata Red with yellow edges
Pallid Echinacea pallida Pale purple
White Swan Coneflower Echinacea purpurea White
Purple Coneflower Echinacea purpurea Purple, pink
White Spiderwort Tradescantia alba major White
Little doll Tradescantia ‘Little Doll' Light blue
Concord Grape Tradescantia ‘Concord Grape' Purplish blue
Trans Pecos Primrose Oenothera kunthiana Whitish to pink
White Evening Primrose Oenothera caespitosa White/cream
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/665
Missouri Evening
Primrose
Oenothera macrocarpa Yellow
Showy Evening Primrose Oenothera speciosa Pink
Louisiana Phlox Phlox divaricata Blue, lavender
Roemer's Phlox Phlox roemeriana Pink
Common Name Botanical Name Flower Color
Pitcher Sage Salvia azurea White/cream, blue
Tropical Sage Salvia coccinea White/cream, pink
Mt. Emory Sage Salvia regla ‘Mt. Emory' Red
Mealy Blue Sage Salvia farinacea Blue
Autumn Sage Salvia greggii White/cream, red, pink
Creekside Orange Salvia greggii Red/orange
Moonglow Salvia greggii Cream
White sage Salvia apiana White with a little lavender
Texas Betony Stachys coccinea Red
Hummingbird Mint Agastache cana Pink
Hummingbird Mint Agastache neomexicana Lavender pink
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/665
St. John's Wort Hypericum calycinum Yellow
Baptisia Baptisia australis var. minor Blue, purple
Texas Bird Pepper Capsicum annuum var.
glabriusculum
White
White Prickly Poppy Argemone albiflora White
White Prairie Clover Dalea candida White
Larkspur Delphimium consolida White, pink, red, blue to violet
(Ordinance 2014-3-4B adopted 3/4/14)
ARTICLE 6.05 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENTS
Sec. 6.05.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Hazardous material. Any substance or material in a quantity or form which, in the determination of the fire chief
or his authorized representative, poses a risk to persons, property, or the environment, and shall include all
materials listed as “hazardous materials” by the U.S. Department of Transportation, including, but not be limited
to, such substances as explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum products, poisons, compressed or liquefied
gases, etiologic (biologic) agents, oxidizers, corrosives, carcinogens, cryogens, and organic peroxides.
Hazardous material incident. The release, or potential release, of a hazardous material from its container into the
environment.
(1998 Code, sec. 93.01)
Sec. 6.05.002 Penalty
Any person, firm, corporation, or business entity violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined any sum not exceeding $2,000.00. Each continuing day's violation
under this article shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not
preclude the town from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The town retains all legal rights and remedies available
to it pursuant to local, state, and federal law. (1998 Code, sec. 93.99)
Sec. 6.05.003 Liability for costs of abatement
Any individual or business entity who accidentally, negligently, or intentionally causes or is responsible for a
hazardous material incident within the town shall be liable for the payment of costs incurred by the fire
department, public works department, and/or any other department or agency that assists to abate such an event.
The remedy provided by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. (1998 Code,
sec. 93.02)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/665
Sec. 6.05.004 Causing or permitting hazardous material incident
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to cause or permit, within the corporate
limits of the town, a hazardous material incident that poses a risk to persons, property, or the environment, or
requires a cleanup. (1998 Code, sec. 93.03)
Sec. 6.05.005 Billable costs
(a) For the purposes of this article, costs incurred by the fire department, public works department, or any
other departments of the town shall include, but not be limited to, expenses attributable to the abatement or
cleanup of any hazardous material incident, including costs of personnel, costs of equipment operations, cost of
materials and supplies, costs of specialists, experts, or other contract labor not in the full-time employment of the
town, disposal costs, overhead costs, overtime costs, and any other incidental costs incurred by the town. Basic
costs associated with fire department services shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code
for such emergency vehicles.
(b) The responsible party(ies) shall be billed for the recovery of costs described above as follows:
(1) For the first hour of an incident, measured from the time that the first fire department vehicle
arrives at the incident scene, only the cost of materials, supplies, disposal, and specialists/experts not
in the full-time employment of the town shall be billable.
(2) Beginning one hour after the first fire department vehicle arrives at the incident scene, all costs
described in this section shall be billable.
(1998 Code, sec. 93.04)
Sec. 6.05.006 Injunctive relief; suit for collection of damages
Notwithstanding any penal provisions of this article, the town attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the
town, the fire chief or his authorized representative both for injunctive relief, as may be necessary, to enforce the
provisions of this article, or for the collection of damages as provided herein. (1998 Code, sec. 93.05)
ARTICLE 6.06 FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec. 6.06.001 State law and regulations adopted
(a) Regulations adopted. There is hereby adopted by reference title 25, part 1, chapter 229, subchapter K,
section 229.161, et seq. the Texas Administrative Code, “Texas Food Establishments,” as amended, which
regulate food service establishments and are referred to as the “Texas Food Establishment Rules” and chapter
431, “The Texas Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act,” chapter 437, “Regulation of Food Service Establishments,
Retail Food Stores, Mobile Food Units, and Roadside Food Vendors” and chapter 438, “Public Health Measures
Relating to Food” of the Texas Health and Safety Code. The Texas Food Establishment Rules are hereby
incorporated as if fully set forth herein. A copy of the Texas Food Establishment Rules shall be kept on file in
the office of the town secretary.
(b) Cottage food production operations. To the extent set forth in chapter 437 of the Texas Health and Safety
Code and in title 25, part 1, chapter 229, subchapter K, section 229.661, a cottage food production operation is
exempt from the requirements of this article; provided, however, that the town has authority to act to prevent an
immediate and serious threat to human life or health. The town shall maintain a record of a complaint made by a
person against a cottage food production operation. An individual who operates a cottage food production
operation must have successfully completed a basic food safety education or training program for food handlers
accredited under subchapter D, chapter 438 of the Texas Health and Safety Code. A cottage food production
operation is required by state regulations to meet certain labeling requirements as set forth in title 25, part 1,
chapter 229, subchapter EE, section 229.661(d). Cottage foods must be packaged and labeled in accordance with
state law and rules.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/665
(c) Potentially hazardous foods. State law prohibits a cottage food production operation from selling to
consumers potentially hazardous foods. In this subsection, “potentially hazardous food” means a food that
requires time and temperature control for safety to limit pathogen growth or toxin production. The term includes
a food that must be held under proper temperature controls, such as refrigeration, to prevent the growth of
bacteria that may cause human illness. A potentially hazardous food may include a food that contains protein
and moisture and is neutral or slightly acidic, such as meat, poultry, fish, and shellfish products, pasteurized and
unpasteurized milk and dairy products, raw seed sprouts, baked goods that require refrigeration, including cream
or custard pies or cakes, and ice products. The term does not include a food that uses potentially hazardous food
as ingredients if the final food product does not require time or temperature control for safety to limit pathogen
growth or toxin production.
(d) Bed and breakfast limited. To the extent set forth in chapter 437 of the Texas Health and Safety Code and
in title 25, part 1, chapter 229, subchapter K, section 229.162, a bed and breakfast limited is exempt from the
requirements of this article.
(Ordinance 2014-30 adopted 10/7/14)
Sec. 6.06.002 Definitions
All definitions in Health and Safety Code sections 431.001, et seq., 437.001, et seq., and 438.001, et seq., as
amended, as well as in title 25, chapter 229, subchapter K of the department of state health services regulations,
“Texas Food Establishments,” are hereby adopted. In addition, the following definitions shall apply in this
article:
Commissary letter. A written and notarized statement, provided by a central preparation facility that displays the
vehicle identification number of the mobile food establishment and states that the mobile food establishment
receives food, supplies and/or cleaning and servicing from that facility.
Concession stand. A food establishment operated on a seasonal basis for the purpose of providing food at
supporting events associated with an independent school district, university, community college, nonprofit
organization, privately owned school, or the town.
Limited food establishment. An operation that is required by any regulatory agency to be inspected by the local
regulatory authority, but which does not meet the definition of food establishment or bed and breakfast limited,
as provided in this article.
Mobile food vendor (“vendor”). A person who owns, operates or sells food from:
(1) A stationary cart, or trailer mounted on chassis;
(2) Any mobile vehicle, with or without an engine;
(3) A pushcart providing foods other than pre-packaged, non-potentially hazardous foods; or
(4) Any mobile food establishment as defined in Texas Administrative Code section 229.162.
Regulatory authority. The person designated as health inspector by the town, the town manager or his/her
designee.
Texas Food Establishment Rules (TFER). The Texas Food Establishment Rules promulgated by the department
of state health services and located in title 25, part 1, chapter 229, subchapter K, sections 161–178 of the Texas
Administrative Code, as amended.
(Ordinance 2009-10-13C adopted 10/13/09)
Sec. 6.06.003 Permit required
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/665
(a) Permit requirement, renewal, exemption. It shall be unlawful to operate a food establishment in the town
unless the food establishment pays a permit fee set by the fee schedule, found in appendix A of this code and
possesses a valid food establishment permit issued by the town. A permit expires one year after issuance and
may be renewed with payment of a renewal permit fee. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a food establishment that
is a nonprofit organization as defined by Texas Business Organizations Code section 22.001(5) is exempt from
the requirement to obtain a food establishment permit. (Ordinance 2014-30 adopted 10/7/14)
(b) Posting. A valid permit shall be posted in public view in a conspicuous place at the food establishment for
which it is issued.
(c) Permit nontransferable. A permit issued under this article is not transferable. Upon change of ownership of
a business, the new business owner will be required to meet current standards set forth in this article, by state
law or regulation before a permit is issued.
(d) Multiple permits.
(1) A separate permit shall be required for every fixed, mobile, or temporary food establishment
with separate and distinct facilities and operations, as determined by the regulatory authority, whether
situated in the same building or at separate locations.
(2) Separate and distinct lounge operations in a food facility require a separate permit from food
operations. However, multiple lounges on the same floor in the same building and under the same
liquor license will not require a separate permit.
(e) Suspension of permit. The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend a permit
if the operation of a food establishment does not comply with the requirements of this article, state law or
regulation, or otherwise constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. A food establishment inspection report
is sufficient to serve as notice of a suspended permit.
(f) Public notice of suspended permit. When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease.
The regulatory authority shall post and maintain at the food establishment's entrance, the regulatory authority's
notice of the conditions therein, or require the owner, operator, or person in charge of the food establishment to
post and maintain at the establishment's entrance notice that the food establishment is closed.
(g) Reinspection authorized. A permit holder may request reinspection once compliance with this article is
met. Reinspection must be performed by the regulatory authority prior to reinstating a suspended permit. The
holder of the suspended permit may request reinspection by submitting a written request to the regulatory
authority within ten (10) days of the notice of suspension and by paying the reinspection fee set by the fee
schedule, found in appendix A of this code. The regulatory authority may require additional reinspection if
compliance is not met. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if the conditions prompting
the permit's suspension no longer exist and all fees and fines have been paid.
Sec. 6.06.004 Food manager certification and food handler training certificates
(a) Food manager certification requirements.
(1) A food establishment handling open food shall have at least one (1) certified food manager on
duty during all hours of operation.
(2) A food establishment shall provide proof of food manager certification to the regulatory
authority prior to opening the establishment.
(3) A food establishment shall have thirty (30) days to meet the certified food manager requirement
upon the transfer or termination of a certified food manager.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/665
(4) In the event of a change in ownership of a food establishment, the new owner/operator of a
food establishment shall provide proof to the regulatory authority that the appropriate number of
certified food managers will be on duty within thirty (30) days of the change of ownership.
(5) A concessionaire or temporary food establishment must have a certified food handler on duty
during all hours of operation.
(b) Expiration.
(1) A food manager certificate is valid for five (5) years from the date issued unless revoked by the
regulatory authority prior to the expiration date.
(2) A food handler certificate is valid for two (2) years from the date issued unless revoked by the
regulatory authority prior to the expiration date.
(Ordinance 2009-10-13C adopted 10/13/09)
(c) Bed and breakfast limited. For purposes of this article, a bed and breakfast limited is not a food service
establishment if it is a bed and breakfast establishment with seven or fewer rooms for rent that serves only
breakfast to its overnight guests. The owner/operator of a bed and breakfast limited is required under state law to
successfully complete a food manager's certification course approved by the town. A bed and breakfast
establishment that provides food service other than to overnight guests is a food service establishment for
purposes of this article and is subject to all rules and regulations applicable to a food service establishment.
(Ordinance 2014-30 adopted 10/7/14)
Sec. 6.06.005 Public health protections
(a) Condiments and baked goods. Condiments provided for the customer's use, such as relish, sauces, catsup,
mustard, etc., shall be shelf stable and shall be dispensed as single-serving packets or from squeeze-type
containers. Baked goods, not protected from contamination by the use of counter or service line food guards, or
stored in display cases, shall be portioned and wrapped prior to sale.
(b) Grease trap/interceptor. A grease trap/interceptor located upon the premises of a food establishment must
be one hundred percent (100%) pumped out at least the earlier of (i) once every ninety (90) days; or (ii) when
grease, sediment, or oil is visible in the grease trap/interceptor effluent. A grease trap/interceptor shall be
completely evacuated a minimum of four times yearly, unless otherwise allowed by the regulatory authority. If
there is evidence that the fats, oil, and grease discharge exceeds one hundred (100) mg/l, the regulatory authority
shall require the owner/operator of a food establishment to test effluent at the owner's sole expense. Samples
shall be collected in the presence of the regulatory authority and under the regulatory authority's direction.
Testing of the samples shall be conducted at a nationally certified laboratory utilizing methods approved by the
Environmental Protection Agency.
(c) Waste disposal. The owner of a food establishment shall enter into a contract with a licensed waste hauler
to provide for regularly scheduled servicing and shall not self-clean a grease trap/interceptor. Unless authorized
by the regulatory authority, grease shall not be stored outside. Documentation of liquid waste disposal shall be
kept on file for one (1) year in the food establishment. If an owner/operator fails to produce documentation, the
regulatory authority shall require the owner/operator to test effluent at the owner's sole expense. Samples shall
be collected in the presence of the regulatory authority and under the regulatory authority's direction. Testing of
the samples shall be conducted at a nationally certified laboratory utilizing methods approved by the
Environmental Protection Agency.
(d) Hand washing facilities. Hand cleansing soap or detergent in a sanitary dispenser shall be available near
each lavatory. A dispenser containing sanitary towels or a hot air hand drying device shall be located near each
lavatory. If sanitary disposable towels are used, easily cleanable waste receptacles shall be located near the hand
washing facilities. Bar soap is expressly prohibited.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/665
(e) Refuse collection area. Covered refuse containers must be provided, made of nonabsorbent material, and
rodent-proof. Food waste shall be securely bagged. Only articles necessary for the operation and maintenance of
a food establishment and its exterior, which are designated for recycling or disposal, may be stored in an
enclosure area for refuse, recyclables or returnables, but only when the storage does not create a rodent
harborage problem. Refuse collection areas, recycling servicing, and refuse servicing shall be approved by the
regulatory authority.
(f) Storage. Only articles necessary for the operation and maintenance of a food establishment and its exterior
may be stored on the premises, but only when the storage does not create a rodent harborage problem and does
not violate this article, the town code, or state law or regulation.
Sec. 6.06.006 Review of plans
(a) Submission of plans. When a fixed food establishment is constructed, extensively remodeled;
modifications, additions, or reductions are made to a fixed food establishment; or when an existing structure is
converted into a fixed food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction,
remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority prior to commencement of work.
Extensive remodeling means that twenty percent (20%) or greater of the area of the fixed food establishment is
to be remodeled.
(b) Required submissions. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement,
mechanical plans and construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment
and facilities. The owner/operator shall ensure during plan review, construction, and operation that the
equipment and facilities of a fixed food establishment comply with all applicable plumbing, mechanical,
electrical, building, zoning, and fire prevention and protection codes. In addition, the equipment and facilities of
a fixed food establishment shall include the following:
(1) Equipment and utensils shall be of commercial quality and must meet or exceed National
Sanitation Foundation standards or their equivalent;
(2) Auxiliary equipment such as water heaters, remote connected refrigerator compressors, and air
conditioners shall be located outside food preparation areas;
(3) At least one (1) three-compartment sink, regardless of whether a mechanical warewashing
machine is proposed, shall be required to wash and sanitize equipment and utensils;
(4) A grease separator designed to be serviced manually shall not be allowed. Unless otherwise
allowed by the regulatory authority:
(A) A grease trap/interceptor shall be installed in a fixed food establishment;
(B) A grease trap/interceptor shall be located in an area easily accessible for cleaning,
operation, and maintenance; and
(C) A grease trap/interceptor shall not be located within an area where food is held, prepared,
stored, or transferred.
(5) At least one (1) utility sink or curbed cleaning facility equipped with a floor drain and supplied
with hot and cold water by means of a mixing valve. The water supply shall be protected by a
backflow prevention device installed in compliance with the plumbing code and the environment
code. The cleaning facility shall be used for cleaning mops or similar wet floor cleaning tools and for
the disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste. The use of lavatories, utensil or equipment
washing sinks, or food preparation sinks for such utility purposes is expressly prohibited;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/665
(6) At least one toilet shall be provided solely for employee use, in addition to the number of toilets
required by state law or regulation;
(7) Floors that are water flushed for cleaning, or that receive discharges of liquid from equipment
or pressure sprays, shall be constructed of sealed concrete, terrazzo, ceramic tile, or similar material
and be graded to a properly installed trapped floor drain;
(8) Sawdust, wood shavings, peanut hulls, or similar material are expressly prohibited as a floor
covering in dining areas;
(9) An outdoor storage area for refuse, recyclables or returnables shall be constructed for a fixed
food establishment. The outdoor storage area shall be enclosed such that the area is shielded from
public view and shall be completely constructed of masonry, unless otherwise approved by the
regulatory authority;
(10) Outdoor receptacles and waste handling units for refuse, recyclables or returnables shall be
designed and constructed to have tight-fitting lids, doors, or covers and shall be placed within an
approved outdoor storage area enclosure. All outdoor receptacles and waste handling units shall be
approved by the regulatory authority prior to installation or use;
(11) Any outdoor walking and driving areas must comply with the standards set forth in section
14.02.690 [sic] of division 14 “commercial planned development district” of article 14.02.
(c) Approval of plans. No food establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted except
in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the regulatory authority.
(d) Preoperational inspection. The regulatory authority shall inspect a food establishment prior to its
beginning operation to ensure compliance with approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of
this article. The owner/operator of a food establishment must pay a preoperational inspection fee as set by the
fee schedule, found in appendix A of this code. Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will
result in denial, suspension or revocation of a permit.
Sec. 6.06.007 Mobile food establishments
(a) Limited operating area, limited duration of operation. A mobile food establishment shall not operate at one
location for a period of time exceeding fifteen (15) minutes. A mobile food establishment shall not operate in a
location in violation of the comprehensive zoning ordinance, or which otherwise violates the town code.
(b) Central preparation facility requirement.
(1) Supplies, cleaning and servicing operations. A mobile food establishment shall operate from a
central preparation facility or other fixed food establishment and shall report to this location for
supplies, cleaning, and servicing.
(2) Written proof of agreement to receive such services from a central preparation facility, in the
form of a commissary letter or other documentation approved by the regulatory authority, shall be
submitted to the regulatory authority upon application for a permit. The commissary letter or other
required documentation shall be kept on file and updated when changing a central preparation
facility, or as deemed necessary by the regulatory authority.
(3) The central preparation facility shall be inspected by the regulatory authority of the jurisdiction
in which they are located. The certificate of such inspection shall be submitted upon application for a
permit. The certificate shall be kept on file in the mobile food establishment.
(Ordinance 2009-10-13C adopted 10/13/09)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/665
(c) Permit requirement, renewal, exemption.
(1) A mobile food establishment may not operate within the town without a valid permit and
payment of the permit fee set by the fee schedule, found in appendix A of this code. A permit is not
transferable and expires one year after issuance and may be renewed with payment of a renewal
permit fee. The following documents shall be submitted with the completed permit application:
(A) A commissary letter or equivalent;
(B) Proof of valid liability insurance coverage for the mobile food establishment covering the
duration of the requested permit;
(C) The vendor's valid driver's license;
(D) Written consent to a background check;
(E) A copy of a certified food manager's certificate; and
(F) Any other documents requested by the town in the interest of public health.
In addition, the vendor of a mobile food establishment on which food is prepared, processed, or
reheated must have one (1) certified food manager present at the mobile food establishment
during all hours of operation and shall provide documentation of certification to the town upon
application for a permit. Once all required documentation is submitted and approved, a mobile
food establishment shall be inspected by the town. The town shall not issue a permit unless the
applicant complies with this article and pays the permit and inspection fees
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, a mobile food establishment that is a nonprofit organization as
defined by Texas Business Organizations Code section 22.001(5) is exempt from the requirement to
obtain a mobile food establishment permit.
(Ordinance 2014-30 adopted 10/7/14)
Sec. 6.06.008 Permit application and renewal
(a) Application requirements. Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must submit a written
permit application on forms provided by the regulatory authority. An application for a temporary food
establishment must be received by the regulatory authority at least ten (10) days prior to a proposed event. An
incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required information or to meet the deadline
for submission of a temporary permit, or falsification of required information may result in denial or revocation
of a temporary permit.
(b) Fee required. A food establishment permit is not valid unless the owner/operator pays the applicable
permit fee set by the fee schedule, found in appendix A of this code.
(c) Renewal. Renewal of a valid permit requires a written permit renewal application on forms provided by
the regulatory authority. A permit renewal is required on an annual basis, except where otherwise stated. An
incomplete renewal application shall not be accepted. A permit renewal shall not be issued until all outstanding
fines and fees, including reinspection fees, permit renewal late fees, and plan review fees, have been paid.
(Ordinance 2009-10-13C adopted 10/13/09)
(d) Limited food establishment. Any person desiring to operate a limited food establishment must obtain a
permit and pay the permit fee as specified in section 6.06.003 of this article and set by the fee schedule found in
appendix A of this code. Notwithstanding the foregoing, instead of obtaining a permit under this article, a person
intending to prepare, produce, or serve food at a temporary event governed by article 6.08 or at a farmers' market
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/665
governed by article 6.09 must obtain a permit to the extent required by said articles under the procedures set
forth in said articles.
(e) Exemptions.
(1) A food establishment operated by a public entity, such as an independent school district,
university, community college, or the town, may be exempt from paying the food establishment
permit fee for a temporary event, if the exemption is approved by the town.
(2) A food establishment that is a nonprofit organization as defined by Texas Business
Organizations Code section 22.001(5) is exempt from the requirement to obtain a permit for a
temporary event.
(Ordinance 2014-30 adopted 10/7/14)
(f) Validity. A permit issued by the regulatory authority shall be valid unless it is suspended, revoked or
expires. A permit of the type concession shall expire at the end of the sporting season for which they are
permitted except that a concession stand owned, operated, and maintained by a single public entity, such as an
independent school district, university, community college, or the town, shall be permitted on an annual basis. A
permit of the type temporary shall expire on the last day of the event for which they are issued, but under no
circumstances shall exceed fourteen (14) calendar days. All other permits shall expire annually on the date one
(1) year from the date of issuance. The regulatory authority shall assess a permit renewal late fee of fifty percent
(50%) of the permit fee on any annual permit that is renewed within thirty (30) days following expiration. A
permit renewal received after thirty (30) days following the expiration date shall be assessed a permit renewal
late fee of one hundred percent (100%) of the annual permit fee. The assessment of this late fee shall not release
a food establishment from any other fee or fine imposed under this article.
Sec. 6.06.009 Administrative process and appeal
(a) Service of notice. A notice required by this article is properly served when it is personally delivered to the
permit holder or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the address on the submitted permit application. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the
regulatory authority.
(b) Notification of hearing. Whenever a notice of a permit suspension or revocation is given, such notice shall:
(i) include the reason the permit is subject to suspension or revocation; (ii) inform the permit holder that the
permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten (10) days following service of such notice if a hearing is not
requested; (iii) inform the permit holder of an opportunity for a hearing prior to revocation; and (iv) inform the
permit holder of the procedures to request a hearing. Unless a request for a hearing is submitted by the permit
holder within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, the permit's revocation shall be final.
(c) Permit revocation. The regulatory authority may, after providing notice and an opportunity for a hearing,
revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of this article for interfering with the regulatory authority's
performance of his/her duties.
(d) Conduct of hearing. The hearings provided for in this article shall be conducted at a time and place
designated by the regulatory authority. Based upon the evidence of such hearings, the regulatory authority shall
make a final finding, and may sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written
report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the permit holder by the regulatory authority within fourteen
(14) days following the date the hearing was held.
(e) Appeal. Any permit holder who wishes to dispute the decision of a regulatory authority may appeal the
decision to the town manager. The appeal shall be filed in writing within ten (10) days of the date of the notice
of suspension or revocation to the town manager. The town manager shall attempt to hear the appeal within
thirty (30) days after notice of the appeal. The town manager shall have the power to modify, rescind or reverse a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/665
decision of the regulatory authority where he finds that such a reversal will not affect the health and/or welfare
of the public. All decisions of the town manager or his/her designee shall be subject to review by the town
council at one of its regularly scheduled meetings. The decision of the town manager shall be final unless
reversed by the town council. The town council's failure to take action upon any such appeal shall constitute
approval of the decision by the town manager.
(f) Application after revocation. Once a permit's revocation is final, the holder of the revoked permit may
make written application for a new permit to the regulatory authority.
(Ordinance 2009-10-13C adopted 10/13/09)
Sec. 6.06.010 Administrative penalty
(a) Administrative penalty. The town health officer may impose an administrative penalty on a person or
establishment that the town requires to hold a permit under this article or under article 6.08 or 6.09 or if the
person or establishment violates this article or violates article 6.08 or 6.09 or any regulations adopted under said
articles.
(b) Amount of administrative penalty. The amount of the penalty may not exceed $500.00 per day, and each
day a violation continues or occurs is a separate violation for the purpose of imposing a penalty. The procedures
for imposing a penalty and the opportunity for judicial review shall be as set forth under section 437.0185 of the
Texas Health and Safety Code.
(c) Criminal offense/penalty. A person commits an offense if the person operates a food service establishment,
retail food store, mobile food unit, or roadside food vendor without a permit required by the county or public
health district in which the entity is operating. A criminal offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor.
Each day on which a criminal offense occurs constitutes a separate offense.
Sec. 6.06.011 Regulations related to dogs on patios of food establishments
(a) Variance required. A food establishment with an outdoor patio under its exclusive ownership or control
may apply to the town manager or his or her designee for a variance modifying or waiving the prohibition
against dogs on the premises of a food establishment contained in title 25, part 1, chapter 229, subchapter K,
section 229.167(p)(15) of the Texas Administrative Code. The food establishment shall apply for the variance on
a form provided by the town and shall include in the application all of the information required by title 25, part
1, chapter 229, subchapter K, section 229.171(c)(2) of said code. The application shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable variance application fee set by the fee schedule, found in appendix A of this code. A variance
granted under this section is nontransferable.
(b) Procedure. The town may grant a variance, as authorized in title 25, part 1, chapter 229, subchapter K,
section 229.171(c) of the Texas Administrative Code, by modifying or waiving the requirements of section
229.167(p)(15) of said code.
(c) Compliance. A food establishment granted a variance shall comply with any conditions or standards for
the variance established by the town or this article.
(d) Revocation. The town shall deny or revoke a variance if:
(1) The application for variance contains a false statement as to a material matter.
(2) The food establishment does not hold a valid permit issued under this article.
(3) The town determines that a health hazard or nuisance will result or has resulted from the
variance;
(4) The food establishment failed to pay a fee required under this article at the time it was due; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/665
(5) The food establishment is in violation of any term or condition of the variance as established by
the town, this article, or state law.
(e) Notice of revocation appeal. If the town denies or revokes a variance the town shall notify the applicant in
writing by personal service or regular United States mail. The notice must include the reasons for the denial or
revocation and a statement informing the applicant of the right to appeal the decision in accordance with section
6.06.009 of this article.
(f) Minimum conditions and standard. If the town grants a variance allowing dogs to be present in the outdoor
patio area of a food establishment, then the food establishment shall comply with the following conditions and
standards in addition to any other conditions and standards established by the town for the variance:
(1) Except as allowed under state law relating to service or patrol dogs, no dog may be present
inside the food establishment or on any playground area of the food establishment.
(2) A separate entrance must be provided from the outside of the food establishment to the outdoor
patio so that a dog will have direct access to the patio without entering the interior of the food
establishment or any playground area of the food establishment. A dog may not be allowed within
seven (7) feet of any entrance to the interior of the food establishment, except when necessary to
enter or exit the patio.
(3) Doors equipped with self-closing devices must be provided at all entrances to the outdoor patio
from the interior of the food establishment, and must be kept closed when not in use.
(4) No food preparation may be performed in the outdoor patio area, except that a beverage glass
may be filled on the patio from a pitcher or other container that has been filled or otherwise prepared
inside the food establishment. This restriction does not apply to a bar serving alcoholic beverages
where all ice and any food items must be covered at all times
(5) The outdoor patio must be continuously maintained free of visible dog hair, dog dander, and
other dog-related waste or debris. The outdoor patio must be hosed down or mopped with a product
that sanitizes the patio surface at the beginning of each shift during which food or beverages will be
served (breakfast, lunch, dinner, or late-hours), except that cleaning under this subsection is not
required if no dog has been present on the outdoor patio since the last cleaning.
(6) All table and chair surfaces shall be non-porous, easily cleanable material and cleaned with a
product that will sanitize said surfaces.
(7) Spilled food and drink shall be removed from the floor or ground within five (5) minutes of the
spill.
(8) Waste created from a dog's bodily functions must be cleaned up with a product that will
sanitize the surface that any such waste contacted within five (5) minutes after each occurrence. All
dog waste must be disposed of outside of the food establishment in an appropriate waste receptacle.
Equipment used to clean the outdoor patio must be kept outside of the food establishment.
(9) While on duty, wait staff or other food handlers at the food establishment may not pet or have
contact with any dog.
(10) A dog must be kept on a leash, or in a secure bag or container specifically designed to carry
and provide continuous restraint of dogs while providing adequate ventilation, and remain under
continuous physical control of the customer while in the outdoor patio area. The dog must be wearing
a collar or harness with a current rabies tag attached to it.
(11) A dog is not allowed on a seat, table, countertop, or similar surface in the outdoor patio area.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/665
(12) A dog is not allowed to have contact with any dishes or utensils used for food service or
preparation at the food establishment.
(13) A dog may not be given any food (including, but not limited to, dog kibble, biscuits, and
edible treats) while in the outdoor patio area, but may be given water in a disposable container or a
container clearly marked as a dog dish.
(14) The food establishment shall maintain written procedures to notify the town's local health
authority of any local rabies control incident as required by article 2.02 of chapter 2 of this code.
(g) Violations, penalty. Food establishments or persons that do not obtain a variance as required under this
section may not allow dogs on the premises of the food establishment; provided, however, that this section shall
not apply to service or patrol dogs allowed under state law or rules. Any violation of this section shall subject a
violator to penalties as set forth in section 6.06.010 of this code.
(Ordinance 2014-30 adopted 10/7/14)
ARTICLE 6.07 ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCTS
Sec. 6.07.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the use, possession, sale, ingestion or smoking of illegal smoking
products, as hereinafter defined, within the town limits.
Sec. 6.07.002 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them by this
article. All terminology used in this article and not specifically defined herein, shall retain its meaning in
conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor
body or if not defined therein the latest volume of Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary.
Illegal smoking product. Any plant or other substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or
any blend thereof, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which
includes any one or more of the following substances or chemicals:
(1) Salvinorin A: Contained within the salvia divinorum plant, whether growing or not; or
possessed as an extract, compound, manufacture, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant;
(2) 2-(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl)-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47, 497)
and homologues;
(3) 1-pentyl-2-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018); or
(4) Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073).
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed business.
Town. The Town of Fairview, Texas.
Sec. 6.07.003 Violation
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, barter, give, publicly display, sell or offer for
sale any illegal smoking product.
(b) The culpable mental state required by chapter 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code is specifically negated and
dispensed with and a violation is a strict liability offense.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/665
Sec. 6.07.004 Affirmative defense
(a) It shall be an affirmative defense for a person charged with an offense for possession or use of an illegal
smoking product that the use or possession was pursuant to the direction or prescription of a licensed physician
or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act.
(b) It shall be an affirmative defense that the sale or possession of salvinorin A was in conjunction with
ornamental landscaping and used solely for that purpose.
Sec. 6.07.005 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000.00 for each offense,
or the greatest amount allowed under applicable law, whichever is lowest, and each and every separate violation
of this article shall constitute a separate offense, unless otherwise specifically set forth in this code. Allegation
and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for proof of any offense defined by this article.
(Ordinance 2010-9-7C adopted 9/7/10)
ARTICLE 6.08 TEMPORARY EVENT FOOD REGULATIONS
Sec. 6.08.001 Purpose, regulations adopted
(a) Purpose, definitions. The purpose of this article is to provide adequate health protection for the public
attending special events of a temporary nature (“temporary event”) through regulations including permitting and
food safety regulations. “The Village at Fairview” means that certain tract of approximately 200-acres that is a
regional mixed-use development located at the northeast corner of Stacy Road and US 75 that includes retail,
restaurants, specialty establishments. “The Village at Allen” means that certain tract of approximately 181-acres
that is a regional mixed-use development located at the southeast corner of Stacy Road and US 75 that includes
retail, restaurants, specialty establishments.
(b) Regulations adopted. There is hereby adopted by reference title 25, part 1, chapter 229, subchapter K,
section 229.161, et seq. of the Texas Administrative Code, “Texas Food Establishments,” as amended, which
regulate food service establishments and are referred to as the “Texas Food Establishment Rules” and chapter
431, “The Texas Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act,” chapter 437, “Regulation of Food Service Establishments,
Retail Food Stores, Mobile Food Units, and Roadside Food Vendors” and chapter 438, “Public Health Measures
Relating to Food” of the Texas Health and Safety Code. The Texas Food Establishment Rules are hereby
incorporated as if fully set forth herein. A copy of the Texas Food Establishment Rules shall be kept on file in
the office of the town secretary.
Sec. 6.08.002 Permit requirements; violations
(a) Temporary food establishment permit. Except as exempted in this section establishments or persons that
intend to prepare and/or distribute food at a temporary event are required to obtain a temporary food
establishment permit from the town. A permit issued under this subsection shall state the precise location that
food will be prepared and/or served and the dates and times during which food may be prepared and/or served.
A temporary event does not include a farmers' market for which a permit is required under article 6.09 of this
chapter. Temporary food establishment permits shall be issued as follows:
(1) Single event. The single-event permit is valid for one individual food booth or unit at one
specific event, and is valid for 14 consecutive days from the initial effective date.
(2) Multiple event. The multiple-event permit is valid for one individual food booth or unit at
multiple events for 1 year from the initial effective date.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/665
(b) Exemption for certain establishments. Food establishments located in The Village at Fairview or in The
Village of Allen that prepare and/or serve food at a temporary event that is held in The Village at Fairview are
not required to obtain a temporary food establishment permit for a temporary event, provided that such
establishment: (1) holds a current food establishment permit and certificate of occupancy issued by the
regulating authority having proper jurisdiction; and (2) prepares the food to be served at the temporary event in
the kitchen facilities that are operated under such certificate of occupancy. If such food establishment intends to
prepare food at a location in The Village at Fairview other than said kitchen facilities, it must obtain a separate
permit as described in subsection (a), above.
(c) Certification. Each establishment or person that prepares and/or distributes food at a temporary event shall
ensure that a minimum of one state certified food handler is overseeing such preparation and/or distribution of
food at all times. Proof of said certification must be publicly displayed at the temporary event and submitted to
the town upon annual renewal of permit.
(d) Permit fees, renewal. The fees for the permits under this section are set by the fee schedule, found in
appendix A of this code. A permit is not transferable and expires one year after issuance and may be renewed
with payment of a renewal permit fee. Additional fees for reinspections are set by the fee schedule, found in
appendix A of this code.
(e) Nonprofits exempt. Notwithstanding any provision of this article, a food establishment that is a nonprofit
organization as defined by the Texas Business Organizations Code section 22.001(5) is exempt from the
requirement to obtain a temporary food establishment permit.
(f) Cottage food operations exempt. To the extent set forth in chapter 437 of the Texas Health and Safety
Code and in title 25, part 1, chapter 229, subchapter EE, section 229.661 of the Texas Administrative Code, a
cottage food production operation is exempt from the requirements of this article; provided, however, that the
town has authority to act to prevent an immediate and serious threat to human life or health. The town shall
maintain a record of a complaint made by a person against a cottage food production operation. Under state law,
an individual who operates a cottage food production operation must have successfully completed a basic food
safety education or training program for food handlers accredited under subchapter D, chapter 438 of the Texas
Health and Safety Code. A cottage food production operation is required by state regulations to meet certain
labeling requirements as set forth in title 25, part 1, chapter 229, subchapter EE, section 229.661(d). Cottage
foods must be packaged and labeled in accordance with state law and rules.
(g) Farmers' markets. If a temporary event includes a farmers' market, the farmers and producers that
participate in the farmers' market are governed under article 6.09 of this code and are not required to comply
with this article.
(h) Violations, penalty. Except as expressly set forth in this chapter, establishments or persons that do not
obtain a permit required under this section may not prepare or distribute food at temporary events. Any violation
of this section or of the regulations set forth in other provisions of this article or adopted hereunder shall subject
a violator to penalties as set forth in section 6.06.010 of this code.
Sec. 6.08.003 Temporary event food regulations; generally
(a) Samples. At all times, sample food items require active handout to the consumer by an employee of an
establishment or person properly permitted under section 6.08.002. When not actively providing food to a
consumer, food samples must be fully covered.
(b) Maintenance. All food service preparation areas must be clean and well maintained.
(c) Hair restraints. At any time when food is not served in individual packaging vending staff, including food
service staff, must wear suitable hair restraints, including hairnets, ball caps or other hats.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/665
(d) Personal hygiene. Personnel shall maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness and conform to good
hygienic practices. They shall be free of infections which may transmit foodborne illness. Hands shall be washed
as often as needed during food preparation. Handwash facilities shall include an insulated container with a spigot
that can be turned on to allow potable, clean, warm water to flow; a wastewater container; soap; disposable
towels and a waste receptacle. An approved hand sanitizer must be used after handwashing. Single-use gloves
may be used in addition to handwashing. The use of tobacco or eating food in preparation and serving areas is
prohibited.
(e) Restrooms. Vending staff, including food service staff, and consumers must have access to nearby,
adequate, and clean restroom facilities.
(f) Food service areas. Vending staff, including food service staff, or other employees of an establishment or a
person holding a permit under section 6.08.002 may not eat, smoke or drink in food service or vending areas and
may not allow others to eat, smoke or drink in food service or vending areas.
Sec. 6.08.004 Additional food safety regulations
(a) Coverings and separations. Food preparation on site at a temporary event shall require a covering (such as
a canopy) over all food service areas as well as a physical (sneeze barrier complying with NSF Standard 2) or
distance separation of at least 5 feet (e.g., additional table wider than 5 feet), separating the food
preparation/storage from the general public/consumers.
(b) Contact with food. All food items unless individual packaged must be handled with a serving utensil and
disposable gloves may be worn. Bare hand contact with food is prohibited.
(c) Temperature control, ice. On-site mechanical cold holding or hot holding is required unless food is preportioned,
individually packaged and rotated every 2 hours maximum from the kitchen mechanical holding
equipment. Mechanical temperature holding equipment must comply with subsection (l), below. Ice chests will
be allowed to store commercially bottled or canned products only. No ice that has touched food or been used for
temperature control may be given to a consumer. Ice for use as a food or a cooling medium shall be made from
drinking water. Ice shall be obtained only in chipped, crushed, or cubed form and in single-use safe plastic or
wet-strength paper bags filled and sealed at the point of manufacture. Ice for consumption shall be held in such
bags until it is dispensed in a way that protects it from contamination.
(d) Condiments. Condiments provided for the customer's use shall be individually portioned and enclosed.
Where possible, single serve packets or squeeze-type, shelf-stable containers such as relish, sauces, peppers,
catsup, mustard, and similar items shall be used.
(e) Food origin. Home preparation of food is not permitted. Proof of origination or purchase of food products
may be required on site.
(f) Handwashing. Handwashing shall be required within the vending/food preparation area if, at any time,
food preparation is performed. Where required, a convenient handwashing facility shall be available within the
food preparation area or in another approved location. This facility shall consist of an insulated container with a
spigot that can be turned on to allow potable, clean warm water to flow; a wastewater container; soap;
disposable towels; and, a waste receptacle. An approved hand sanitizer may also be required to be used in
conjunction with handwashing. Sanitizer is not a substitute for proper handwashing. Food handling personnel
must wash their hands as frequently as necessary to keep them clean. Disposable gloves may not be used in lieu
of handwashing.
(g) Water. Water from an approved source shall be made available in a temporary food establishment for food
preparation, handwashing, and for cleaning and sanitizing utensils and equipment. Water need not be under
pressure but shall come from approved sources which include: commercially bottled drinking water, closed
portable water containers, enclosed vehicular water tanks, on-premises water storage tanks, or piping, tubing or
hoses connected to an approved source.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/665
(h) Wastewater and trash disposal. Wastewater must be disposed of in the sanitary sewer or an approved onsite
sewage system. Wastewater cannot be disposed of in the grass, on the ground, or in drainage facilities.
(i) Solid waste. Covered trash containers must be provided made of nonabsorbent material and rodent-proof.
All trash must be bagged. Trash collection areas and servicing must be approved by the town.
(j) Single service articles. All temporary event food establishments shall provide only disposable single
service articles for use by consumers. Other than disposable paper plates, no plates or nondisposable utensils
may be used. No reusable items such as ceramic plates or metal silverware may be provided for consumer use.
(k) Physical facilities. The physical facilities at which a temporary event is held shall comply with title 25,
part 1, chapter 229, subchapter K, section 229.164(k)–(o) of the Texas Administrative Code.
(l) Equipment.
(1) Design and construction. Equipment and utensils shall be designed and constructed to be
durable and to retain their characteristic qualities under normal use conditions.
(2) Location and installation. Equipment shall be located and installed and cleaned in a way that
prevents food contamination and that also facilitates cleaning of the establishment.
(3) Hot and cold holding equipment. Equipment for cooling or heating food, and holding cold or
hot food shall be adequate in number and capacity to provide food temperatures as specified under
title 25, part 1, chapter 229, subchapter K, section 229.164(k)–(o) of the Texas Administrative Code.
(4) Protection from contamination. Food-contact surfaces of equipment shall be protected from
contamination by consumers and other contamination sources. Where necessary to prevent
contamination, effective shields for such equipment shall be provided.
(5) Alternative manual warewashing. Alternative manual warewashing equipment, such as
receptacles that substitute for the compartments of a multi-compartment sink, may be used when
there are special cleaning needs or constraints and the regulatory authority has approved the use of
alternative equipment.
(m) Wet storage. Packaged food may not be stored in direct contact with ice or water if the food is subject to
the entry of water because of the nature of its packaging, wrapping, or container or its positioning in the ice or
water.
(n) Fire safety. Should on-site cooking occur or should food warmers and/or heat lamps be used, a fire
extinguisher must be provided. Tents and awnings, if used in an area where cooking or food warming occurs,
must be made of flame retardant material and proof verifying same must be presented upon request by the town.
(o) Personnel knowledge. Food safety training is highly recommended for all temporary event food
establishment workers. Food service workers may obtain a list of approved courses from the Texas Department
of State Health Services website. Depending on duration of event and the extent of the food service offered, a
food handler certification or a certified food manager's certification may be required for a minimum of one or all
personnel during the event.
ARTICLE 6.09 FARMERS' MARKET REGULATIONS
Sec. 6.09.001 Purpose; regulations; definitions adopted
(a) Purpose. Farmers' markets are exempt from the requirements of a food service establishment and are
generally not required to comply with the Texas Food Establishment Rules. However, a local health authority
may require permits and enforce temperature requirements governing potentially hazardous foods. The purpose
of this article is to provide adequate health protection for the public through regulations including permitting and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/665
food safety regulations pertaining to persons who sell potentially hazardous food at farmers' markets. A farmers'
market is a designated location used primarily for the distribution and sale directly to consumers of food by
farmers or other producers.
(b) Regulations adopted. To the extent applicable to a farmers' market, there is hereby adopted by reference
title 25, part 1, chapter 229, subchapter K, section 229.161, et seq. and subchapter FF, section 229.701, et seq. of
the Texas Administrative Code, as amended, which regulate farmers' markets, chapter 433, “Texas Meat and
Poultry Inspection Act,” applicable provisions of chapter 437, “Regulation of Food Service Establishments,
Retail Food Stores, Mobile Food Units, and Roadside Food Vendors” and chapter 438, “Public Health Measures
Relating to Food” of the Texas Health and Safety Code.
(c) Potentially hazardous food definition. A potentially hazardous food is a food that requires time and
temperature control for safety (“TCS”) to limit pathogen growth or toxin production, as further defined in Texas
Administrative Code, title 25, part 1, chapter 229, subchapter K, section 229.162(74).
Sec. 6.09.002 Permit requirements; violations
(a) Permit, fee, renewal. A person who intends to sell food at a farmers' market in the town must obtain from
the town a temporary food establishment permit. A permit expires one year after issuance and may be renewed
with payment of a renewal permit fee. Permits are not transferable. The fees for the permits under this section
are set by the fee schedule, found in appendix A of this code.
(b) Coordinator. For every farmers' market event, a coordinator must be designated by the company or group
operating a farmers' market. The coordinator of the farmers' market is responsible for the day to day operations
and monitoring of all food vendors, including TCS food vendors and non-TCS food vendors. The coordinator
must submit to the town in advance a list of all vendors participating and identify each vendor, state the extent to
which a vendor will sell or distribute potentially hazardous food, provide food samples, or conduct cooking
demonstrations.
(c) Certain activities exempt from permit fee. The permit fee required under subsection (a), above, is waived
solely for sampling or cooking demonstrations that are conducted for bona fide educational purposes. A
participant must pay the permit fee if the participant:
(1) Sells food at the farmers' market; or
(2) Provides samples or performs cooking demonstrations other than for bona fide educational
purposes.
(d) Cottage food operations exempt. To the extent set forth in chapter 437 of the Texas Health and Safety
Code and in title 25, part 1, chapter 229, subchapter EE, section 229.661, a cottage food production operation is
exempt from the requirements of this article; provided, however, that the town has authority to act to prevent an
immediate and serious threat to human life or health. The town shall maintain a record of a complaint made by a
person against a cottage food production operation. An individual who operates a cottage food production
operation must have successfully completed a basic food safety education or training program for food handlers
accredited under subchapter D, chapter 438 of the Texas Health and Safety Code. A cottage food production
operation is required by state regulations to meet certain labeling requirements as set forth in title 25, part 1,
chapter 229, subchapter EE, section 229.661(d).
(e) Nonprofits exempt. Notwithstanding the foregoing a food establishment that is a nonprofit organization as
defined by Texas Business Organizations Code section 22.001(5) is exempt from the requirement to obtain a
permit under this article.
(f) Violations, penalty. Establishments or persons that are not permitted as required under this section may not
sell or distribute food at a farmers' market. Any violation of this section or of the regulations set forth in other
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/665
provisions of this article or adopted hereunder shall subject a violator to penalties as set forth in section 6.06.010
of this code.
Sec. 6.09.003 Meat; poultry and milk
(a) Meat and poultry. In addition to complying with the TCS regulations set forth in section 6.09.004(c), a
person who sells or provides samples of meat or poultry or food containing meat or poultry shall comply with
Texas Health and Safety Code, chapter 433.
(b) Milk. No raw milk or raw milk products may be sold or provided to a consumer.
Sec. 6.09.004 Cooking demonstrations, samples, temperatures
(a) Cooking demonstrations. Only the holder of a permit issued under this article may conduct a cooking
demonstration at a farmers' market. A cooking demonstrator may conduct a cooking demonstration only if:
(1) Regardless of whether the demonstrator provides a sample of food to consumers, the farmers'
market that hosts the demonstration:
(A) Has an establishment operator with a valid certification under subchapter D, chapter 438
of the Texas Health and Safety Code supervising the demonstration; and
(B) Complies with subsection (c), below, regarding food temperature; and
(2) A demonstrator may provide a sample of food to consumers only if the demonstrator complies
with subsection (b), below, and:
(A) The demonstrator provides a sample (bite-sized) only and not a full serving; and
(B) Samples of food prepared during a demonstration are disposed of not later than two hours
after the beginning of the demonstration.
(b) Samples. Only the holder of a permit issued under this article may provide food samples to consumers. In
providing samples to consumers, the holder of a permit issued under this article must comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Samples must be distributed in a sanitary manner and must be bite-sized and not full portions.
(2) A person preparing produce samples on site must:
(A) Wear clean, disposable plastic gloves when preparing samples; or
(B) Observe proper handwashing techniques immediately before preparing samples;
(3) Produce intended for sampling must be washed in potable water to remove any soil or other
visible material;
(4) Potable water must be available for washing;
(5) Except as set forth in subsection (c), below, potentially hazardous food, as determined by rule
of the department, must be maintained at or below 41 degrees Fahrenheit or disposed of within two
hours after cutting or preparing; and
(6) Utensils and cutting surfaces used for cutting samples must be smooth, nonabsorbent, and
easily cleaned or disposed of.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/665
(c) Food temperatures. Food temperature requirements shall be as set forth in this subsection (c); provided,
however, that in any instance where this subsection conflicts with state law or rule, then the state law or rule
shall prevail to the extent of the conflict.
(1) Potentially hazardous food sold, distributed, or prepared on site at a farmers' market, and
potentially hazardous food transported to or from a farmers' market shall meet the requirements of
this subsection (c).
(2) Frozen food. Stored frozen foods shall be maintained frozen.
(3) Hot and cold holding. All potentially hazardous food sold at, prepared on site at, or transported
to or from a farm or farmers' market at all times shall be maintained at:
(A) For cold, 5 degrees Celsius (41 degrees Fahrenheit) or below; or
(B) For hot, 54 degrees Celsius (135 degrees Fahrenheit) or above.
(4) Cooking of raw animal foods. Raw animal foods shall be cooked to heat all parts of the food to
the following temperatures:
(A) Poultry, ground poultry, stuffing with poultry, meat and fish to 74 degrees Celsius (165
degrees Fahrenheit) for 15 seconds;
(B) Ground meat, ground pork, ground fish, and injected meats to 68 degrees Celsius (155
degree Fahrenheit) for 15 seconds;
(C) Beef, pork, meat, fish and raw shell eggs for immediate service to 63 degrees Celsius
(145 degrees Fahrenheit) for 15 seconds;
(D) Prepackaged, potentially hazardous food, that has been commercially processed, to 57
degree Celsius (135 degrees Fahrenheit);
(E) A raw or undercooked whole-muscle, intact beef steak may be served if:
(i) The steak is labeled to indicate that it meets the definition of “whole-muscle, intact
beef” as defined in Texas Administrative Code, title 25, chapter 229, subchapter K,
section 229.162(115) of this title (relating to definitions); or
(ii) The steak is cooked on both the top and bottom to a surface temperature of 63
degrees Celsius (145 degrees Fahrenheit) or above and a cooked color change is achieved
on all external surfaces.
(F) Raw animal foods cooked in a microwave oven shall be:
(i) Rotated or stirred throughout or midway during cooking to compensate for uneven
distribution of heat;
(ii) Covered to retain surface moisture;
(iii) Heated to a temperature of at least 74 degrees Celsius (165 degrees Fahrenheit) in
all parts of the food; and
(iv) Allowed to stand covered for 2 minutes after cooking to obtain temperature
equilibrium.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/665
(5) Cooking fruits and vegetables. Fruits and vegetables that are cooked shall be heated to a
temperature of 57 degrees Celsius (135 degrees Fahrenheit).
(6) Eggs. A farmer or egg producer that sells eggs directly to the consumer shall maintain the eggs
at an ambient air temperature of 7 degrees Celsius (45 degrees Fahrenheit) as specified in Texas
Administrative Code, title 25, chapter 229, subchapter K, section 229.164(c)(1)(C).
(Ordinance 2014-30 adopted 10/7/14)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 7.01.001 Established
The town council hereby establishes the municipal court, which shall be operated in accordance with the
constitution and laws of the state. (1998 Code, sec. 34.01)
Sec. 7.01.002 Prosecuting attorney
The town attorney shall serve as the prosecuting attorney in the municipal court. (1998 Code, sec. 34.05)
State law reference–Municipal prosecutions by city attorney or deputy city attorney, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 45.201.
Sec. 7.01.003 Bailiff
(a) There shall be appointed by the police chief one or more officers to serve as the bailiff for each session of
the municipal court. (1998 Code, sec. 34.06; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Such appointed bailiff shall, when so directed, serve under the direction of the municipal judge during
sessions of the municipal court.
(c) The bailiffs shall meet all qualifications as set by the municipal court judge for the town.
(d) Compensation for service as bailiff shall be set by the town manager.
(1998 Code, sec. 34.06)
ARTICLE 7.02 FEES, COSTS AND SPECIAL EXPENSES†
Sec. 7.02.001 Driving safety course fee
A nonrefundable fee shall be charged as a special expense each time a person requests to take a driving safety
course for the purpose of having the charge dismissed after the successful completion of the course. The fee
shall be paid into the town treasury to recover the costs incurred by the town in processing the person's request
for driving safety school. The fee is to be paid to the municipal court at the time the defensive driving course is
requested. (1998 Code, sec. 70.04; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Additional court fees for driving safety course, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 103.021.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/665
Sec. 7.02.002 Building security fund
(a) There is hereby created a municipal court building security fund. This fund shall be administered under the
direction of the governing body of the town.
(b) All defendants convicted in a trial for a misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall be required to pay a
$3 security fee as a cost of court. A person is considered convicted for purposes of this section if a sentence is
imposed on the person, the person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication, or the court
defers final disposition of the person's case. The security fee shall be collected by the municipal court clerk and
paid to the official who discharges the duties of municipal treasurer for deposit in the municipal court building
security fund.
(1998 Code, sec. 34.07)
(c) The municipal court building security fund may be used only to finance the items specified in V.T.C.A.,
Code of Criminal Procedure, article 102.017. (1998 Code, sec. 34.07; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Authority to establish municipal court building security fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.017.
Sec. 7.02.003 Technology fund
(a) Fund established.
(1) There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, hereinafter referred
to as the “fund,” pursuant to Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0172. The fund is to be funded by 100%
of the technology fee assessed to each misdemeanor conviction originating after September 1, 1999,
as directed by the state, and to be used as directed by the state.
(2) The fund may be maintained in an interest-bearing account and may be maintained in the
general revenue account.
(b) Fee established; assessment and collection of fee.
(1) The fee shall be in the amount of $4.00.
(2) The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor
offense in the town municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(A) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(B) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication
community supervision; or
(C) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(3) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after September 1,
1999.
(4) The court clerk shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the finance director, who shall deposit
the fee into the municipal court technology fund.
(c) Use of fund; administration.
(1998 Code, sec. 34.08)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/665
(1) The fund shall be used only for those items as specified in V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal
Procedure, article 102.0172. (1998 Code, sec. 34.08; Ordinance adopting Code)
(2) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the town council. (1998 Code, sec.
34.08)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish municipal court technology fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0172.
Sec. 7.02.004 Credit card processing fees
(a) Payment of fees or costs by credit card or electronic means. The municipal court clerk and any other
municipal officer collecting fees, fines, court costs and other charges for the municipal court for the town are
hereby authorized to accept payment by credit card of such fees, fines, court costs or other charges and to collect
a fee for processing the payment by credit card. (Ordinance 2011-9-22A adopted 10/1/11)
(b) Processing or handling fee. The municipal court clerk and any other municipal officer is hereby authorized
and directed to assess a processing fee of three (3%) percent of the amount of the fee, fine, court cost, or other
charge being paid by the use of a credit card, as an amount reasonably necessary and related to the expense
incurred by the town, as authorized by section 132.003(b), Texas Local Government Code.
(c) Service charge. If for any reason a payment by credit card is not honored by the credit card company on
which the funds are drawn, the municipal officer shall collect a service charge from the person who owes the fee,
fine, court cost, or other charge to the town. The service charge is in addition to the original fee, fine, court cost,
or other charge and is for the collection of that original amount. The amount of the service charge shall be the
same amount as the fee charged for the collection of a check drawn on an account with insufficient funds, as
authorized by section 132.004, Texas Local Government Code and as said fee is set forth in appendix A to this
code [sic].
(Ordinance 2013-10-1F, sec. 2, adopted 10/1/13)
(d) Encumbrance of credit cards. The town is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with companies
which issue credit cards to collect and seize credit cards issued by the company that are outdated or otherwise
unauthorized and the town is further authorized to charge the company a fee for the return of said credit cards, as
authorized by section 132.005, Texas Local Government Code.
(e) Disposition of fees and charges. Processing fees and service charges collected pursuant to this section shall
be deposited in the general fund of the town, as provided by section 132.006(b), Texas Local Government Code.
(Ordinance 2011-9-22A adopted 10/1/11)
Sec. 7.02.005 Collection fee
In accordance with article 103.0031 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, there is hereby imposed an
additional fee of thirty percent (30%) on all debts and accounts receivable, i.e.: fines, fees, court costs,
restitution, and other debts that are more than sixty (60) days past due and have been referred to Perdue, a
private firm, for collection. (Ordinance 2014-6-3-10B adopted 6/3/14)
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/665
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 8.01.001 Penalty
A violation of any provision of this chapter for which no other penalty is provided shall be punishable as set
forth in section 1.01.009. (1998 Code, sec. 94.99(A))
Sec. 8.01.002 Impairing drainageway
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place in any street, alley, drainage ditch, or gutter any trash, tin,
shavings, refuse, or other matter whatsoever so as to prevent the free passage of water or cause same to stagnate
therein. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person installing or repairing water, gas, or service pipes to leave
any street, alley, drainage ditch, or gutter in such condition as to impair the drainage of same. (1998 Code, sec.
94.20)
ARTICLE 8.02 NUISANCES GENERALLY†
Sec. 8.02.001 General prohibition
Whatever is dangerous to human life or health, or whatever renders the ground, the water, the air, or food a
hazard or injury to human life or health or that is offensive to the senses or that is or threatens to become
detrimental to the public health, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and, as such, liable to be abated, and the
person guilty of causing, permitting, or suffering a nuisance to exist upon any premises or upon any building
occupied or controlled by him or her, or in any street, alley, sidewalk, or gutter immediately adjacent to such
premises, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1.01.009. (1998 Code, sec. 94.01)
Sec. 8.02.002 Specific nuisances prohibited
The following are specifically declared to constitute public nuisances and are prohibited within the municipal
limits and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction:
(1) The discharge or exposure of sewage, human excreta, wastewater, garbage, or other organic
filth into or on any place in such a manner that transmission of disease from the infected material
may result, or the placing or maintaining of such materials as tin cans or rubbish of any sort that
might constitute a breeding place for mosquitoes or flies or offer a hiding place or protection for
rodents.
(2) The act of sweeping or depositing any trash, paper, or rubbish into any street, alley, public
thoroughfare, or other public place while driving or walking, or by any other means.
(3) The act of conducting or causing to be conducted [any article] into any alley or gutter, drain, or
public ground, except such articles as are permitted by ordinance, in such manner as to obstruct such
passageway.
(4) The act of conducting any business or enterprise upon any premises or within any building
which through negligence allows paper, paper cups, or any other debris to escape from such premises
or building and litter any sidewalk, alley, street, or other public place or private property.
(5) The act of permitting any prohibited conduct set forth in section 6.04.003.
(1998 Code, sec. 94.02)
State law references–Local regulation of sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 342; Texas Litter Abatement Act, V.T.C.A.,
Health and Safety Code, ch. 365.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/665
ARTICLE 8.03 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND FREEZERS*
Sec. 8.03.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Abandon. The throwing away of an icebox, refrigerator, or freezer on vacant property, junk heaps, trash piles, or
debris accumulations or any other act which at common law would constitute an abandonment of personal
property.
Dangerous exposure. The placing of an icebox, refrigerator, or freezer not in use in a garage, barn, outbuilding,
porch, yard, lot, or other portion of premises where persons may come upon it and be attracted to it.
(1998 Code, sec. 94.10)
Sec. 8.03.002 Penalty
A violation of section 8.03.003 shall be punishable by a fine of up to $200.00. Each day this section is violated
shall be a separate offense. (1998 Code, sec. 94.99(B))
Sec. 8.03.003 Declaration of nuisance
The abandonment or dangerous exposure of an icebox, refrigerator, or freezer with its doors in normal latching
or locking condition is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a serious menace to life because of the
danger of persons, especially children, entering such an icebox, refrigerator, or freezer and becoming locked
inside and suffocating. (1998 Code, sec. 94.11)
Sec. 8.03.004 Removal of latches and locks
(a) The owner of an abandoned or dangerously exposed icebox, refrigerator, or freezer and the owner or
occupant of the premises where an abandonment or dangerous exposure occurs shall remove the door or
dismantle or remove the latch or lock holding the door shut on the icebox, refrigerator, or freezer.
(b) A person commits an offense if he or she abandons or dangerously exposes, or causes or permits to be
abandoned or dangerously exposed, an icebox, refrigerator, or freezer unless the latch or lock holding each door
shut is dismantled or removed so that the door may be opened from within by pushing on it.
(1998 Code, sec. 94.12)
ARTICLE 8.04 NOISE*
Sec. 8.04.001 Noise nuisances enumerated
The following acts, among others, are declared to be nuisances in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) The playing of any radio, phonograph, tape player or other electronic device of a similar nature,
or any musical instrument, in such manner or with such volume, during the hours between 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities
in any dwelling or other type of residence, such persons being either indoors or outdoors at any such
location.
(2) The running of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair or so loaded, or
operating a vehicle in any such manner, as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, jarring, or
rattling noise or vibrations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/665
(3) The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal
combustion engine, motor vehicle engine or boat engine, except through a muffler or other device
which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(4) The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless the noise to be created is
effectively muffled and reduced to prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(1998 Code, sec. 94.30)
(5) The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair work, of any building, other
than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on or during the weekdays of Monday through
Saturday, inclusive, or during any town-declared holiday, except in case of an urgent necessity in the
interest of public safety and convenience, and then only by permit from the town manager in
accordance with section 8.04.003, specifying the nature of the emergency and the days and hours
such work is to be allowed, which permit may be renewed by the town manager during the time the
emergency exists. If such work shall be of a commercial nature, shall occur wholly within any
portion of the CPDD zone, and is a minimum of 1,000 linear feet of any occupied residential
structure, work may begin at 6:00 a.m. and continue until 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and
8:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. on Sundays.
(6) The operation of any heavy equipment, machinery or apparatus for excavation, construction,
grading, earth moving, paving, cement laying or pouring, drilling or work of any nature, or the
operation of any chainsaw, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on or during the
weekdays of Monday through Saturday, inclusive, or during any town-declared holiday, except in
case of an urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and convenience, and then only by permit
from the town manager in accordance with section 8.04.003, specifying the nature of the emergency
and the days and hours such work is to be allowed, which permit may be renewed by the town
manager during the time the emergency exists. If such work shall be of a commercial nature, shall
occur wholly within any portion of the CPDD zone, and is a minimum of 1,000 linear feet of any
occupied residential structure, work may begin at 6:00 a.m. and continue until 9:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday, and 8:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. on Sundays.
(Ordinance 2008-5-6D adopted 5/6/08)
Sec. 8.04.002 Exceptions
This article is not intended to prohibit and shall not prohibit in any way the operation of power lawnmowers or
other lawn equipment or any equipment used for agricultural purposes or golf course or lawn maintenance.
(1998 Code, sec. 94.31)
Sec. 8.04.003 Permit for temporary exemption
(a) Any exemption from the provisions of this article, by permit issued by the public works director, shall be
requested in writing by the applicant at least 48 hours prior to the requested issuance date and time, unless the
emergency circumstances are such, upon determination by the public works director, that a shorter time should
be allowed.
(b) Thereafter, upon issuance of the permit by the public works director, such permit shall be displayed at all
times during the performance of the work, upon the premises to which such permit applies, in clear view for
inspection by the public or law enforcement officials of the town. No permit for an exemption to the provisions
of this article shall be issued or renewed by the public works director for a period exceeding fourteen (14) days.
(1998 Code, sec. 94.32)
Sec. 8.04.004 Injunctive relief
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/665
In addition to the fines and penalties set forth in section 1.01.009 for the enforcement of the provisions of this
article, the town may enforce the provisions hereof by injunctive relief through an appropriate court of
competent jurisdiction. (1998 Code, sec. 94.33)
ARTICLE 8.05 WEAPONS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 8.05.001–8.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Firearms
Sec. 8.05.031 Carrying in town buildings
(a) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
License holder. A person holding a state license to carry a concealed handgun issued pursuant to V.T.C.A.,
Government Code, sec. 411.171 et seq.
Premises. A building or a portion of a building. This term does not include any public or private driveway, street,
sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, parking garage, or other parking area.
(b) The carrying of any firearm, including handguns carried by a license holder, is prohibited within the
business premises of any town building. In this regard it is noted that state law makes it an offense for a license
holder to carry a handgun, regardless of whether the handgun is concealed, at any meeting of a governmental
entity, which under certain circumstances may be held at a location outside the business premises of a town
building.
(c) The director of public works shall post a sign at each entrance to the town hall and other town buildings,
reasonably likely to come to the attention of persons entering the building, that indicate that firearms and
handguns are prohibited within the building. Such posted notice shall be sufficient notice that entry under such
circumstances is forbidden and that such entry is without effective consent and shall be treated as a criminal
trespass.
(1998 Code, sec. 130.01)
Sec. 8.05.032 Discharge prohibited
(a) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Firearm. A handgun, pistol, rifle, shotgun, or any other firearm or firearms.
(b) It shall be unlawful for anyone other than a peace officer to discharge any gun, pistol, or firearm of any
kind in the direction of or into the corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm within the corporate limits of the town.
(Ordinance 2008-2-5C adopted 2/5/08)
State law reference–Limitation of authority to prohibit discharge of firearms or other weapons in extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A.,
Local Government Code, sec. 229.002.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/665
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 9.01.001 Personnel policies adopted by reference
The town personnel policies, as may be adopted or amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference
and incorporated as if set forth in full in this code. (1998 Code, sec. 35.01)
ARTICLE 9.02 POLICE†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 9.02.001 Appointment and termination of police officers; oath of office
(a) All police officers shall be appointed and/or terminated by the police chief.
(b) All police officers appointed to the police department shall take and subscribe to the official oath
prescribed by the constitution of the state.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.50)
Sec. 9.02.002 Qualifications of police officers
(a) All police officers shall meet the minimum standards for licensing as peace officers as established by the
state commission on law enforcement officer standards and education, and shall have a current and valid peace
officer license at the time of appointment.
(b) All police officers shall retain such license during their employment as police officers with the town, and
will be subject to discharge if such license is suspended or revoked or becomes invalid for any reason.
(c) In addition, all police officers must have a valid Texas vehicle operator's license and must be insurable as a
vehicle driver by the town's automobile insurance carrier.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.51)
State law reference–Commission on law enforcement officer standards and education, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1701.
Sec. 9.02.003 Duties generally
(a) All police officers and other members of the police department shall be and are hereby invested with all
the power and authority given to them as peace officers under the laws of the state, in enforcing the criminal and
traffic laws of the state and the ordinances of this town within the jurisdictional limits of the town.
(b) It shall also be the general duty of all police officers to quell riots, disorders and disturbances of the peace
and to take into custody all persons so offending against the public peace.
(c) Such officers shall further use their best endeavors to prevent the commission within the town of offenses
against the laws of the state and of the ordinances of the town; to observe and enforce all such laws and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/665
ordinances; to detect and arrest offenders against the same; and to preserve the good order of the town and to
secure the inhabitants thereof from violence, and the property therein from injury.
(d) Such officers shall have no power or authority in civil matters, but shall execute any criminal warrant or
warrant of arrest which may be placed in their hands by the duly constituted authorities of the town.
(e) In addition, all police officers shall execute all writs and processes issued from the municipal court of the
town.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.52)
Sec. 9.02.004 Uniforms, badges and armament
The chief of police shall prescribe the uniforms and badges for the members of the police department, and direct
the manner in which its members shall be armed. (1998 Code, sec. 31.53)
Secs. 9.02.005–9.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Reserve Police Force*
Sec. 9.02.031 Established; purpose
(a) There is hereby established a reserve police force to function in addition to the regularly constituted police
department of the town. It shall be composed of personnel who have volunteered to join the organization and
whose application for membership has been reviewed and accepted by the police chief and appointed by the
town council.
(b) The purpose and necessity of the reserve police force is to assist in the creation of an active and efficient
civil defense program in the town, and as an aid to the regularly constituted police department in the
performance of assigned duties as set forth in this code and/or directed by the town council.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.60)
Sec. 9.02.032 Appointment, removal and command of members
(a) The members of the reserve police force shall be under the control and command of the police chief, who
shall exercise supervision over training and utilization of the reserve police force membership.
(b) Members may be terminated by the police chief for any cause deemed sufficient by the police chief. Any
member may resign from the reserve police at any time by notifying the police chief of his or her resignation.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.61)
Sec. 9.02.033 Maximum number of members
The reserve police force shall not exceed a total of ten members. The police chief may diminish or expand its
number as exigency may require, but may not exceed a total of ten members. (1998 Code, sec. 31.62)
Sec. 9.02.034 Qualifications and training of members
(a) Members of the reserve police force must at all times conform to the rules and regulations of the police
department, as approved by the town council.
(b) Reserve police officers must comply with the minimum training standards established by the state
commission on law enforcement officer standards and education for all reserve law enforcement officers, which
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/665
must be fulfilled before a person is appointed as a reserve law enforcement officer.
(c) All applicants for positions in the reserve police force must also meet the following basic qualifications:
(1) Over 21 years of age;
(2) United States citizen;
(3) High school graduate or equivalent;
(4) Good moral character; and/or
(5) Never have been convicted of a felony.
(d) All applicants shall complete an examination which will be developed and periodically revised as
necessary by the chief of police. The examination shall be impartial and practical and shall relate to those
matters that fairly test the relative capacity of the persons examined to discharge the duties of the position to
which they expect to be appointed.
(e) All applicants successfully completing the examination shall be subjected to the following prior to
appointment:
(1) Background investigation;
(2) Fingerprint check for criminal record;
(3) Driver's license record check;
(4) Good credit rating; and/or
(5) Physical examination.
(f) Failure to receive a favorable report on any of the five investigations referenced in subsection (e) shall
result in rejection of the applicant.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.63)
State law reference–Commission on law enforcement officer standards and education, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1701.
Sec. 9.02.035 Oath of applicants
All applicants, before appointment to the reserve police force, shall subscribe to the same oath as given to
regularly appointed officers of the police department. (1998 Code, sec. 31.64)
Sec. 9.02.036 Identification
An identification card or other insignia or evidence of identity, as the police chief may prescribe, shall be issued
to each new member of the reserve police force, who must carry the card and other identification at all times
while on duty. The card and other identification must be surrendered upon termination of membership. (1998
Code, sec. 31.65)
Sec. 9.02.037 Uniforms and equipment; funding
(a) When on duty, members of the reserve force shall wear the uniform and equipment prescribed by the
police chief.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/665
(b) Uniforms and equipment will normally be furnished by the individual reserve member at his own expense,
but used uniforms and equipment belonging to the town may be utilized by the reserve force with approval of
the police chief.
(c) Budgeted public funds in approved amounts will be utilized for necessary training, supplies, equipment
maintenance, and replacement thereof to the reserve police force.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.66)
Sec. 9.02.038 Compensation of members
Members of the reserve police force shall serve on a voluntary pay basis and shall not receive monetary
compensation unless specifically authorized by the town council. (1998 Code, sec. 31.67)
Sec. 9.02.039 Duties
(a) Reserve police officers may act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force and may not
assume the full-time duties of regular police officers without complying with the requirements for regular police
officers.
(b) The police chief may establish rules and regulations to fix the specific duties of its members and to
provide for the maintenance of discipline. He or she may change such orders from time to time, and may
command members of the reserve police force to obey the instructions of regular police officers in carrying out
their duties.
(c) Members of the reserve police force serve as peace officers during the actual discharge of official duties.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.68)
Sec. 9.02.040 Carrying weapons
A reserve police force officer may carry a weapon only when authorized to do so by the police chief and only
when discharging official duties as a peace officer. (1998 Code, sec. 31.69)
Sec. 9.02.041 Impersonation
(a) It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to wear, carry or display an identification card or otherwise
represent oneself to be connected with the reserve police force unless one is in fact a member in good standing.
(b) It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to wear a uniform or badge of the reserve police force unless he
or she is in fact a member in good standing.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.70)
Sec. 9.02.042 Annual report
The police chief will prepare a report on the status of the reserve force, to be submitted to the town council.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.71)
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/665
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 10.02 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10.02.001 Authority
Under the authority of Tex. Local Gov't Code section 212.001 et seq., which is hereby made a part of these
regulations, the town council does hereby adopt the following as the subdivision code of the town. The purpose
of this code is to control the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the town and in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the town, in order to provide for the orderly development of the areas and to secure adequate
provisions for traffic, light, air, recreation, transportation, water, drainage, sewage, and other facilities for the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the town. (1998 Code, sec. 153.001)
Sec. 10.02.002 Subdivision defined; compliance with state law
(a) As used herein, the term “subdivision” shall mean the division of any lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more parts to lay out a subdivision of the tract including an addition to a municipality, to lay out suburban,
building, or other lots, or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the tract intended to be
dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys,
squares, parks, or other parts.
(b) A division of a tract includes a division regardless of whether it is made by using a metes and bounds
description in a deed of conveyance, or in a contract for deed, by using a contract of sale, or other executory
contract to convey, or by using any other method.
(c) Vacating an existing plat may be accomplished only pursuant to Tex. Local Gov't Code section 212.013.
(d) Replatting without vacating a preceding plat may be accomplished only pursuant to Tex. Local Gov't Code
sections 212.014 and 212.0115.
(e) Amending an existing plat may be accomplished only pursuant to Tex. Local Gov't Code section 212.016.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.002)
Sec. 10.02.003 Jurisdiction
The provisions of this article shall apply to all land within the corporate limits of the town and to all land within
the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town. No person shall subdivide or plat any tract of land within the
corporate limits or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town except in conformity with the provisions of
the subdivision regulations contained in this article. (1998 Code, sec. 153.003)
State law reference–Extension of rules to extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.003.
Sec. 10.02.004 Plat approval required for recording and utilities
(a) A person may not file for record or have recorded in the office of the county clerk, a plat or replat of a
subdivision of real property required to be platted by this article unless it is approved pursuant to the provisions
of this article (Tex. Prop. Code section 12.002).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/665
(b) Pursuant to Tex. Local Gov't Code section 212.012, no entity that serves land with water, sewer,
electricity, gas, or other utility service, may serve or connect with such service, any land within the corporate
limits of the town or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town, unless the entity has, pursuant to Tex.
Local Gov't Code section 212.0115, been presented with or holds one of the following:
(1) (A) A utility connection certificate, applicable to such land, issued by the town
secretary, stating that such land is within a subdivision that has been reviewed and approved in
compliance with the platting requirements of the town. The certificate should list the cabinet
and page where the subdivision, applicable to such land, is recorded in the land records of the
county. The certificate may be placed on or attached to the recorded final plat when it is
returned to the town after being recorded.
(B) The primary purpose of the above provision is to prohibit the connection of utilities until
the subdivider returns the recorded final plat to the town.
(2) A utility connection certificate, applicable to such land, issued by the town secretary, stating the
planning and zoning commission and the town council have determined that a plat is not required.
This certificate is issued on request of an owner of land or a utility provider.
(c) Pursuant to the above-mentioned state code, it is unlawful for a utility provider to connect land with utility
service without first having obtained the above-mentioned utility connection certificate. However, the certificate
does not grant a right to any landowner, and other requirements, particularly those of the utility provider, will
have to be complied with.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.004)
Sec. 10.02.005 Connection to public utilities
(a) Until a plat of a subdivision has been approved by the town council and the subdivider has constructed the
streets, curbs, gutters, paving, utilities, and drainage facilities therein, in the manner provided for in the
ordinances of the town, and has caused same to have been accepted by the town council, it shall be unlawful for
any official of the town or public utility to serve or connect or cause to be served or connected any public
utilities, controlled or distributed by the town, to any land or part thereof, covered by a plat, or the owners or
purchasers of the land or any part thereof.
(b) Until a certificate of occupancy has been issued in accordance with this code, it shall be unlawful for any
official of the town or public utility to serve or connect, or cause to serve or connect, any public utilities,
controlled or distributed by the town, to any building or structure located within the town.
(c) However, as an exception to subsection (b) of this section, a temporary connection of a service by a public
utility may be had by a contractor, builder, remodeler, or any other person causing a building or structure located
within said town to be constructed, remodeled or renovated. Upon completion of said construction, remodeling,
or renovating, said subsection (b) of this section must be complied with.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.005)
Sec. 10.02.006 Sight barrier fence
Commercial and industrial areas shall be separated from residential areas by the erection of a screening wall of a
substantial nature which shall be at least eight feet in height in addition to a landscape buffer. The final plat for a
proposed subdivision, in cases where there will be a separation of residential property from commercial or
industrial property, shall indicate the location and height of all proposed screening. (1998 Code, sec. 153.006)
Sec. 10.02.007 Inspections
(a) A letter of acceptance is required from the town inspector before any job is complete.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/665
(b) No acceptance will be given on any work covered before the town inspector has seen it.
(c) A minimum of a 24-hour time allotment must be given before the town inspector is expected at the job
site. Any work or improvements covered before inspections will be uncovered.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.007)
Sec. 10.02.008 Permits
Any developer, contractor, builder, and the like, must obtain a permit from the town prior to the commencement
of any construction. This includes such improvement as grading, street construction, removal of existing
structures, utility installation, and the like. (1998 Code, sec. 153.008)
Sec. 10.02.009 Changes and variations
The rules and regulations in this article are the standard requirement of the town. A variance or waiver of any of
these rules and regulations may be granted by the board of adjustments, upon a showing that there are special
circumstances or conditions affecting the property in question and that enforcement of the provisions of this
article will work a hardship on the applicant, and that such variance or waiver, if granted, will not be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property rights in the vicinity. Provided, however, such
variance or waiver shall be at the discretion of the board of adjustment with appeal only to the town council.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.009)
Sec. 10.02.010 Definitions
Abutter. Any property owner whose land is contiguous, adjacent, adjoining, sharing a common border, or within
500 feet of subject property. The term “abutter” shall also include for the purposes of site plan review approval,
any property owner whose land is contiguous, adjacent, adjoining, sharing a common border or within 1,000 feet
of subject property.
Administrative officers. Every officer referred to by title, i.e., town attorney, town secretary, town engineer,
director of public works, etc., and shall be the person so retained in this position by the city or his duly
authorized representative.
Alley. A minor way used primarily for vehicular service to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
Approach main. An off-site main which brings water or sewer service to the subdivided property.
Billboard. Any signboard of 25 square feet or more carrying a message of advertising, whether political or
commercial or display for advertising. This definition does not include official notices issued by a court or
public entity in the performance of a legal function.
Border main. A water or sewer main located in a roadway, alley, or utility easement abutting the perimeter of the
property of a subdivider.
Building line. A line beyond which buildings must be set back from the street or road right-of-way line or
property line.
Collector street. A street which is continuous through several residential or other districts and is intended as a
connecting street between such districts and thoroughfares, highways, or business district.
Commercial street. Any street situated so that 50% or more of the property abutting it is zoned for other than
low-density residential development.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/665
Commercial tract. Any tract containing any type of land use except for single-family detached residential and
two-family (duplex) residential uses. (Requirements and standards for religious and educational land uses shall
be the same as the character of the predominant surrounding land use.) Nothing contained in this definition shall
be considered as limitations to or repeal of the definitions set forth in the building and fire codes adopted by the
town.
Commission or planning and zoning commission. The official town planning and zoning commission of the
town as appointed by the town council. The commission is charged with the responsibility of reviewing for
approval all subdivisions, preliminary plats, final plats and site plans in the town.
Comprehensive plan. The general plan for the growth and development of the town and its environs; and
including any elements of such plan, such as a land use plan, thoroughfare plan, utilities plan, schools and parks
plan, and others.
County or the county. Collin County, Texas.
Cul-de-sac. A short residential street having but one vehicular access to another street and terminated by a
vehicular turnaround.
Dead-end street. A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet.
Driveway approach. That access or transitional portion of a driveway intended for vehicular traffic, and running
from the street curb line or edge of paving (or rock/gravel) to the property line. (permit required)
Easement. An area designated for restricted use on private property or an interest in land granted to the town and
to the public generally.
Emergency access easement. A private street, alley or paved place dedicated to the public for the purpose of
providing access to adjacent structures by emergency vehicles such as fire equipment, police or ambulances, the
boundaries of which are continuously and permanently marked.
Engineer (whenever used without a prefix). A registered professional engineer retained by a subdivider.
Final plat. A map or drawing prepared according to the provisions of this article, and containing all surveying
and legal data, dedications and certificates necessary to the recording of same in the plat records of the county.
Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. (See Fairview flood
protection regulations, article 3.12, division 2.)
(1998 Code, sec. 153.010)
HUD-code manufactured home.
(1) Means a structure:
(A) Constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development;
(B) Built on a permanent chassis;
(C) Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the
structure is connected to the required utilities;
(D) Transportable in one or more sections; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/665
(E) In the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length
or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet;
(2) Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home; and
(3) Does not include a recreational vehicle as defined by 24 C.F.R. section 3282.8(g).
A HUD-code manufactured home is not a mobile home for any purpose under state law.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Lot. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and/or accessory building and including such open spaces as
are required by ordinances of the town and having its principal frontage on a public street or officially approved
place.
Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded with the county clerk,
Collin County; or a parcel of land, the deed for which was recorded with the county clerk, Collin County.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.010)
Manufactured home or manufactured housing. A HUD-code manufactured home or a mobile home. (Ordinance
adopting Code)
May. Wherever used in this article, will be interpreted as “optional.”
Mayor. The duly elected presiding officer of the town council of the Town of Fairview.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.010)
Mobile home.
(1) Means a structure:
(A) Constructed before June 15, 1976;
(B) Built on a permanent chassis;
(C) Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the
structure is connected to the required utilities;
(D) Transportable in one or more sections; and
(E) In the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length
or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet; and
(2) Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home.
A mobile home is not a HUD-code manufactured home for any purpose under state law.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Mobile home parks or trailer courts. Areas for renting or leasing sites for mobile homes or trailer coaches.
Off-premises sign or billboard. A sign or billboard displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business,
person, organization, activity, event, place, service or product not principally located or primarily manufactured
or sold on the premises on which the sign is located.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/665
On-site main. A water or sewer main located in a roadway, alley, or easement within the perimeter of the
property of a subdivider and which provides service only within a subdivider's property.
Open space. That part of any lot or tract that is used for recreational purposes, both passive and active, but not
including areas used for parking or maneuvering of automobiles, or drives or approaches to and from parking
areas.
Oversize main. A water or sewer main which the system's master plan requires or which the town elects to
construct or have constructed of larger diameter than that required to provide service to the property of a
subdivider.
Plat filing date. The date upon which a plat, which must include the payment of all fees and submission of all
documents required by this article and chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code, is properly filed with
the town.
Preliminary plat. A map or drawing on which is shown the subdivider's proposed arrangement of streets, lots,
easements and other public spaces and facilities in the subdivision, and which is intended for review and study
by the town, and not for recording.
Residential street. A street which is intended primarily to service traffic within a neighborhood or limited
residential district which is used primarily for access to abutting properties and which is geometrically designed
to discourage high speeds and through traffic.
Residential tract. Any tract of land developed for the purpose of single-family detached or two-family domestic
living (religious and educational institutions may also be included). Requirements and standards for religious
and educational institutions shall be the same as the character of the predominant surrounding land use.
Sanitary sewer. A pipe or conduit for water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and
industrial establishments, and to which storm, surface and ground water are not normally admitted, and which is
a part of the public sewage collection system.
Service line. A water or sewer pipe running from the water or sewer main to the property to which water or
sewer service is given.
Sewer or sewer main (used without any prefix). A sanitary sewer (excluding service lines).
Shall. Wherever used in this article, will be interpreted in its mandatory sense.
Sign. Any device that brings a visual message to the public, but not including any flag, pennant or other visual
insignia specifically associated with governmental, civic, religious, charitable, patriotic, or fraternal
organizations. The sign may consist of one or more sections, in which case the sum of the square feet of all
sections shall be considered in meeting the requirements of this article.
Sign[,] flat. Any sign erected on the outside of a building or parallel to its surface and which is supported by that
face.
Site plan. Scale drawing of any site for which a building permit is sought. The plan shall include but is not
limited to the following: locations of all existing and proposed structures, utilities, parking areas, fences,
barriers, roads, driveways and landscaping. The site plan also includes data to show that all setback
requirements, area coverage ratios, and site development regulations have been met.
Standard specifications. The document published by the North Central Texas Council of Governments entitled
“Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction” and all subsequent revisions thereto.
Standard specifications and codes of the town. Shall be applied to all improvements constructed within the town
and shall be in accordance with all revisions, as may be adopted by the town.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/665
Storm sewer or storm drain. A pipe, conduit, or channel which carries storm and surface water and drainage, but
excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
Street. A way for vehicular traffic whether designated a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
road, avenue, boulevard, land, place, or however otherwise designated.
Street right-of-way width. The shortest distance between the lines which delineate the rights-of-way of a street.
Structure. Anything constructed that is of necessity attached directly or indirectly to the ground, including but
not limited to all above-grade structures, buildings, towers, signs (except for those flat against other structures),
service station islands, and the like; and all below-grade structures such as septic systems and leaching fields;
swimming pools constructed above or below grade including decks and construction aprons; and tennis courts
and other manufactured or constructed playing surfaces, inclusive of barriers or other containment construction.
Subdivider or developer. An individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, or other
organization dividing or proposing to divide land, or making improvements to such land, so as to effect a
subdivision of land hereunder for himself, or for itself, or for another.
Surveyor. A licensed land surveyor or a registered public surveyor, as authorized by the state statutes to practice
the profession of surveying.
Thoroughfare. A principal traffic thoroughfare more or less continuous across the town which is intended to
connect remote parts of the town, or areas adjacent thereto, and act as a principal connecting street with state and
interstate highways.
Town council. The duly elected governing body of the Town of Fairview, Texas.
Town engineer. The town engineer, the town's consulting engineers, or their duly authorized representatives.
Tree. Any self-supporting woody perennial plant which has a trunk diameter of four and one-half (4-1/2) inches
or more when measured by caliper inch at a point of four and one-half (4-1/2) feet above ground level and which
normally attains an overall height of at least 15 feet.
Utility easement. An area for restricted use on private property upon which any public utility shall have the right
to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, or other improvements or growths
which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance, or efficiency of its respective
systems within said area. Any public utility shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to, from and
upon the said easements for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining,
adding to or removing all or part of its respective systems without the necessity, at any time, or [of] procuring
the permission of anyone.
Water main. A pipe or conduit which is part of a public water distribution system (excluding service lines).
(1998 Code, sec. 153.010)
Sec. 10.02.011 Penalty
(a) Whenever in this article or any ordinance of the town an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in this article or ordinance the doing of any act is required
or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation
of such provision of this article or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00;
provided, however, that a final penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire
safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, may not exceed $2,000.00.
(b) Notwithstanding the above provision, no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the
same or a similar offense of the laws of the state.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/665
(c) Each day a violation of this article or of any ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.999)
Secs. 10.02.012–10.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Subdivision Procedure
Sec. 10.02.041 Platting required upon subdivision
(a) The owner of any tract of land located within the limits or in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town
who divides the tract in two or more parts for any one or more of the following purposes must have a plat of the
subdivision prepared and approved pursuant to the provisions of this article:
(1) To lay out a subdivision of the tract;
(2) To lay out an addition to the town;
(3) To lay out suburban, building, or other lots;
(4) To lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated to
public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys,
squares, parks, or other parts.
(b) A division of a tract includes a division regardless of whether it is made by using a metes and bounds
description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for deed, by using a contract of sale or any executory
contract to convey, or by using any other method.
(c) The platting process set out herein involves the filing and approval of both a concept plan and a final plat.
However, a plat meeting the requirements of a “minor plat” as set out in section 10.02.221 of this article may be
submitted and considered as a final plat without the necessity of prior approval or filing of a preliminary plat.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.015)
State law reference–Plat required. V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.004.
Sec. 10.02.042 Platting process in general
(a) Voluntary submission of “preliminary working plat.”
(1) Submission and review of a “preliminary working plat” is not required but is available to a
developer or applicant who may wish to have some prior review with staff prior to the official filing
of the preliminary plat. This procedure often allows minor corrections to be made prior to the first
hearing that may eliminate disapproval or undue delay.
(2) Prior to the official filing of a preliminary plat, it is recommended that the developer send a
copy marked “preliminary working plat” to the planning and zoning commission, the director of
public works and the town's engineer for review. The town engineer's copy shall include a review fee
(see the master fee schedule set out in appendix A of this code). The director of public works and
town engineer will notify the developer after their evaluation.
(b) The regular subdivision platting process involves the following general procedure:
(1) (A) The filing of a preliminary plat with the planning and zoning commission, usually
not less than 15 days nor more than 25 days before the next regular meeting of the planning and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/665
zoning commission. The plat is stamped with a filing date.
(B) If review of a preliminary working plat has not been requested, the official preliminary
plat will be forwarded to the director of public works and, if deemed necessary, to the town's
consulting engineer, who will make a preliminary study of the plat. If the director of public
works or the town's consulting engineer determines that the preliminary plat, as submitted, is
substantially incomplete they will report their findings to the planning and zoning commission
prior to the plat being considered for approval and will attempt to notify the applicant of their
findings. This report and/or notification to the applicant will not cause the plat to be withdrawn
from consideration by the planning and zoning commission unless the applicant requests
withdrawal in writing so as to stop the running of the requirement that action be taken within 30
days of the filing date mentioned below.
(2) A meeting of the planning and zoning commission to consider approval or disapproval of the
proposed plat will be held.
(3) (A) The planning and zoning commission shall act on the preliminary plat within 30
days after the date the plat is filed.
(B) The action of the planning and zoning commission shall be to approve, disapprove, or
disapprove “without prejudice.” A disapproval stops the platting process and the plat is not sent
to the town council.
(C) A disapproval “without prejudice” shall mean that the plat may again be considered
without the applicant having to start over with the platting process or pay additional fees.
(D) If a plat is disapproved “without prejudice” the applicant may file a new revised plat to
meet any objection or if the disapproved plat does not require revision in order to meet any
objection, may request in writing that it be stamped with a new filing date for the purpose of
starting a new 30-day action period.
(E) The term “revised plat” as used above in this subsection shall mean revisions to the initial
concept or to meet objections to the disapproved plat. It shall not include a new subdivision
concept for the property which, at the discretion of the approval body, shall require starting over
on the platting process and the payment of new filing fees.
(4) When a plat is disapproved, it will be considered as disapproved “with prejudice” and the plat
shall not be forwarded to the town council. The planning and zoning commission may, where facts
warrant reconsideration, change its “disapproval” of a plat to “disapproval without prejudice.”
(5) When a plat is approved, the chairperson of the planning and zoning commission shall sign the
approval certificate on the face of the plat and the plat shall be forwarded to the town council for
consideration.
(6) (A) The town council shall act on the preliminary plat within 30 days after the date the
planning and zoning commission approves the plat.
(B) The action of the town council shall be to approve, disapprove, or disapprove “without
prejudice.”
(C) A disapproval stops the platting process.
(D) A disapproval “without prejudice” shall mean that the plat may again be considered
without the applicant having to start with the platting process or pay additional fees.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/665
(E) If a plat is disapproved “without prejudice” the applicant may file a new revised plat to
meet any objection or if the disapproved plat does not require revision in order to meet any
objection, may request in writing that it be stamped with a new filing date for the purpose of
starting a new 30-day action period.
(F) The term “revised plat” as used above in this subsection shall mean revisions to the initial
concept or to meet objections to the disapproved plat. It shall not include a new subdivision
concept for the property which, at the discretion of the approval body, shall require starting over
on the platting process and the payment of new filing fees.
(7) When a plat is disapproved it will be considered as disapproved “with prejudice.” The town
council may, where facts warrant reconsideration, change its “disapproval” of a plat to “disapproval
without prejudice.”
(8) When a plat is approved, the mayor shall sign the approval certificate on the plat.
(9) After approval of a preliminary plat by both the planning and zoning commission and the town
council, the applicant may file a final plat with the planning and zoning commission.
(10) The final plat is considered by the planning and zoning commission and the town council in
the same manner as the preliminary plat was considered and acted upon.
(11) (A) When the final plat is in final form for approval by the town council, the applicant
provides three 24" x 36" white Mylar prints for execution. After the final plat is approved by
the town council, the mayor signs the approval certificate on one direct paper copy and the
three white Mylar prints as does the chairperson of the planning and zoning commission. The
town secretary retains in the subdivision file the direct print signed by the mayor and delivers
the three white Mylar prints to the applicant.
(B) The applicant then takes the three white Mylar prints and from one of them has two
aperture cards made for filing with the county clerk. The county clerk can supply a list of
printers who will make the aperture cards to county specifications.
(C) The applicant then takes the three white Mylar prints and the two aperture cards to the
county clerk for filing. The two aperture cards are maintained by the county clerk as the filed
subdivision plat showing that the subdivision is filed at a certain cabinet and page of the land
records of the county. One of the white Mylar prints will be sent by the county clerk to the
central appraisal office.
(D) The aperture card mentioned above is a card that contains a small positive photocopy of
the larger plat that can be projected on a screen or enlarged and printed for copies.
(12) The second and third white Mylar prints will be marked with the proper cabinet and page by
the county clerk and returned to the applicant, one for the applicant's records and one to be returned
to the town secretary.
(13) Upon the filing of said white Mylar of the recorded final plat with the town secretary the
applicant or property owner may, pursuant to Tex. Local Gov't Code sections 212.012 and 212.0115,
request issuance of a utility connection certificate stating that the plat has been reviewed and
approved. Upon such request the town secretary shall issue the certificate.
(14) Where a subdivision consists of more than one block within any phase of the subdivision, the
town council may at its discretion authorize the issuance of building permits on a block-by-block
basis within consecutive blocks that are completed with utilities, installed and approved by the town,
and completed with streets and alleys paved and approved by the town. However, no certificate of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/665
occupancy shall be issued by the building official until the entire phase of the subdivision has been
completed and accepted by the town.
(15) All Mylar prints and other required documents shall be submitted to the town secretary within
45 calendar days of approval of a final plat by the town council. No construction shall be permitted to
occur until all documentation requirements, as specified in subsections (11), (12) and (13) above, or
any other documentation required to file the plat with the Collin County clerk, are fully satisfied.
(16) All plats, plans and construction documents must be reviewed and stamped approved by the
town engineer and signed by the town manager or his or her designee prior to any construction taking
place. The town engineer may further require such data to be submitted in computer-readable format,
the type of the format to be specified by the town.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.016)
Secs. 10.02.043–10.02.069 Reserved
Division 3. Preliminary Plat
Sec. 10.02.070 Required
Where a site plan (or a preliminary plan) is required, an applicant shall not be required to submit a preliminary
plat. However, the applicant may submit a preliminary plat, at his/her option, as part of the development process.
Zoning districts where a site plan (preliminary plan) is required are: commercial planned development district
(CPDD); conditional use permit (CUP); special use permit (SUP); planned center (preliminary plan) (PC);
planned development (PD); general business (GB); and mobile home (MH).
Sec. 10.02.071 Preliminary plat procedure
(a) The applicant or developer should first determine whether or not a “preliminary working plat” is to be
considered as set out in section 10.02.042.
(b) The applicant or developer shall prepare and file with the planning and zoning commission a preliminary
plat in accordance with the regulations of this article. The preliminary plat shall be stamped with a file date. For
basic general procedure see section 10.02.042.
(c) Once the preliminary plat has been filed its consideration shall be placed on the next regular agenda of the
planning and zoning commission for approval, disapproval, or disapproval without prejudice. Because the
planning and zoning commission meets in regular session only once each month and must approve or disapprove
a plat within 30 days after the date the plat is filed, a plat may not be filed on a date that will not permit the
planning and zoning commission, at a regular meeting, to consider approval or denial of the plat within the
required 30-day period after the plat is filed. Therefore, the planning and zoning commission may require any
plat to be filed at least 15 days and not more than 25 days before its next regular meeting.
(d) (1) The planning and zoning commission shall act on the preliminary plat within 30 days
from the date of filing. The action of the planning and zoning commission shall be to approve,
disapprove, or disapprove “without prejudice.”
(2) A disapproval stops the platting process and the plat is not sent to the town council.
(3) A disapproval “without prejudice” shall mean that the plat may again be considered without the
applicant having to start over with the platting process or pay additional fees.
(4) If a plat is disapproved “without prejudice” the applicant may file a new revised plat to meet
any objection or if the disapproved plat does not require revision in order to meet any objection, may
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/665
request in writing that it be stamped with a new filing date for the purpose of starting a new 30-day
action period.
(5) The term “revised plat” as used above in this subsection shall mean revisions to the initial
concept or to meet objections to the disapproved plat.
(6) The term “revised plat” shall not include a new subdivision concept for the property which, at
the discretion of the approval body, shall require starting over on the platting process and the
payment of new filing fees.
(7) When a plat is disapproved it will be considered as disapproved “with prejudice” and the plat
shall not be forwarded to the town council. The planning and zoning commission may, where facts
warrant reconsideration, change its “disapproval” of a plat to “disapproval without prejudice.”
(8) When a plat is approved, the chairperson of the planning and zoning commission shall sign the
approval certificate on the face of the plat and the plat shall be forwarded to the town council for
consideration.
(e) An applicant may, at any time, file a written request that a plat be withdrawn from consideration. After the
filing of such a request the plat shall not be reconsidered until a new plat has been filed or a new filing date has
been requested and stamped on the face of the plat originally filed.
Sec. 10.02.072 General requirements for preliminary plat
(a) An application in writing shall accompany the preliminary plat to be filed together with three prints of said
plat. The town secretary, acting as secretary to the planning and zoning commission, shall stamp the file date on
the face of each print, one of which shall be retained together with the original application. No plat will be
considered for approval by the town until all prescribed filing fees have been paid. After review by the town
engineer and the public works director, the developer shall submit seven additional plats for the planning and
zoning commission.
(b) The preliminary plat shall be drawn on sheets measuring 24" x 36".
(c) The applicant must notify all abutters of record that the application will be considered by the planning and
zoning commission at a public meeting to be held not less than 15 days after the date of filing of the application.
Sec. 10.02.073 Existing features included in preliminary plat
The following features shall be included in the preliminary plat:
(1) Subdivision boundary lines, indicated by heavy lines, and the computed acreage of the
subdivision. The subdivision boundary shall be construed to include the part of adjacent boundary
streets which were previously established by dedication or purchase from the tract being subdivided.
(2) The location, widths, and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways, within or
adjacent to the tract, existing permanent buildings, railroads, rights-of-way and other important
features, such as abstract lines, political subdivision or corporation lines, and school district
boundaries.
(3) Existing sewer mains, water mains, fire hydrants, drainage culverts, or other underground
structures within the tract and within 200 feet thereto with pipe sizes, grades, and locations indicated.
(4) Reserved.
(5) The names of adjacent subdivisions and/or the names of record owners of adjoining parcels of
unplatted land.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/665
(6) Permanent structures and uses within the subdivision including location of houses, barns, walls,
wells, tanks, and other significant features.
(7) Location of floodplain and existing watercourses within the subdivision.
(8) Reserved.
(9) Reserved.
(10) In the event any trees are to be removed from the property being subdivided, the developer
shall apply for a tree removal permit, submit for approval a proposed tree removal plat plan and
comply with all the provisions of article 3.15 of this code, the same as if such chapter was
incorporated into these subdivision regulations. Failure to comply with article 3.15 of this code shall,
in addition to the other fines and penalties stated therein, be grounds for disapproval of the final plat
of the proposed subdivision.
Sec. 10.02.074 New features included in preliminary plat
The preliminary plat shall contain the following new features:
(1) The proposed name of the subdivision.
(2) North point, scale, date, and approximate acreage of the proposed subdivision.
(3) The names and addresses of the subdivider and of the engineer, surveyor, or planner.
(4) The tract designation and other description according to the real estate records of the town,
county, or central appraisal district.
(5) All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved in the deeds for the use
of all property owners in the proposed subdivision, together with the purpose of such dedication and
any conditions or limitations of such reservations. Also, all parcels of land to be transferred to the
town pursuant to the town's land conveyance/parkland dedication requirements set out in this article.
(6) The layout, names, and widths of proposed streets, alleys, and easements.
(7) The layout, numbers, front setback lines, and approximate dimensions of proposed lots, blocks,
parks, and the like.
(8) Legal description of the property to be subdivided, and metes and bounds description of the
subdivision perimeter.
(9) Primary control points or descriptions, and ties to such control points to which all dimension,
angles, bearings, block numbers and similar data shall be referred.
(10) Location of town limits, lines, the outer border of the extraterritorial jurisdiction, if they
traverse the subdivision, or form part of the boundary of the subdivision, or are contiguous to such
boundary.
(11) Reserved.
(12) A number or letter to identify each lot or site and each block.
(13) Data specifying the gross area of the subdivision, the proposed number of lots and area
thereof, and the approximate area in nonresidential use.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/665
(14) Reserved.
(15) Front building setback lines on all lots and tracts. Side yard building setback lines at street
intersections and crosswalks.
(16) A copy of all existing protective covenants regulating the use of the land, the construction of
improvements, and otherwise protecting the proposed development shall be submitted with the
preliminary plat.
(17) Reserved.
(18) Reserved.
(19) Phase lines must be clearly delineated, with improvements capable of standing alone as
development occurs and not depending on future construction to meet town standards and
requirements.
(20) See section 10.02.161 et seq. for other plat and development requirements applicable to both
preliminary and final plats, including but not limited to the following:
(A) Lots, blocks, easements, roads, streets, and alleys.
(B) Tree removal requirements.
(C) Land conveyance regulations (parkland dedication).
(21) For a tract of land located within the commercial planned development district, the plat shall
contain such features and comply with the requirements of sections 14.02.681 through 14.02.693
[sic] of this code.
Sec. 10.02.075 Utility plan
There shall be filed with the preliminary plat a plan of the proposed water and sanitary sewer mains and
proposed drainage facilities, including drainage areas, location of lines, inlets, culverts, bridges, and calculated
run-off and points of concentration. Compliance with all provisions of article 3.12, division 2, shall be a
condition of final plat approval. Failure to comply with article 3.12, division 2 provisions shall be grounds for
disapproval of the final plat of the proposed subdivision.
Sec. 10.02.076 Location map
There shall be filed with the preliminary plat a location map.
Sec. 10.02.077 Reserved
Sec. 10.02.078 Approval certificate
The following approval certificate shall be placed on the face of the preliminary plat:
PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL CERTIFICATE
APPROVED __________________, 20___.
Planning and Zoning Commission
By: ________________________________
Chairperson, Planning and Zoning Commission
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/665
Town of Fairview, Texas
APPROVED __________________, 20___.
Town Council, Town of Fairview, Texas
By: ________________________________
Mayor, Town of Fairview, Texas
Attest: _____________________________
Town Secretary
Sec. 10.02.079 Approval of preliminary plat effective 180 days
The approval of the preliminary plat by the town council shall not be effective after the expiration of 180 days
from the date of approval, unless such period is extended by the town council, or a final plat of the subdivision,
or a portion thereof, has been filed for consideration. Upon the filing of a final plat of a portion of an approved
preliminary plat, the effective date of the remaining portion of the preliminary plat shall be extended for an
additional 180 days.
(Ordinance 2017-7, ex. A, adopted 5/2/17)
Secs. 10.02.080–10.02.100 Reserved
Division 4. Final Plat
Sec. 10.02.101 Final plat
(a) (1) The applicant or developer shall prepare and file with the town planning and zoning
commission a final plat in accordance with the regulations of this article. The final plat shall be
stamped with a file date (see section 10.02.102 for scale of this 24" x 36" plat).
(2) The applicant shall submit three prints of the final plat. After review by the town engineer and
the public works director, the applicant shall provide seven additional copies of the proposed final
plat for the members of the planning and zoning commission. For basic general procedure see section
10.02.042.
(b) Once the final plat has been filed, its consideration shall be placed on the next regular agenda of the
planning and zoning commission for approval, disapproval or disapproval without prejudice. Because the
planning and zoning commission meets in regular session only once each month and must approve or disapprove
a plat within 30 days after the date the plat is filed, a plat may not be filed on a date that will not permit the
planning and zoning commission, at a regular meeting, to consider approval or denial of the plat within the
required 30-day period after the plat is filed. Therefore, the planning and zoning commission may require any
plat to be filed at least 15 days and not more than 25 days before its next regular meeting.
(c) (1) The planning and zoning commission shall act on the final plat within 30 days from the
date of filing. The action of the planning and zoning commission shall be to approve, disapprove, or
disapprove “without prejudice.”
(2) A disapproval stops the platting process and the plat will not be sent to the town council.
(3) A disapproval “without prejudice” shall mean that the plat may again be considered without the
applicant having to start over with the platting process or pay additional fees.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/665
(4) If a plat is disapproved “without prejudice” the applicant may file a new revised plat to meet
any objection or if the disapproved plat does not require revision in order to meet any objection, may
request in writing that it be stamped with a new filing date for the purpose of starting a new 30-day
action period.
(5) When the final plat is in final form for approval by the planning and zoning commission, the
applicant should provide ten direct copies with all changes noted thereon for use by the town council,
town engineer and planning and zoning commission. When approved by the planning and zoning
commission the chairperson of the planning and zoning commission shall sign the approval
certificate on the face of the plat and it, together with the extra copies shall be forwarded to the town
council for consideration.
(d) (1) The town council shall act on the final plat within 30 days after the date the planning and
zoning commission approves the plat.
(2) The action of the town council shall be to approve, disapprove, or disapprove “without
prejudice.”
(3) A disapproval stops the platting process.
(4) A disapproval “without prejudice” shall mean that the plat may again be considered without the
applicant having to start with the platting process or pay additional fees.
(5) If a plat is disapproved “without prejudice” the applicant may file a new revised plat to meet
any objection or if the disapproved plat does not require revision in order to meet any objection, may
request in writing that it be stamped with a new filing date for the purpose of starting a new 30-day
action period.
(e) (1) When the final plat is in final form for approval by the town council the applicant
provides three 24" x 36" white Mylar prints for execution.
(2) After the final plat is approved by the town council the mayor signs the approval certificate on
one direct paper copy and the three white Mylar prints. The town secretary then has the chairperson
of the planning and zoning commission sign the three white Mylar prints. The town secretary retains
in the subdivision file the direct print signed by the mayor and delivers the three white Mylar prints
to the applicant.
(3) The applicant then takes the three white Mylar prints and from one of them has two aperture
cards made for filing with the county clerk. The county clerk can supply a list of printers who will
make the aperture cards to county specifications. The applicant then takes the three white Mylar
prints and the two aperture cards to the county clerk for filing. The two aperture cards are maintained
by the county clerk as the filed subdivision plat showing that the subdivision is filed at a certain
cabinet and page of the land records of the county. One of the white Mylar prints will be sent by the
county clerk to the central appraisal office.
(4) The aperture card mentioned above is a card that contains a small positive photocopy of the
larger plat that can be projected on a screen or enlarged and printed for copies.
(f) The second and third white Mylar prints will be marked with the proper cabinet and page by the county
clerk and returned to the applicant, one for the applicant's records and one to be returned to the town secretary.
(g) Upon the filing of said white Mylar of the recorded final plat with the town secretary the Lands 212.015
[sic], request issuance of a utility connection certificate stating that the plat has been reviewed and approved.
Upon such request the town secretary shall issue the certificate.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/665
(h) As each consecutive block is completed, that is, the proper utilities are installed and approved by the town,
the streets and alleys are paved and approved by the town, building permits may be issued on a block-by-block
basis, but no certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the building official until the phase is completed and
accepted by the town.
Sec. 10.02.102 General requirements for final plat
(a) The final plat shall be prepared by a registered public surveyor bearing his seal. All seals and signatures
shall be in black ink.
(b) The direct copies of the final plat shall be drawn on sheets measuring 24" x 36".
(c) (1) When the final plat is in final form for approval by the town council the applicant should
provide three 24" x 36" white Mylar prints for execution. When approved by the town council the
mayor shall sign the approval certificate on the face of one of the final direct prints and on the three
white Mylar prints.
(2) The town secretary shall have the chairperson of the planning and zoning commission sign the
three white Mylar prints.
(3) Reserved.
(4) It shall be unlawful to commence any construction within the area of an approved subdivision
unless the above-mentioned white Mylar print of the approved final plat has been returned and filed
with the town secretary, with the county cabinet and page noted thereon.
(5) The heading of each title block must be correct. The owner's certificate must be signed and
notarized. The plat must be signed and sealed by the surveyor and his signature notarized. All seals
must be in black ink or darkened if an impression seal is used. All signatures must be signed with a
wide black pen.
(6) No plat will be considered by the town until the prescribed filing fees have been paid. The final
plat may constitute all or only a portion of the approved final plat, but any portion thereof shall
conform to all of the requirements of these regulations. If final plats are submitted for approval or
portions or sections of the proposed subdivision, each portion or section shall carry the name of the
entire subdivision but shall bear a distinguishing letter, number, or subtitle. Block letters shall run
consecutively throughout the entire subdivision, even though such subdivision might be finally
approved in sections.
(d) Ten sets of plans and specifications for water, sanitary sewer, paving, and drainage improvements,
prepared by a registered professional civil engineer, shall be approved and retained by the town prior to any
construction in the subdivision.
(e) The approval of construction drawings by the town shall be effective for a period of one year after the
approval date, unless the subdivider has requested and received an extension of time. Construction drawings
which have expired shall be resubmitted to the town for approval before any construction is begun. The design
of the proposed improvements shall be based on the construction requirements which are in effect at the time the
construction drawings are resubmitted.
(f) If a homeowner association is required, a copy of the association agreement shall be filed with the town as
a part of the platting process. All common areas of the subdivision to be maintained by the homeowners
association shall be shown on the plat and shall include any “common areas of town interest” as may be required
by the planning and zoning commission or town council. A “common area of town interest” shall mean one or
more of the common areas over which the association agreement grants the town council the right to exercise the
same authority concerning maintenance as that held by the homeowner association, to be exercised at the sole
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/665
discretion of the town council in the event the association fails in its maintenance obligation, including any right
to assess for maintenance costs. In this regard the town may require the final recorded association agreement to
contain provisions meeting this requirement.
(g) A proposed lighting plan and landscaping plan which provides landscaping and screening with proper
regard to adjacent properties. Buffer strips of at least 35-foot minimum width must be provided, preserving
existing growth and containing vegetation which will screen the view from adjacent residential property and/or
major thoroughfares during all seasons.
(h) See section 10.02.161 et seq. for other plat and development requirements applicable to both preliminary
and final plats and sections 10.02.006 through 10.02.009, and 10.02.251, article 3.15 and article 3.12, division 2,
of this code for other requirements, including the following:
(1) Lots, blocks, easements, roads, streets, and alleys.
(2) Flood protection requirements.
(3) Tree removal requirements.
(4) Land conveyance regulations (parkland dedication).
(i) Final plats located within the commercial planned development district shall comply with the requirements
of sections 14.02.681 through 14.02.693 [sic] of this code.
Sec. 10.02.103 Final plat contents
The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the following information:
(1) The boundary lines with accurate distances and bearings, a metes and bounds description or the
boundary (error of closure shall not exceed one in 10,000 for unadjusted boundary and one in 50,000
for the plat boundary), exact acreage to hundredths, and the exact location and width of all existing or
recorded streets intersecting the boundary of the tract. One copy of the traverse closure sheet shall be
enclosed.
(2) True bearings and distances to the nearest established street lines, official monuments, or
subdivision corner, which shall be accurately described on the plat. Municipal, township, county, or
abstract lines shall be accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and bearings.
(3) An accurate location of the subdivision in reference to the deed records of the county which
shall include the volume and page of the deed of the property to be subdivided.
(4) The exact layout including:
(A) Street and/or alley names;
(B) The length of all arcs, radii, internal angles, and points of curvature, length and bearing
of the tangents;
(C) All easements for right-of-way provided for public services or utilities and any
limitations of the easements; and
(D) All lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths and with
bearings and angles to street and alley lines to the nearest second.
(5) Reserved.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/665
(6) The accurate outline description of all property which is offered for dedication for public use,
such as parks, and the like, and all property that may be reserved by deed covenant for the common
use of the property owners in the subdivision.
(7) Front building setback lines on all lots and tracts. Side yard building setback lines at street
intersections and crosswalks.
(8) Reserved.
(9) Name of the proposed subdivision and final signage if proposed.
(10) Name and address of the subdivider.
(11) North point, scale, and date.
(12) A location map of the proposed subdivision.
(13) Construction plans and profiles shall be drawn on sheets measuring 24" x 36", shall be the
same size as the final plat and shall include the following information:
(A) A plan and profile of each street with top of curb grades shown and fully in conformance
with the applicable criteria presented in article 3.16, division 2, of this code. Each sheet shall
include north point, scale, date and benchmark description to sea level datum. Unless otherwise
approved by the town, scales shall be one inch equals 40 feet (1" = 40') horizontally and one
inch equals five feet or six feet (1" = 5' or 6') vertically. Each plan shall show the seal and
signature of the registered professional civil engineer who prepared the plans.
(B) The cross-sections of proposed streets showing the width of roadways and type of
pavement and location and width of sidewalk.
(C) (i) A plan and profile of proposed sanitary sewers, with grades and pipe sizes
indicated and showing locations of manholes, cleanouts, and the like, and a plan of the
proposed water distribution system showing pipe sizes and location of valves, fire
hydrants, fittings, and the like, in conformance with the applicable criteria presented in
chapter 13 of this code. Each shall show the seal and signature of the registered
professional civil engineer who prepared the plans.
(ii) Each sheet shall include north point, scale, date, and benchmark description on the
mean sea level datum.
(14) Identification of each lot or site and block by number and letter.
(15) Exact acreage of each lot or site.
(16) Reserved.
(17) Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record name, county
recorder's book and page numbers, and the names of owners of adjoining land that is not subdivided,
together with deed references.
(18) Reserved.
(19) The final plat shall be accompanied by one set of surveyor's closure notes for the boundary of
the subdivision and for each block thereof. The notes shall be referenced in the same manner as the
plat. They shall be submitted in the form prescribed by and for the approval of planning and zoning
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/665
commission and the approved notes shall be deposited as a public document in the records of the
town.
(20) Certification of title and statement signed and acknowledged by the owner, and of all others
having interest in the fee title of the subdivision, dedicating streets, alleys, easements, parks and other
spaces to public use, or when the subdivider has made provision acceptable to the town council for
perpetual maintenance thereof to the inhabitants of the subdivision.
(21) Certification by a licensed land surveyor, registered in the state, to the effect that the plan
represents a survey made by him or under his direct supervision and that all monuments shown
thereon actually exist, and that their location, size, and material are correctly shown.
(22) A certificate of ownership and dedication of all streets, alleys, parks, and playgrounds to
public use forever, signed and acknowledged before a notary public, by the owner and lienholder of
the land, and a complete and accurate description of the land subdivided and the streets dedicated.
(23) Certificate showing that all taxes and fees have been paid on the tract to be subdivided.
(24) Reserved.
(25) The following certificate on the plat, in a manner that will allow the filling in of the certificate
by the proper parties:
FINAL PLAT APPROVAL CERTIFICATE
APPROVED ___________________, 20____.
Planning and Zoning Commission
By: ________________________________
Chairperson, Planning and Zoning Commission
Town of Fairview, Texas
APPROVED ___________________, 20____.
Town Council, Town of Fairview, Texas
By: ________________________________
Mayor, Town of Fairview, Texas
The undersigned, the Town Secretary of the Town of Fairview, Texas, hereby certifies that the
foregoing final plat of the Subdivision or Addition to the Town of Fairview was submitted to
the Town Council on the day of _____________, 20___, and the Council, by formal action,
then and there approved the plat and authorized the Mayor to note such approval by signing
his/her name as hereinabove subscribed to which I hereby attest.
Witness my hand this __________ day of _____________, 20__.
_______________________________
Town Secretary
Town of Fairview, Texas
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/665
(26) The requirements of subsections (21) and (22) shall be met by the use of certificates in the
form that follows.
CERTIFICATE OF SURVEYOR WHO PREPARED PLAT
STATE OF TEXAS
COUNTY OF COLLIN
I, ______________________, a registered Professional Land Surveyor in the State of Texas, do
hereby certify that I prepared this plat from an actual and accurate survey of the land and that
the corner monuments shown thereon were properly placed, under my personal supervision, in
accordance with the subdivision regulations of the Town of Fairview, Texas.
(Surveyor's Seal)
Registered Professional Land Surveyor
Registration No. ____________________
Date: ____________________________
OWNER'S DEDICATION AND ACKNOWLEDGMENT
STATE OF TEXAS
COUNTY OF COLLIN
I (we), the undersigned, owner(s) and lienholder(s) of the land shown on this plat within the
area described by metes and bounds as follows:
(metes and bounds description of property),
and designated herein as the ______________ subdivision to the Town of Fairview, Texas, and
whose name is subscribed hereto, hereby dedicate to the use of the public forever all streets,
alleys, parks, watercourses, drains, easements, rights-of-way and public places thereon shown
for the purposes therein stated.
_________________________________________
Date:
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
STATE OF TEXAS
COUNTY OF COLLIN
BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared ____________,
known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, who
acknowledged to me that the same was executed for the purposes and consideration therein
expressed.
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL OF OFFICE, this _________ day of
_____________, 20___.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/665
Notary Public in and for The State of Texas
NOW, THEREFORE, KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
THAT, ______________ acting herein by and through its duly authorized officers, does hereby
adopt this plat designating the hereinabove described property as _________________, an
addition to the Town of Fairview, Texas, and does hereby dedicate to the public use forever, the
streets and alleys shown thereon. The streets and alleys are dedicated for street purposes. The
Easements and public use areas, as shown, are dedicated for the public use forever, for the
purposes indicated on this plat. All public improvements and dedications shall be free and clear
of all debt, liens, and/or encumbrances. No buildings, fences, trees, shrubs or other
improvements or growths shall be constructed or placed upon, over or across the Easements as
shown, except that landscape improvements may be placed in Landscape Easements, if
approved by the Town. The Town of Fairview is not responsible for replacing any
improvements in, under, or over any easements caused by maintenance or repair. In addition,
utility Easements may also be used for the mutual use and accommodation of all public utilities
desiring to use or using the same unless the easement limits use to particular persons, said use
by public utilities being subordinate to the Public's and the Town of Fairview's use thereof. The
Town of Fairview and public utilities entities shall have the right to remove and keep removed
all or parts of any building, fences, trees, shrubs or other improvements or growths which may
in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance, or efficiency of their
respective systems in said Easements. The Town of Fairview and public utility entities shall at
all times have the full right of ingress and egress to or from their respective easements for the
purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining, reading meters, and
adding to or removing all or parts of their respective systems without the necessity at any time
of procuring permission from anyone.
That the undersigned do hereby covenant and agree that they shall construct upon the fire lane
easements, if any, as dedicated and shown hereon, a hard surface and that they shall maintain
the same in a state of good repair at all times and keep the same free and clear of any structures,
fences, trees, shrubs, or other parking of motor vehicles, trailers, boats or other impediments to
the access of fire apparatus. The maintenance of paving on the fire lane easements is the
responsibility of the owner, and the owner shall post and maintain appropriate signs in
conspicuous places along such fire lanes, stating “Fire Lane, No Parking.” The police chief or
his duly authorized representative is hereby authorized to cause such fire lanes and utility
easements to be maintained free and unobstructed at all times for the Fire Department and
emergency use.
The undersigned do covenant and agree that the Access Easements, if any, may be utilized by
any person or the general public for ingress and egress to other real property, and for the
purpose of General Public vehicular and pedestrian use and access, and for Fire Department and
emergency use in, along, upon and across said premises, with the right and privilege at all times
of the Town of Fairview, its agents, employees, workmen and representatives having ingress,
egress, and regress in, along, upon and across said premises.
This plat is approved subject to all platting ordinances, rules, regulations and resolutions of the
Town of Fairview. All modifications to this document shall be by means of the plat and
approved by the Town of Fairview.
WITNESS, my hand at Fairview, Texas, this the ______ day of _________, 20___.
By: _______________________________
AUTHORIZED SIGNATURE
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/665
(Ordinance 2017-7, ex. B, adopted 5/2/17)
Secs. 10.02.104–10.02.130 Reserved
Division 5. Plat Vacation; Replatting; Amended Plats
Sec. 10.02.131 Vacating a plat
(a) The proprietors of a tract covered by a plat may vacate the plat at any time before any lot in the plat is
sold. The plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the plat vacated is approved and
recorded in the manner prescribed for the original plat as set forth in this code.
(b) If lots in the plat have been sold, the plat, or any part of the plat, may be vacated on the application of all
the owners of lots in the plat with approval obtained in the manner prescribed for the original plat as set forth in
this code.
(c) On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the vacated plat has no effect.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.055)
State law reference–Vacating plat, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.013.
Sec. 10.02.132 Replatting without vacating preceding plat
A replat of a subdivision or part of a subdivision may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat
without vacation of that plat or filing a preliminary plat if the replat meets all the other requirements of this code
for an amending plat or final plat and:
(1) Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted;
(2) Is approved by the planning and zoning commission and town council after a public hearing on
the matter at which parties in interest and citizens have an opportunity to be heard;
(3) It does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and
(4) There is compliance, when applicable, with sections 10.02.133 and 10.02.134.
(Ordinance 2016-32 adopted 11/1/16)
State law reference–Replatting without vacating preceding plat, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.014.
Sec. 10.02.133 Additional requirements for certain replats
(a) In addition to compliance with section 10.02.132, a replat without vacation of the preceding plat must
conform to the requirements of this section if:
(1) During the preceding five years, any of the area to be replatted was limited by an interim or
permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than two residential units per lots; or
(2) Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more
than two residential units per lot.
(b) Notice of the hearing required under section 10.02.132 shall be given before the 15th day before the date
of the hearing by:
(1) Publication in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the county; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/665
(2) By written notice, with a copy of subsection (3) below attached, forwarded by the town to the
owners of lots that are in the original subdivision and that are within 500 feet of the lots to be
replatted, as indicated on the most recently approved municipal tax roll or in the case of a subdivision
within the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction, the most recently approved county tax roll of the
property upon which the replat is requested. The written notice may be delivered by depositing the
notice, properly addressed with postage prepaid, in a post office or postal depository within the
boundaries of the town.
(3) If the proposed replat requires a variance and is protested in accordance with this subsection,
the proposed replat must receive, in order to be approved, the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths
of the members present of the planning and zoning commission or town council. For a legal protest,
written instruments signed by the owners of at least 20% of the area of the lots or land immediately
adjoining the area covered by the proposed replat and extending 200 feet from that area, but within
the original subdivision, must be filed with the planning and zoning commission and town council
prior to the close of the public hearing.
(4) In computing the percentage of land area under this subsection, the area of streets and alleys
shall be included.
(5) Compliance with subsections (3) and (4) of this subsection is not required for approval of a
replat of part of a preceding plat if the area to be replatted was designated or reserved for other than
single or duplex family residential use by notation on the last legally recorded plat or in the legally
recorded restrictions applicable to the plat.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.057)
State law reference–Additional requirements for certain replats, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.015.
Sec. 10.02.134 Amending plat
(a) The town council may approve and issue an amending plat, which may be recorded and is controlling over
the preceding plat without vacation of that plat, if the amending plat is signed by the applicants only and is
solely for one or more of the following purposes:
(1) To correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat;
(2) To add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat;
(3) To correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat;
(4) To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the
engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments;
(5) To show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character
or that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat;
(6) To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the
municipal authority responsible for approving plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names,
and identification of adjacent recorded plats;
(7) To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots if:
(A) Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat;
(B) Neither lot is abolished;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/665
(C) The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and
(D) The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the
other owners in the plat;
(8) To relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other
improvement on a lot line or easement;
(9) To relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots if:
(A) The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
(B) The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and
(C) The amendment does not increase the number of lots;
(10) To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six or fewer lots in the subdivision
or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat if:
(A) The changes do not effect applicable zoning and other regulations of the town;
(B) The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and
(C) The area covered by the change is located in an area that the planning and zoning
commission and town council have approved, after a public hearing, as a residential
improvement area; or
(11) To replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if:
(A) The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
(B) The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions;
(C) The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and
(D) The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary
the extension of municipal facilities.
(b) Notice, a hearing, and the approval of other lot owners are not required for the approval and issuance of an
amending plat.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.058)
State law reference–Amending plat, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.016.
Secs. 10.02.135–10.02.160 Reserved
Division 6. Plat and Development Requirements Applicable to Preliminary and Final Plats
Sec. 10.02.161 Zoning requirements enforced
All requirements pertaining to lot size, yard size, lot coverage, height, parking, loading, and screening contained
in article 14.02 of this code shall be adhered to for development under this article.
Sec. 10.02.162 Lots
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/665
(a) All lots shall conform to the regulations as set forth in the town's zoning ordinance.
(b) Lot width for corner lots in residential areas shall be wider than lot width of adjacent inside lots on the
same public street, private drive, or dedicated access easement and allow the required setback from both streets
as if all lot lines adjacent to a public street, private drive, or dedicated access easement are “front” lot lines.
(c) Each lot shall face onto a public street, private drive, or dedicated access easement, intended to serve the
same purpose as a public street or private drive except in a planned unit development. Lots with street frontage
at both front and rear shall be avoided, except when the lot backs onto a highway or thoroughfare.
(d) Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to straight streets and radial to curved street lines
for any plat which creates additional lots and is smaller than five (5) acres. For purposes of this provision,
“approximately” means within 5 degrees of a right angle to the straight street or radial of a curved street line for
the entire length of the line.
(e) In subdivisions where buildings are to be served by septic tanks, the size of lots shall be sufficiently large
to accommodate adequate drainage fields and to meet the standards set forth by the department of state health
services and the town.
Sec. 10.02.163 Easements
(a) Easements across lots on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities when necessary and shall be at
least 20 feet wide.
(b) Where a subdivision is bounded by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, the guidelines
outlined in article 3.12, division 2, shall apply.
(c) For a development within the commercial planned development district, easements shall be dedicated in
accordance with the requirements of sections 14.02.681 through 14.02.693 [sic] of this code.
Sec. 10.02.164 Blocks
The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with regard to the following items:
(1) Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use proposed;
(2) Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions;
(3) Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of traffic; and
(4) Limitations of topography.
Sec. 10.02.165 Requirements listed in other chapters or sections
(a) Provisions adopted by reference. Article 3.12, division 2; article 3.15; article 3.16, division 2; article
13.03, article 13.04, and article 13.05 of this code are incorporated herein by reference and made a part of these
subdivision regulations the same as if copied herein verbatim.
(b) Roads, streets, alleys, sidewalks, storm sewers, drainage, water, sanitary sewer and septic systems, utility
services, street lighting and driveway approaches.
(1) All construction of such improvements, including the requirement for contractor's contract and
bonds, shall comply with all the provisions of article 3.16, article 13.03, article 13.04, and article
13.05 of this code.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/665
(2) Public improvements, including streets, drainage, and public utility rights-of-way shall
conform to the requirements of article 14.02 and any site plan, approved for the property being
platted.
(c) Flood protection.
(1) The final plat must reflect compliance with all provisions of article 3.12, division 2, of this
code and compliance shall be a condition of final plat approval.
(2) All construction in connection with the subdivision shall comply with all the provisions of said
article 3.12, division 2.
(d) Tree removal. In the event any trees are to be removed from the property being subdivided, an approved
tree removal plat plan, in compliance with all the provisions of article 3.15, shall be a condition of final plat
approval. Failure to comply with said provisions shall, in addition to the other fines and penalties stated therein,
be grounds for disapproval of the final plat of the proposed subdivision.
(e) Land conveyance regulations (parkland dedication). See the regulations as set out in section 10.02.251 et
seq.
Sec. 10.02.166 Mobile home parks and mobile homes
(a) Development of mobile home parks for locating mobile homes shall be in accordance with the provisions
of the mobile home parks and mobile homes regulations at section 14.02.571 et seq., and shall meet the approval
of the town.
(b) After the effective date of adoption of this Code of Ordinances, it shall be unlawful to place a mobile home
on any lot, tract or parcel within the town.
Sec. 10.02.167 Survey monuments and lot markers
Concrete monuments, of which there shall be a minimum of two feet, shall be placed in all corners of boundary
lines in a subdivision and in any case no more than 1,400 feet apart. These monuments will be installed before
recording of the final plat. Intermediate property corners, curve points, and angle points of each lot in the
subdivision shall be marked by iron stakes one-half inch in diameter and not less than 24 inches in length, driven
flush with the ground or counter-sunk, if necessary, in order to avoid being disturbed. No utility construction
shall be allowed until permanent lot pins are in place.
Sec. 10.02.168 Record drawings (as-built plans)
(a) Within 30 days of acceptance of the subdivision, the engineer for the developer shall submit to the town a
complete set of drawings of the paving, drainage, water, and sanitary sewer improvements showing all changes
made in the plans during construction and containing on each sheet a “record drawing” stamp bearing the
signature of the engineer and the date. In addition, three reproducible drawings of the utility plan sheets,
containing the record drawing information, shall be submitted to the town.
(b) No final acceptance of the subdivision will be made by the town until this requirement has been made to
the satisfaction of the town. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to furnish copies of the record drawing
plans to the appropriate state agencies.
Sec. 10.02.169 Road gates
No gate or other structure designed to control or limit traffic on any public or private subdivision street of
ordinary passenger vehicles shall be permitted in any zone except a planned development zone. Such gate or
structure shall be removed upon annexation of any public or private street with such control in place at the time
of annexation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/665
(Ordinance 2017-7, ex. C, adopted 5/2/17)
Secs. 10.02.170–10.02.190 Reserved
Division 7. Filing Fees and Charges
Sec. 10.02.191 Procedure
Fees and charges shall be paid to the town when any plat is tendered to the planning and zoning commission or
any other authorized board or agency of the town. Each of the fees and charges shall be paid in advance, and no
action of the planning and zoning commission or any other board or agency shall be valid until the fee or fees
shall have been paid to the officer designated therein. (1998 Code, sec. 153.090)
Sec. 10.02.192 Fee structure
(a) The town shall calculate the basic fees and charges for each plat review based on the complexity of the
proposed subdivision as reflected by the application, with a goal of recovering all of the town's direct expenses
(see the master fee schedule set out in appendix A of this code).
(b) Fees shall be charged on all plats, regardless of the action taken by the planning and zoning commission
and whether the plat is approved or denied by the town council.
(c) If the amount deposited is less than the actual cost of reviewing and processing the plat, that balance shall
be collected before final approval of the plat.
(d) Any fees and charges paid in connection with a preliminary plat will be valid as paid for a period of six
months from the time of payment unless extended by the town council.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.091)
Secs. 10.02.193–10.02.219 Reserved
Division 8. Minor Plats
Sec. 10.02.220 Required
Where a site plan (or a preliminary plan) is required, an applicant shall not be required to submit a minor plat.
However, the applicant may submit a minor plat, at his/her option, as part of the development process. Zoning
districts where a site plan (preliminary plan) is required are: commercial planned development district (CPDD);
conditional use permit (CUP); special use permit (SUP); planned center, (preliminary plan) (PC); planned
development (PD); general business (GB); and mobile home (MH). (Ordinance 2008-10-14P adopted 10/14/08)
Sec. 10.02.221 Minor plat approval process
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the minor plat approval process is to provide a mechanism to determine the
necessity for a preliminary plat and to offer an expedited review process.
(b) Minor plat. A minor plat must be submitted as a concept plan showing existing features, new features,
utilities, locations, and the general requirements outlined in a “minor plat checklist” that may be obtained from
the town secretary and must meet the following requirements:
(1) Must not create more than four single-family building lots.
(2) Must not contain any new streets or alleys.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/665
(3) Each proposed lot must have frontage on either a dedicated public road, private drive, or on a
dedicated access easement and each lot must have its driveway on the road or easement that serves as
its frontage.
(4) All proposed lots must conform to the regulations of the town's zoning ordinance.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.100)
(c) Expedited review.
(1) An application for a minor plat must be filed with the town and the appropriate fee must be
paid.
(2) The concept plan for the minor plat will be reviewed by the town director of planning and
community development to determine if the concept plan meets the requirements of a minor plat. If
the director determines that the concept plan meets the requirements of a minor plat, the applicant
may use the concept plan as the basis for preparing and filing of a complete final plat without
necessity of filing a preliminary plat.
(3) If the property for which the minor plat is proposed is either not zoned or is proposed for a
zoning change, the applicant must also submit an application for zoning or zoning change in
accordance with the requirements of article 14.02 of this code.
(4) If some zoning action is required in association with the proposed plat, public hearings
associated with the zoning action and approval of the zoning action may be accomplished at the same
respective planning and zoning commission and town council meetings at which the proposed final
plat is considered.
(Ordinance 2016-32 adopted 11/1/16)
Secs. 10.02.222–10.02.250 Reserved
Division 9. Land Conveyance (Park Land Dedication)
Sec. 10.02.251 Purpose and goal
This division is adopted pursuant to the police powers of the town to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens of the town by insuring that adequate recreational areas in the form of parks are provided to meet the
need created by new residential development. (1998 Code, sec. 153.110)
Sec. 10.02.252 Scope
The provisions of this division shall apply to all new residential subdivisions of property located within the
corporate limits of the town or within the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction, that are filed for plat or replat
approval after the effective date of this division. (1998 Code, sec. 153.111)
Sec. 10.02.253 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
Commission. The planning and zoning commission of the town.
Community park. A park of sufficient size and location to serve the entire town. A community park may
typically contain lighted athletic facilities for more active play purposes, such as ballfields for football, softball,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/665
baseball and soccer, and a recreational center or swimming pool.
Council. The town council of the Town of Fairview, Texas.
Dwelling unit. Any building or structure, or part thereof, which is designed, used, or intended to be used, for
human occupancy as the living quarters for one housekeeping unit or family.
Neighborhood park. A park designed to service a specific neighborhood area and may include playground
apparatus and other space for active recreational purposes along with some areas for passive use. Whenever
possible, neighborhood parks should be located adjacent to existing or proposed greenbelt areas.
Residential or residential development. The actual or proposed use of land for one or more buildings or
structures which are designed or intended to be used, in whole or in part, for one or more dwelling units.
Subdivider or developer. Any owner or any person, firm, association, syndicate, corporation, or other
organization, seeking to effect a subdivision of land on behalf of the owner, pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
Subdivision. This term shall have the same meaning as that term is defined in section 10.02.002 of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.112)
Sec. 10.02.254 Preservation of Sloan Creek corridor
(a) First priority should be given to preserving as a protected nature trail within the town and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, Sloan Creek Stream to the greater of 50 feet from the creek bank or the 100-year
floodplain.
(b) Therefore, the Sloan Creek Corridor shall be considered by the town council as a first priority location for
meeting a subdivision applicant's requirement for park land dedication.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.113)
Sec. 10.02.255 General requirements
(a) Conveyance or payment of money required. The owner, subdivider, or developer of any property to which
this division applies, shall convey for park purposes land, or make a payment of money in lieu of land, or a
combination of both, to the town at the time of subdivision approval to provide for the recreational needs created
by such development, in accordance with the provisions of this division.
(b) Proposed number of dwellings units to be submitted. All plats or replats filed after the effective date of this
division shall indicate on the proposed plat the number of proposed dwelling units to be constructed or placed
within the development.
(c) Determination of requirements. In reviewing any proposed plat or replat for a new residential
development, the council shall, after receiving the recommendation of the commission, make a determination of
whether a conveyance of land, payment of money in lieu of land, or combination of both, shall be made to meet
the requirements of this division.
(d) Factors considered. The commission in making its recommendation and the council in making its
determination of whether a proposed conveyance of land, money in lieu of land, or combination of both, shall be
made to meet the requirements of this division, shall make such recommendation or decision, based upon
relevant factors, which may include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Whether the proposed land to be conveyed for park purpose would be suitable as a
neighborhood or community park.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/665
(2) Any available park plan or recreational master plan for the area in which the development is
located.
(3) The recommendation of the department of parks and recreation.
(4) Whether the proposed land to be conveyed for park purposes is adjacent to an existing
greenbelt area.
(5) Whether there is sufficient existing public or private park land in the area of the proposed
development.
(6) Whether the park needs of the area of the proposed development would be best served by
expanding or upgrading existing parks; or
(7) Whether the park needs of the area of the proposed development would be best served by
expanding or upgrading adjacent greenbelt areas.
(8) The guidelines of the current zoning ordinance or any comprehensive plan of the town.
(e) Suitability of proposed conveyance of land for park purposes. A proposed conveyance of land to meet the
requirements of this division shall not generally be considered suitable for neighborhood or community park
purposes if it has one or more of the following characteristics:
(1) Generally if more than 20% of the proposed park site is located within the 100-year floodplain,
as shown on the latest flood insurance rate map or floodplain ordinance adopted by the town on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community, the town may take more than the
20% floodplain land if it is determined in the best interest of the town. (See section 10.02.256(5)
[10.02.256(6)] for credit for donation of floodplain.)
(2) The proposed park site dedication is of less acres than would be suitable for a neighborhood
park or for a community park, unless the proposed dedication is located in such a manner in which it
could be combined with other dedications to create a park of adequate size.
(3) It has unusual topography or slope which renders it unsuitable for organized recreational
activities.
(4) It does not or would not front an improved public street or would not be readily accessible, in
whole or in part, to the public.
(f) Combination of land and money payment. The council may, when the best interest of the town would be
served, require a combination of the dedication or conveyance of land and the payment of money in lieu of land
to meet the requirements of this article, or total payment in lieu of land conveyance.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.114)
Sec. 10.02.256 Conveyance of land requirements
Where the council determines that a conveyance of land shall be required, in whole or in part, to meet the
requirements of this article, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Amount.
(A) Any required conveyance of land shall be in an amount proportionally equal to 413.8
square feet per capita on all proposed residential developments as defined herein. Per capita
density shall be assumed to be 3.15 persons per single-family dwelling unit and 1.75 persons
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/665
per multifamily dwelling unit, as that term is defined herein, except that developers of
residential properties may submit data substantiating lower than standard population densities.
The lower densities may be accepted or rejected by the council.
(B) If the property is not zoned at the time of plat approval the per capita density shall be
based on the highest density reflected by the plat or the highest density permitted under the
existing zoning of the town, whichever is the greatest density. However, a refund or site
adjustment may be made by the council on the following conditions:
(i) If the property is annexed into the town within the same calendar year as plat
approval; and
(ii) Prior to the sale of any lot within the subdivision permanent zoning is requested and
granted that lowers the maximum per capita for the subdivision; and
(iii) At the time of filing application for permanent zoning a written request for
adjustment or refund is made to the council.
(2) Manner and method. Plats of subdivisions required to be submitted for approval by the town in
accordance with the Tex. Local Gov't Code section 212.001 et seq., shall show thereon a dedication
to the town of the land required by this article for park purposes as a condition to approval of such
plat by the council, and the town may further require the conveyance of the park property by general
warranty deed.
(A) As a condition to acceptance of the plat or deed by the town, the subdivider shall provide
the town with an owner's title policy of insurance in an amount equal to the value of the land
conveyed, which amount shall be determined by the town. If payment of money is to be made
in lieu of land the amount shall be stated on the final plat with a place for the mayor's signature
acknowledging receipt of such payment.
(B) If any replat or subdivision change results in an increase in the number of dwelling units
allowed on a platted lot, the difference shall be made up by the developer as a fee in lieu of land
dedicated.
(3) Credit for prior dedications. Where a gift of land was made prior to the effective date of this
article by the owner of land required to convey land under the provisions of this article, the former
gift of land shall be credited on a per-acre basis toward the required conveyance provided by this
article, when the council finds that:
(A) The gift was made within five years of the effective date of this article.
(B) The land given was within one-half mile of the new development for which land is
required to be conveyed; and
(C) The land given is not being presently used for purposes incompatible with park purposes
and is suitable for park purposes.
(D) (i) A credit may be given for on-site improvements that are compatible with
long-range development plans for the proposed park.
(ii) The credit provided for herein shall not be transferable and shall only be given to
the donor of the land who is the owner of the property being developed for which a
conveyance of land is required by this article unless said prior conveyance where [was]
included as a part of an executed facilities and/or development agreement with the town
and the developer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/665
(4) Credit for private recreational facilities.
(A) Where private recreational facilities are built for the residents for the subdivision or
development, a credit may be granted by the town council.
(B) The value of these private recreation facilities shall be determined by the town council
but shall not exceed 50% credit.
(5) Credit for landscape and greenbelt areas. At its discretion, town council may grant credits on a
per-acre basis for site improvements such as landscape buffers and greenbelt areas. (Which may by
their size exceed the normal requirements for buffering and landscaping.)
(6) Credit for conveyance of floodplain. In cases where floodplain land or property is proposed to
be conveyed to satisfy the park land requirements, a credit will be given based upon the following
formula or ratio: three acres of floodplain shall equal one acre of non-floodplain land.
(7) Location. The land required to be conveyed may be located inside or outside the boundaries of
the development so long as the land is located in such proximity to the development to serve or
benefit persons residing therein.
(8) Improvements to be made. The person required to convey land shall be responsible for, and pay
the costs of, providing convenient access by improved streets and sidewalks and providing adequate
drainage improvements, so that the site is suitable for the purpose intended.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.115)
Sec. 10.02.257 Money in lieu of land
Where the council determines that a payment of money in lieu of land shall be made, the following provisions
shall apply:
(1) Amount required to be paid.
(A) Any payment of money required to be paid by this article shall be in an amount equal to
the average per-acre value of the whole property included within the residential development.
(B) In determining the average per-acre value of the total land included within the proposed
residential development, the council may base its determination on one or more of the
following:
(i) The most recent appraisal of all or part of the property made by the central appraisal
district; or
(ii) Confirmed sale prices of all or part of the property to be developed, or comparable
property in close proximity thereof, which have occurred within two years immediately
preceding the date of determination; or
(iii) Where, in the judgment of the council, subsection (i) or (ii) above would not,
because of changed conditions, be a reliable indication of the then-current value of the
land being developed, an independent appraisal of the whole property obtained by the
town and paid for by the developer.
(2) Time of payment. Any payment of money required herein shall be paid as a condition to
approval of any final plat or replat. Payment shall be made prior to the signing of the plat unless
otherwise stated in a facilities agreement approved by the council.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/665
(3) Park development fund. All cash payments paid to the town in accordance with this division
shall be deposited in a separate park development fund. The town shall account for all such payment
with reference to each development for which the payment is made.
(4) Use of funds. Any payments made to the park development fund may be used solely for the
acquisition, development, expansion or upgrading of a community park that would serve the area of
the proposed development as well as other areas of the town, or for a neighborhood park located
within the general area of the proposed development.
(5) Right to refund. If all or part of the payments made for a development are not expended for the
purposes authorized herein within ten years of the date that 95% of all certificates of occupancy have
been issued for the completed development of the property for which the payments were made, the
person or entity who made such payments shall be entitled to a refund on all unexpended funds, if a
request for a refund in writing has been made within one year of entitlement. If no such timely
request is made, the right to a refund of the unexpended funds shall be considered waived.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.116)
Sec. 10.02.258 Failure to comply; withholding utilities for noncompliance
(a) Requirements to be satisfied prior to development. It shall be unlawful for any person who is required to
convey land, or pay money, in lieu of land, as required by this article, to begin, or allow any other person or
contractor to begin, any construction or improvements on any land within any development to which this article
applies, until the required conveyance of land, or payment of money in lieu of land, is made to the town in
accordance with this article.
(b) Permits and services to be withheld. No building permits shall be issued for, and no permanent utility
services shall be provided to any land within any development to which this article applies until the required
conveyance of land, or payment of money in lieu of land, is made to the town in accordance with this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.117)
Secs. 10.02.259–10.02.280 Reserved
Division 10. Thoroughfare Plan
Sec. 10.02.281 Thoroughfare plan adopted
The town hereby adopts the thoroughfare plan to provide for the location and size of thoroughfares in the town.
The streets of a proposed subdivision shall conform to the general intent of the approved thoroughfare plan. The
town shall have the authority to determine final alignment and right-of-way requirements.
Sec. 10.02.282 Future development
(a) All future developments and subdivisions of land in the town and its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be in
accordance with the thoroughfare plan.
(b) Proposed public or private streets for all future developments and subdivisions of land in the town and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, regardless of whether they are included on the town's thoroughfare plan, shall be
aligned and constructed to connect to as many existing public streets that border the future development or
subdivision as are necessary to provide for at least two points of emergency access. In circumstances where
existing public street right-of-way within an existing development abuts a future development or subdivision,
and said right-of-way is unpaved or otherwise unimproved in a manner to allow normal use by vehicular traffic
including emergency vehicle and apparatus, the developer of the future development or subdivision may be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/665
required, in rough proportion to the impact of the future development or subdivision, to construct all or part of
an improved street surface on said right-of-way in accordance with town's street design standards.
(c) Notwithstanding subsection (b) above or any other provision in this chapter, in circumstances where the
secondary point of ingress and egress for a future development could be accomplished through connection to a
residential street or residential street right-of-way in an existing residential development, the town shall have the
authority to require that said secondary point of ingress and egress be accomplished by dedication of an
emergency access easement and construction of an emergency access drive or private street (as opposed to
providing for a public street connection), constructed in accordance with town requirements, within said
emergency access easement. The town shall also have the authority to require proposed developments and
subdivisions to extend proposed residential streets and residential street right-of-way to adjacent properties
where future development or redevelopment is projected to occur.
(d) The town has adopted and will update thoroughfare plans by ordinance. The intention of the plan is to
minimize traffic and to provide for thoroughfares that appropriately addresses the traffic demand provided by
existing and projected development. The plan shall address pedestrian and auto-oriented modes of travel in a
manner that provides for safe interaction between pedestrian and automobile-oriented uses, while reducing
automobile-oriented trips within the town. Roadway infrastructure shall be designed in a manner to minimize
negative impacts on the environment and to limit roadway construction and maintenance costs.
(Ordinance 2014-2-4B, ex. B, adopted 2/4/14)
Sec. 10.02.283 Dedication required
(a) As a condition for the approval of all future subdivision plats submitted to the town for approval, the
owners of the property to be developed shall dedicate to the public, if required by the plan, sufficient property to
provide the minimum width of the thoroughfare established by the thoroughfare plan.
(b) A person who develops property within the commercial planned development district shall construct
sidewalks in accordance with the provisions of sections 14.02.681 through 14.02.693 [sic] of this code.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.132)
Sec. 10.02.284 Construction of thoroughfares
Construction of all thoroughfares shall be in accordance with this article and approved by the town engineer.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.133)
Secs. 10.02.285–10.02.310 Reserved
Division 11. Comprehensive Plan*
Sec. 10.02.311 Adopted
(a) The town hereby adopts the comprehensive plan, adopted in Ordinance No. 2005-019, to: aid in the
orderly growth management of the town; aid in the developing of compatible land uses; aid in preserving and
establishing zoning districts compatible with the comprehensive plan; and to enhance the public health, welfare,
and safety of the town.
(b) Copies of the comprehensive plan, along with any amendments thereto, are available for review during
normal business hours in the office of the town secretary.
(1998 Code, sec. 153.140; Ordinance 2008-12-2A adopted 12/2/08; Ordinance 2014-5-27A adopted 5/27/14)
APPENDIX. CONTRACT BETWEEN DEVELOPER, CONTRACTOR AND TOWN
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/665
500 S. HWY 5 · Fairview, TX 75069 · Town Hall 972-562-0522
CONTRACT BETWEEN DEVELOPER/CONTRACTOR AND TOWN
CONTRACT
STATE OF TEXAS
COUNTY OF COLLIN
WHEREAS, a developer of property located within the corporate limits of the Town of Fairview, Texas, must
develop such property in compliance with applicable ordinances and regulations of the Town of Fairview; and
WHEREAS, there are special regulations and specifications that are applicable to construction that involve work
projects which, upon completion, will be dedicated to the Town, such as streets, alleys, curbs, gutters, and
drainage facilities, water mains and sewer facilities; and
WHEREAS, the developer may elect to make such improvements himself or through a private contractor, as
provided by the Ordinances of the Town of Fairview; and
WHEREAS, ______________, hereinafter called Developer, is the authorized agent of the subdivision or
property described herein; and
WHEREAS, Developer has elected, and has entered into an agreement with ______________, hereinafter called
Contractor, to perform such work projects, hereinafter called “the Work,” for a total consideration of ($_____)
Dollars; and
WHEREAS, the Ordinances of the Town require such parties to enter into a contract with the Town, as set out in
the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Fairview.
NOW, THEREFORE, the undersigned Developer and Contractor, in consideration of the issuance of permits for
“the Work,” agree as follows:
WITNESSETH:
1. Developer and Contractor, undertake, covenant and agree to perform or cause “the Work” to be performed,
in accordance with, and in every detail conforming to, the standards and specifications of the Town of Fairview,
Texas, as provided for in the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Fairview, including the provisions of Chapter
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/665
10, Article 10.02, thereof, and any other special provisions, plans, or working drawings approved by the Town
Council of the Town of Fairview, Texas.
Developer and Contractor agree that all “the Work” shall be completed on or before the _____ day of
___________, 19__, and that time is of the essence.
The Property or Subdivision is described as follows:
“The Work” to be performed is described as follows:
(The full contract between Developer and Contractor incorporated by reference and attached as an Exhibit,
containing provisions for the Performance Bond, Payment Bond and Maintenance Bond required by section
97.25 et seq. of the Town's 1998 Code of Ordinances and agreement to furnish the Maintenance Bond as
required by said section 97.25 et seq.).
2. Developer and Contractor each acknowledge that they have obtained copies of the Town of Fairview
standards and specifications governing the type of improvements to be made.
3. Developer and Contractor agree that upon completion of “the work,” but before acceptance of the
improvements by the Town of Fairview, Contractor shall deliver to the Town of Fairview a properly executed
Maintenance Bond as required by the Ordinances of the Town of Fairview.
Developer and Contractor hereby bind themselves, their heirs, successors, assigns, and representatives, for the
faithful and full performance of the terms and provisions of this contract, individually, jointly, and severally.
Executed this _____ day of ___________, 19__.
Developer Contractor
Approved for Town of Fairview:
Mayor
Approved as to form:
Town Attorney
Attest:
Town Secretary
(1998 Code, ch. 153 appendix; Ordinance adopting Code)
APPENDIX. CERTIFICATION OF UTILITY
500 S. HWY 5 · Fairview, TX 75069 · Town Hall 972-562-0522
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/665
CERTIFICATE OF UTILITY
Date:
Developer:
Location address:
Utility Service(s):
Plat records of the county:
Cabinet:
Page:
Volume:
APPROVAL:
Developer
Date
Town of Fairview
Date
THE PURPOSE OF THIS CERTIFICATE IS TO PROHIBIT THE CONNECTION OF UTILITIES IN THE
EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION AND CORPORATE LIMITS OF FAIRVIEW UNTIL APPROVED
THROUGH THE TOWN.
(1998 Code, ch. 153 appendix)
ARTICLE 10.03 IMPACT FEES*
Sec. 10.03.001 Official copy of land use assumptions, capital improvements plan and impact fee study
(a) A current copy of the adopted land use assumptions, capital improvements plans and impact fee study shall
be kept at the office of the town secretary and shall be the official documents used to administer the impact fee
standards in this article.
(b) The land use assumptions, capital improvements plans and impact fee study for water, wastewater and
roadway facilities may be amended from time to time, pursuant to section 10.03.006. Upon amendment, a copy
of the updated land use assumptions, capital improvements plan or impact fee study shall be retained in the
office of the town secretary upon the effective date of this article and thereafter shall become the official copy
for purposes of administering the regulations in this article.
(Ordinance 2015-32, sec. 3, adopted 12/1/15)
Sec. 10.03.002 Purpose and policy
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/665
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Tex. Local Gov't Code, chapter 395. This article implements
a policy of the town to impose fees upon new development to pay the costs of constructing capital improvements
and facility expansions necessary to serve new development. (1998 Code, sec. 38.16)
Sec. 10.03.003 Definitions
For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Advisory committee. A body of members appointed by the town council, composed of not less than five
members, where no less than 40% of the membership shall be representative of the real estate, development, or
building industries who are not employees or officials of a political subdivision or governmental entity. The
planning and zoning commission may, with the approval of the town council, act as the advisory committee,
provided that the commission includes at least one representative of the real estate, development, or building
industry who is not an employee or official of a political subdivision or governmental entity. If no such
representative is a member of the planning and zoning commission, the commission may act as the advisory
committee if at least one such representative is appointed by the town council as an ad hoc voting member of the
planning and zoning commission when it acts as the advisory committee. Where the terms of this article extend
the application of the impact fee into the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction, the membership of the advisory
committee shall include a representative from that area.
Assessment. The determination of the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit which can be imposed
on new development pursuant to this article.
Capital improvement. Any of the following facilities that have a life expectancy of three or more years and are
owned and operated by or on behalf of a political subdivision:
(1) Water facilities, wastewater facilities, and stormwater, drainage, and flood control facilities,
whether or not they are located within the service area; and
(2) Roadway facilities.
Capital improvements plan. The adopted plan, as amended from time to time, that identifies water, wastewater or
roadway capital improvements or facility expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and
attributable to new development and will be financed in whole or in part through water, wastewater or roadway
impact fees collected under this article.
Credit. The amount of the reduction of an impact fee for fees, payments or charges for or construction of the
same type of facility.
Facility expansion. The expansion of the capacity of an existing facility that serves the same function as an
otherwise necessary new capital improvement, in order that the existing facility may serve new development.
The term does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing facility to better
serve existing development.
Final plat approval or approval of a final plat. The point at which the applicant has complied with all conditions
of approval and the plat has been released for filing with the county clerk.
Impact fee. A charge or assessment imposed as set forth in this article against new development in order to
generate revenue for funding or recouping the costs of capital improvements or facility expansions necessitated
by and attributable to the new development. The term does not include:
(1) Dedication of land for public parks or payment in lieu of the dedication to serve park needs;
(2) Dedication of rights-of-way or easements or construction or dedication of on-site water
distribution, wastewater collection or drainage facilities, or streets, sidewalks, or curbs if the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/665
dedication or construction is required by a valid ordinance and is necessitated by and attributable to
the new development; or
(3) Lot or acreage fees to be placed in trust funds for the purpose of reimbursing developers for
oversizing or constructing water or sewer mains or lines.
Land use assumptions. A description of the service area and projections of changes in land uses, densities,
intensities, and population in the service area over at least a ten-year period which has been adopted by the town
and upon which the capital improvements plan is based.
New development. The subdivision of land, the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure, or any use or extension of the use of land, any
of which increases the number of service units.
Off-site. Located entirely on property which is not included within the boundaries of a plat being considered for
impact fee assessment.
Political subdivision. A municipality, or a district or authority created under article III, section 52, or article
XVI, section 59, of the state constitution.
Roadway facilities. Arterial or collector streets or roads that have been designated on the town's officially
adopted roadway plan, together with all necessary appurtenances. The term does not include any roadways or
associated improvements designated on the federal or state highway system, except to the extent that such
roadways or associated improvements are to be paid for (in whole or in part) from town funds (local
participation by the town). The term includes but is not limited to interests in land, traffic lanes, curbs, gutters,
intersection improvements, traffic-control devices, turn lanes, drainage facilities associated with the roadway,
and street lighting, for which the town be will obligated to pay.
Service area.
(1) For water facilities and wastewater facilities: The entire area within the corporate limits of the
town and its extraterritorial jurisdiction to be served by the capital improvements or facilities
expansions specified in the capital improvements plan;
(2) For roadway facilities: Each individual area located within the corporate boundaries of the
town and designated in the land use assumptions served by the roadway facilities designated in the
capital improvements plan.
Service unit. A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation, or discharge attributable to an individual
unit of development calculated in accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a
particular category of capital improvements or facility expansions. “Service unit” is defined in the capital
improvements plan.
Wastewater facilities. Improvements for providing wastewater collection and treatment, including, but not
limited to, land or easements, treatment facilities, lift stations, and interceptors or mains. “Wastewater facilities”
excludes sanitary sewer lines or mains which are constructed by developers, the costs of which are reimbursed
from pro rata charges paid by developers or owners of property in other subdivisions as a condition of
connection to or use of such facility.
Water facilities. Improvements for providing water supply, treatment and distribution service, including, but not
limited to, land or easements, water treatment facilities, water supply facilities, water distribution lines, water
meters, water storage, and water pumps. “Water facilities” excludes water lines or mains which are constructed
by developers, the costs of which are reimbursed from pro rata charges paid by developers or owners of property
in other subdivisions as a condition of connection to or use of such facility.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/665
(1998 Code, sec. 38.17)
Sec. 10.03.004 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction be subject to a fine in accordance with the general provisions of the Code of
Ordinances. (1998 Code, sec. 38.99)
Sec. 10.03.005 Advisory committee
(a) The advisory committee serves in an advisory capacity and is established to:
(1) Advise and assist the town in adopting land use assumptions;
(2) Review the capital improvements plan and file written comments;
(3) Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements plan;
(4) File semiannual reports with respect to the progress of the capital improvements plan and
report to the town council any perceived inequities in implementing the plan or imposing the impact
fee; and
(5) Advise the town staff and council of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions,
capital improvements plan, and impact fee.
(b) All professional reports concerning the development and implementation of the capital improvements plan
shall be made available to the advisory committee.
(c) The advisory committee shall elect a chairperson to preside at its meetings and a vice-chairperson to serve
in the chairperson's absence. All meetings of the committee shall be open to the public and posted at least 72
hours in advance. A majority of the membership of the committee shall constitute a quorum.
(1998 Code, sec. 38.18)
Sec. 10.03.006 Periodic updates of land use assumptions and capital improvements plan
The land use assumptions and capital improvements plan upon which impact fees are based shall be updated at
least every five years. The first five-year period begins on the date the capital improvements plan is adopted.
Alternatively, the town council may, pursuant to the provisions of Tex. Local Gov't Code section 395.0575, or
any successor statute thereto, make a determination that no such update is required. (1998 Code, sec. 38.19)
Sec. 10.03.007 Payment required; exceptions
(a) No building permit shall be granted for new development or new construction of any property nor shall
any original water or sewer service connection be made or service commenced unless and until impact fees
required by this article are assessed and collected or a contract providing for payment as approved by the town is
entered into.
(b) For new development which is platted and received final plat approval in accordance with Tex. Local
Gov't Code chapter 212, subchapter A, or the town's subdivision or platting procedures prior to the effective date
of this article, impact fees may not be collected on any service unit for which a valid building permit is issued
prior to May 6, 1999.
(c) For land platted and which receives final plat approval in accordance with Tex. Local Gov't Code chapter
212, subchapter A, or the town's subdivision or platting procedures after the effective date of this article, impact
fees shall be assessed against such land and collected as required by section 10.03.008. No final plat for any
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/665
such land or new development shall be approved without assessment of an impact fee as required by section
10.03.008, nor shall a building permit be issued or utility connection be made until the landowner has paid the
impact fee.
(d) For land on which new development occurs or is proposed to occur without platting, no building permit
shall be issued in connection with or utility connection made to such land unless and until the landowner has
paid the impact fee as required by section 10.03.008.
(1998 Code, sec. 38.20)
Sec. 10.03.008 Assessment and collection
(a) For new development which is platted and received final plat approval in accordance with Tex. Local
Gov't Code chapter 212, subchapter A, or the town's subdivision or platting procedures prior to the effective date
of this article, no impact fees shall be collected on any service unit for which a valid building permit is issued
before May 5, 1999. Impact fees shall be assessed and collected for all other service units subject to such a plat
at the time of the issuance of the building permit or upon the filing of an application for connection of an
individual water or wastewater meter to the town's water or wastewater system in order to serve the
development, whichever first occurs.
(b) For land platted and which received final plat approval in accordance with Tex. Local Gov't Code chapter
212, subchapter A, or the town's subdivision or platting procedures after the effective date of this article, impact
fees shall be assessed against such land at the time the plat of the land receives final plat approval. Except as
provided in subsection (e), and where water and wastewater capacity is available, impact fees shall be collected
for a development on occurrence of the following events:
(1) For land inside the town's corporate limits, on issuance of a building permit.
(2) For land located outside the town's corporate boundaries, or for land where the town lacks
authority to issue building permits, upon filing of an application for connection of an individual water
or wastewater meter to the town's water or wastewater system in order to serve the development.
(c) For land on which new development occurs or is proposed to occur without platting, impact fees shall be
assessed against such land at the time of the issuance of a building permit or other development permit, and
impact fees shall be collected at the time of the issuance of a building permit.
(d) After assessment of the impact fees attributable to the new development or execution of an agreement for
payment of impact fees, additional impact fees or increases in fees shall not be assessed against the tract unless
the number of service units to be developed on the tract increases. Should the number of service units be
increased, impact fees shall be increased in an amount equal to the then-current impact fee per service unit
multiplied by the number of additional service units.
(e) Except for roadway facilities, impact fees may be assessed but not collected in areas where service is not
available unless:
(1) The collection is made to pay for a capital improvement or facility expansion identified in the
capital improvements plan and the town commits to commence construction of necessary facilities
identified in the capital improvements plan within two years and to have service available in a
reasonable time not exceeding five years; or
(2) The town agrees in writing to permit the owner of a new development to construct or finance
the required capital improvements or facility expansions and agrees:
(A) That the costs incurred or funds advanced will be credited against the impact fees
otherwise due from the new development; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/665
(B) To reimburse the owner for such costs from impact fees paid from other new
developments that will use such capital improvements or facility expansions, which fees shall
be collected and reimbursed to the owner at the time the other new development records its plat;
or
(3) The owner voluntarily requests that the town reserve capacity to serve future development and
the town and the owner enter into a valid written agreement.
(f) Where the town and an owner have entered into an agreement in writing as described in subsection (e)(2)
(B) above, the town may use impact fees paid from other new developments that will use the capital
improvements or facility expansions as described in this section to reimburse the owner for the ratable portion of
such capital improvements or facility expansions attributable to such other new developments, and such fees
shall be collected and reimbursed to the owner at the time the other new development records its plat.
(g) The owner of the property for which there is a recorded plat may enter into a written agreement with the
town providing for the time and method of payment of impact fees, which agreement shall prevail over any
contrary provision of this article.
(h) The amount of the impact fees to be assessed against a new development for each category of capital
improvement by water meter type and size or by vehicle mile shall be as set forth in schedule 1, as established
by section 10.03.015 of this article. The amount of the impact fees which are to be collected from a new
development for each category of capital improvement shall be determined by multiplying the impact fee per
service unit using schedule 2, as established by section 10.03.015 of this article, by the number of service units
generated by the development, using the land use equivalency table, as established by section 10.03.016 of this
article.
(1998 Code, sec. 38.21)
Sec. 10.03.009 Calculation
(a) Maximum impact fees per service unit for each service area shall be established by category of capital
improvements. The maximum impact fee per service unit for each service area for each category of capital
improvement shall be computed in the following manner:
(1) Calculate the total projected costs of capital improvements necessitated by and attributable to
new development in the service area identified in the impact fee capital improvements plan for each
category of capital improvements;
(2) From such amount, subtract a credit equal to 50% of such total projected costs; and
(3) Divide the resultant amount by the total number of service units anticipated within the service
area, based upon the land use assumptions for that service area.
(b) As an alternative to the 50% credit referenced in subsection (a)(2), the town may incorporate within the
capital improvements plan, for any category of capital improvements, a discount against the total costs of capital
improvements, in the amount of that portion of ad valorem tax and utility service revenues, if any, including the
payment of debt, to be generated by new service units during the period the capital improvements plan is in
effect, including the payment of debt associated with the capital improvements in the plan.
(c) The impact fee per service unit which is to be paid by each new development within a service area shall be
that established by ordinance of the town council, as such may be amended from time to time, and shall be an
amount less than or equal to the maximum impact fee per service unit established in subsection (a).
(d) The determination of impact fees shall be reduced by any allowable credits for the category of capital
improvements as provided by section 10.03.011.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/665
(e) The total amount of unpaid impact fees shall be attached to the development application, or, if to be paid at
some later date, to the request for other permit or connection.
(f) Replatting shall not require recalculation of impact fees unless the number of service units is increased. If a
proposed development increases the number of service units, the impact fee shall be recalculated as provided as
provided for herein.
(1998 Code, sec. 38.22)
Sec. 10.03.010 Alteration, expansion or replacement of building or construction of accessory building
(a) Impact fees shall be imposed and calculated for the alteration, expansion, or replacement of a building or
dwelling unit or the construction of an accessory building if the alteration, expansion, or replacement of the
building or dwelling or the construction of an accessory building results in a land use determined to increase the
number of dwelling units, increase the usable square footage (or other type of service unit measure), change the
land use so as to constitute a different impact fee land use category, or increase the size of the utility meter(s).
Such fees shall be calculated as follows:
(1) The impact fees shall be the amounts due under the applicable rate for the land use or meter
size category resulting from the alteration, expansion, or replacement, less the impact fee that would
be imposed under the applicable impact fee rate for the land use or meter size category prior to
alteration, expansion, or replacement. In determining the impact fee which would have been in place
for the land use category prior to alteration, expansion, or replacement, the use of land during the
previous three years which provided the highest impact upon the town's capital improvements shall
be utilized.
(2) The roadway impact fee for any accessory building shall be that applicable under the rate for
the land use of the primary structure.
(b) The following shall be exempted from payment of impact fees:
(1) Alteration, expansion, or replacement of an existing dwelling unit which does not increase the
number of families which such dwelling unit is arranged, designed, or intended to accommodate for
the purpose of providing living quarters.
(2) The alteration or expansion of an accessory building or structure which will not create
additional dwelling units or will not increase the usable square footage space (or other service unit
measure) associated with the principal building or of the land or will not change the utility meter size.
(3) The replacement of a dwelling unit or a building with a new dwelling unit or building of the
same size and use, and same utility meter size, which will not increase the square footage associated
therewith; provided that the replacement of the dwelling unit or building which has been destroyed,
moved, or otherwise rendered uninhabitable must be replaced within three years of the date it was
destroyed, moved, or otherwise rendered uninhabitable in order to be exempt from payment of
impact fees.
(1998 Code, sec. 38.23)
Sec. 10.03.011 Credits
(a) Any construction of, contributions to, or dedications of any facility by a developer appearing on the capital
improvements plan which is required by the town to be constructed as a condition of development shall be
credited against the impact fees otherwise due for the same category of impact fees otherwise due from the
development.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/665
(b) The amount of each credit for required dedication or construction of a facility on the capital improvements
plan shall be calculated by multiplying the value of the facility assessed for the capital improvements plan by a
fraction, the numerator of which is the impact fee per service unit due for the new development computed using
schedule 2 as established by section 10.03.015 of this article, and the denominator of which is the maximum
impact fee per service unit computed using schedule 1 as established by section 10.03.015 of this article.
(c) As an alternative to the foregoing, the town and the owner may enter into an agreement providing that, in
addition to the credit, the owner will be reimbursed for all or a portion of the costs of such facilities from impact
fees as received from other new developments that will use such capital improvements or facility expansions.
(d) An owner shall be entitled to a credit against any category of impact fee as provided in any written
agreement between the town and the owner.
(e) No credit for construction of any facility shall exceed the total amount of impact fees due from the
development for the same category of improvement.
(f) The town council may, upon petition of the property owner, give credit for dedication or construction of a
capital improvement which is not identified within the applicable capital improvements plan, if the council finds
that such improvement supplies capacity to new developments other than the development paying the impact fee
and provisions for credit are incorporated in an agreement for capital improvements pursuant to section
10.03.016.
(1998 Code, sec. 38.24)
Sec. 10.03.012 Expenditures; accounting
(a) All impact fees collected shall be deposited in interest-bearing accounts clearly identifying the category of
capital improvements or facility expansions within the service area for which the fee is adopted.
(b) Interest earned shall be credited to the account and shall be subject to the same restrictions on expenditures
as the funds generating such interest.
(c) Impact fees and the interest earned thereon may be spent only for the purposes for which such fees were
imposed as shown in the capital improvements plan.
(d) The records of the accounts into which impact fees are deposited shall be open for public inspection and
copying during ordinary business hours.
(1998 Code, sec. 38.25)
Sec. 10.03.013 Appeals
(a) A property owner or applicant for new development may appeal the following decisions to the town
council:
(1) The applicability of an impact fee to the development;
(2) The amount of the impact fee due;
(3) The availability or the amount of an offset or credit;
(4) The application of an offset or credit against an impact fee due; or
(5) The amount of a refund due, if any.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/665
(b) The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that the amount of the fee or the amount of
the offset or credit was not calculated according to the applicable schedule or impact fees or the guidelines
established for determining offsets and credits.
(c) The applicant must file a notice of appeal with the town secretary within 30 days following the decision. If
the notice of appeal is accompanied by a bond or other sufficient surety satisfactory to the town attorney in an
amount equal to the original determination of the impact fee due, the development application may be processed
while the appeal is pending.
(1998 Code, sec. 38.26)
Sec. 10.03.014 Refunds
(a) On the request of an owner of property on which an impact fee has been paid, impact fees shall be
refunded if existing facilities are available and service is denied, or if the town failed to commence construction
of facilities required for service within two years of payment of the fee or if such construction is not completed
within a reasonable time but not in any event in more than five years from the date of payment of the fee.
(b) Upon completion of capital improvements or facility expansions identified in the capital improvements
plan, the impact fee shall be recalculated utilizing actual costs. If the impact fee based on actual cost is less than
the impact fee paid, the town shall refund the difference if such difference exceeds the impact fee paid by more
than 10%.
(c) Any impact fee funds not expended within ten years after payment shall be refunded.
(d) Refunds shall bear interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at the statutory rate
set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, section 395.025, or its successor statute.
(e) All refunds shall be made to the record owner of the property at the time the refund is paid. However, if the
impact fees were paid by another political subdivision or governmental entity, payment shall be made to the
political subdivision or governmental entity.
(f) The owner of the property on which an impact fee has been paid or another political subdivision or
governmental entity that paid the impact fee has standing to sue for a refund under this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 38.27)
Sec. 10.03.015 Fee schedules
(a) Table 1, as may be amended from time to time, shall state the amount of the water and wastewater impact
fees per service units associated with a unit of development for water and wastewater which shall be assessed
against a new development.
(b) Table 2, as may be amended from time to time, shall state the amount of the road impact fees per service
units associated with a unit of development for roads which shall be assessed against a new development
(c) A current copy of the adopted tables 1 and 2 shall be kept in the office of the town secretary and shall be
the documents used to administer the impact fee standards in this article. Upon amendment of table 1 or 2, a
copy of each amended schedule shall be retained in the office of the town secretary upon the effective date of the
amendatory ordinance and thereafter shall become the official copy for purposes of administering the regulations
in this article for water, wastewater, and roadway impact fees.
(Ordinance 2015-32, sec. 4, adopted 12/1/15)
Sec. 10.03.016 Agreement for capital improvements
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/665
(a) The property owner for a new development may construct or finance a capital improvement or facility
expansion designated in the capital improvements plan, if required or authorized by the town, by entering into a
capital improvements agreement with the town prior to the issuance of any building permit or utility connection
for the development.
(b) (1) The capital improvements agreement shall provide for the method to be used to
determine the amount of the credit to be given against impact fees due for the development. The town
and the property owner may agree that the costs incurred or funds advanced will be:
(A) Credited against the impact fees otherwise due from the new development; or
(B) Reimbursed to the owner from impact fees paid from other new developments that will
use the capital improvements or facility expansions, or from other funding sources.
(2) In the event the town elects to reimburse an owner for the dedication, construction or financing
of a capital improvement or facility expansion designated in the capital improvements plan, the terms
of reimbursement shall be incorporated in the agreement required by subsection (a). Reimbursement
agreements shall further be based on the availability of town funds from all sources including current
and projected impact fee fund accounts.
(1998 Code, sec. 38.30)
Sec. 10.03.017 Local restrictions
Under a duly adopted development agreement the town council may, for the purpose of promoting economic development
within or near the town, forgo its entitlement to assess and/or collect some or all of the impact fees for lots or units that
would otherwise become subject to assessment and/or collection under this article. (Ordinance 2017-10 adopted 6/6/17)
ARTICLE 10.04 VESTED RIGHTS
Sec. 10.04.001 Recognition
(a) Law. Under state law, each application for permit or plat approval shall be processed pursuant to the
regulations in effect at the time of the application unless the applicant has applied for and obtained a letter of
recognition of vested rights for the permit or project for which the permit is sought.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of a vested rights recognition application is to determine the regulations by which an
application for approval of a permit or plat is to be processed.
(c) Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings hereinafter ascribed to them:
Chapter 245. Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code, as may be amended.
Permit. Has the meaning set forth in Texas Local Government Code chapter 245, as may be amended.
Progress. Has the meaning set forth in Texas Local Government Code chapter 245, as may be amended.
Project. Has the meaning set forth in Texas Local Government Code chapter 245, as may be amended.
Vested right. The right of a person to develop a project that complies only with ordinances and other
development regulations in effect on the date a plan for development or the first application for the project was
filed with the town.
(d) Applicability. An owner of property, or the owner's authorized agent, may submit an application for
recognition of vested rights for the property:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/665
(1) With an application for approval of a plat, zoning change, building permit or any other permit;
or
(2) To prevent expiration of a plat.
(e) Effect. If recognition of vested rights is issued in whole or in part, the [town official] shall issue a letter
which shall specify the regulations which apply to an application and the application shall be processed in
accordance with the regulations specified in the letter. If the application for recognition is to prevent expiration
of an approved plat, the plat otherwise subject to expiration shall be extended as provided in the letter.
(f) Types of vested rights. A person may claim vested rights under common law, a federal or state statute, the
state or federal constitution, or chapter 245. For vested rights claimed under chapter 245, the definition of
“permit” in chapter 245 shall apply to applications submitted pursuant to this article.
(g) Exemptions. This article shall not apply to the types of ordinances or other governmental actions
enumerated in Texas Local Government Code section 245.004 regardless of the effective date of the ordinance
or the existence of vested rights for a project.
(h) Duration. This article and any letter of recognition issued hereunder shall not extend the time of validity
for any permit or project. Any rights recognized by a letter issued pursuant to this article shall not extend beyond
the expiration date prescribed by ordinance for the permit(s) submitted for recognition.
(Ordinance 2007-8-7A, sec. 1, adopted 8/7/07)
Sec. 10.04.002 Requirements for application
(a) Who may apply. A property owner or the owner's authorized agent may submit an application for
recognition of vested rights with an application for approval of a plat or building permit, or at any time for a plat
prior to its expiration date established by the subdivision ordinance.
(b) Fee. The applicant shall submit a completed application together with a permit application review fee in
the amount of dollars ($ ) or such fee as subsequently determined by ordinance or resolution of the
town council, and three (3) copies of any documents on which the applicant is relying to establish vested rights.
(c) Form of application. The application shall state that the applicant has a vested right for some or all of the
land for which the permit is sought under chapter 245 or another statute, or other state or federal law that
requires the town to review and decide the application under regulations in effect prior to the effective date of
the currently applicable regulations. The application shall include the following:
(1) The name, mailing address, phone number and fax number of the applicant;
(2) The name, mailing address, phone number and fax number of the property owner, if different
than the applicant;
(3) Identification of the property for which the applicant claims a vested right, including a legal
description of the exact boundaries of the property encompassed by the project;
(4) A description of the project for which the application is submitted, how the project was
commenced, and the date of commencement of the project;
(5) Layout of the site, including locations of buildings, streets, utilities and drainage facilities;
(6) Identification of the original application for the first permit in the series of permits required for
the project, as described in Local Government Code section 245.001(1) and section 245.002(a) and
(b), as may be amended;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/665
(7) The date that the first permit in the series of permits required for the project was filed with the
town;
(8) Identification of the regulations which the applicant contends apply to the project and the
specific parts of the project which are subject to vesting;
(9) A copy of any prior recognition of vested rights by the town involving the same land; and
(10) If the applicant alleges that a plat subject to expiration under a town ordinance should not be
terminated, a description of the events, including any plat or other development applications on file
that should prevent termination.
(d) An application for recognition of vested rights shall not be considered to have been filed with the town
until such time as the application is administratively complete. To be administratively complete, the application
must meet the following requirements:
(1) Contain all materials and information required by this article; and
(2) Be accompanied by a check payable to the town for the application review fee.
(e) No letter of recognition of vested rights shall be issued unless the applicant has demonstrated compliance
with the following criteria, as applicable:
(1) For statutory vested rights:
(A) The applicant filed an application for a permit as provided in chapter 245 prior to
adoption of the regulations against which vested rights are claimed; and
(B) The regulations against which vested rights are claimed are not subject to an exemption
as provided in Local Government Code section 245.004; and
(C) The project has not become dormant as defined in Texas Local Government Code section
245.005; and/or
(2) For recognition of vested rights under common law or the federal or state constitution,
applicant is in compliance with any other factor which may be required to establish vested rights
under the state or federal constitution.
(Ordinance 2007-8-7A, sec. 2, adopted 8/7/07)
Sec. 10.04.003 Processing of application
(a) Review and determination. The [town official] may require the submission of additional evidence relevant
to support the applicant's claim for recognition. The [town official] shall process the application and forward a
copy of the application to the town attorney following acceptance. Upon review of the application and evidence,
the [town official] shall make a determination as to whether the applicant is entitled, in whole or in part, to
recognition of vested rights for a permit. If the evidence presented by the applicant establishes that the permit for
which approval is sought is part of a project which is vested under chapter 245, the [town official] shall issue a
letter of recognition of such rights. If the [town official] finds that the applicant is not entitled to recognition of
vested rights, he shall notify the applicant of the basis for his findings.
(b) Substantial change. A substantial change to a project denies the town, and the public, of fair notice. Where
the [town official] determines that the project for which the applicant seeks vested rights has undergone a
substantial change since its inception, recognition of vested rights shall be denied. Examples of substantial
change include, but are not limited to, modifications of the following characteristics of a project:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/665
(1) Gross surface area or acreage;
(2) Gross floor area;
(3) Gross number of buildings;
(4) Density; or
(5) Living unit equivalents;
(6) Land use classification;
(7) Impervious cover;
(8) Drainage pattern or volumes;
(9) Street layouts;
(10) Additional curb cuts or driveways; or
(11) Orientation of buildings.
(Ordinance 2007-8-7A, sec. 3, adopted 8/7/07)
Sec. 10.04.004 Appeal
(a) Who may appeal. The applicant may appeal the [town official]'s decision on the application for vested
rights determination to the town council. An appeal under this section stays acceptance by filing of any related
development applications.
(b) Process. The application for appeal shall be made in writing to the town secretary and shall state the basis
for requesting the appeal. The appeal shall be made within 10 days of the date of the letter. The town secretary
shall schedule a hearing before the town council within 30 days of the date the appeal is submitted.
(c) Appeal of council decision. A person dissatisfied with the decision of the town council may appeal the
decision to a court within the county in which the property is located. The person shall file the appeal with the
court within 30 days of the decision of the town council. If no appeal is filed, the decision of the town council
shall be final.
(Ordinance 2007-8-7A, sec. 4, adopted 8/7/07)
Sec. 10.04.005 Expirations
(a) A permit issued by the town that is subject to chapter 245, but does not expressly contain an expiration
date, shall expire by operation of law two years after issuance. This subsection shall not apply to permits
pursuant to which progress has been made toward the completion of the project, as determined by Local
Government Code section 245.005(c), as may be amended.
(b) A project subject to chapter 245 shall expire by operation of law five years after an application was filed
for the first permit necessary for the project. This subsection shall not apply to permits for which progress has
been made toward the completion of the project.
(Ordinance 2007-8-7A, sec. 5, adopted 8/7/07)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/665
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 11.01.001 Assessment and collection of taxes by county
(a) The town hereby designates the tax assessor/collector of the county, in compliance with Tex. Tax Code
section 6.22(c), hereafter be authorized and required to assess and collect taxes for the town, and to perform all
the duties relating to the assessment and collection of such taxes provided by the laws of the state.
(b) All taxes collected by the county tax assessor/collector for the town, including any penalties or interest
which may be due thereon, and less any fees for such collection due the county, shall be remitted to the town
weekly.
(c) On or about September 1 of each year the town shall deliver to the county tax assessor/collector the current
certified tax roll for the town, including the ad valorem tax rate and any special assessment to be collected for
the town.
(d) The town shall deliver to the possession and control of the county tax assessor/collector copies of all
records necessary for the performance of the duties and responsibilities for the collection of ad valorem taxes,
specifically including the delinquent tax roll which includes sufficient detail to be able to prepare a tax bill in
accordance with Tex. Tax Code section 31.01.
(e) In accordance with Tex. Tax Code section 6.27(b), the tax assessor/collector is entitled to a reasonable fee
for assessing and collecting taxes, not to exceed $0.75 per parcel on the current year certified tax roll on which
taxes may be collected, to be deducted from December collections.
(1998 Code, sec. 39.05)
Sec. 11.01.002 Goods in transit
Goods in transit, as defined under Texas Tax Code, section 11.253(a)(2), as amended by Senate Bill 1, enacted
by the 82nd Texas Legislature in its first called session, shall remain and be subject to taxation by the town.
(Ordinance 2011-11-8B adopted 11/8/11)
State law reference–Tax exemption for goods in transit, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.253.
ARTICLE 11.02 TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES TAX†
Sec. 11.02.001 Levy; rate
A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the town. For purposes of this section,
the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other
telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot
be determined, the sale is consummated at the same address to which the call or other communication is billed.
The rate of the tax imposed shall be the same as the rate imposed by the town for all other sales and use taxes as
authorized by the legislature of the state. The town secretary shall forward to the comptroller of the state by
registered U.S. mail a copy of this section along with a copy of the minutes of the town council's vote and
discussion of this section. (1998 Code, sec. 39.07)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/665
Sec. 11.02.002 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of section 11.02.001 shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction be subject to a fine in accordance with the general provisions of the Code of
Ordinances. (1998 Code, sec. 39.99(A))
ARTICLE 11.03 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX*
Sec. 11.03.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Consideration. The cost of the room in the hotel as measured in U.S. dollars, only if the room is only ordinarily
used for sleeping, and shall not include the cost of any food served by the hotel or the cost of personal services
rendered by the hotel to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for
occupancy. Charges not stated separately shall be presumed to be part of the consideration paid for occupancy of
a sleeping room or sleeping facility and shall be taxed under this article.
Hotel. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations.
The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, or
other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but “hotel” shall not be defined so as to include
hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes.
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel if the room is one
ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession, or right to use or possession extends for a
period of less than 30 days.
Occupant. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel
if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping. This term applies regardless of whether such use, possession, or a
right to use or possession is arranged under a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or other
agreement.
Permanent resident. Any occupant who has or shall have the right of occupancy of any room or rooms or
sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding
year.
Quarterly period. The regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being the months of October,
November and December, the second quarter being the months of January, February and March, the third quarter
being the months of April, May and June, and the fourth quarter being the months of July, August and
September.
Town manager. The town manager of the Town of Fairview, Texas, or his or her designee.
Sec. 11.03.002 Levy; rate
(a) Authorization. There is hereby levied a tax upon the occupant for the cost of, or consideration paid for, the
use, possession, or the right to use or possess any sleeping room or sleeping space furnished by any hotel, and
such tax shall apply whether paid under or through a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract,
or other agreement.
(b) Tax rate. The tax shall be equal to 7% of the total consideration provided by an occupant for a sleeping
room or sleeping space, said consideration to include all goods and services provided by the hotel which are not
ordinarily subject to sales tax.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/665
(c) Presumption of taxability. For the purpose of proper administration of the tax, it is presumed that all
amounts contributing to the total cost of, or the total consideration paid for, a sleeping room are subject to the tax
until the contrary is established, and the burden of proving that any amount is not taxable is upon the party
collecting the tax.
(d) Exceptions.
(1) There shall be no tax on the cost of, or consideration paid for, occupancy of a hotel sleeping
room or sleeping facility priced at less than two dollars ($2.00) per day.
(2) Other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies are excluded in determining
the total consideration paid for a room or space which is the subject of the tax levied by this article.
(3) The cost or consideration paid for a room or space occupied by a permanent guest is not subject
to this tax.
(4) There can be no occupancy tax on the consideration paid directly by the United States Treasury
if the constitutional exemption is invoked. This exception is not extended to employees of the federal
government or any local government who pay the consideration for the room or space without the
federal government being a party to the contract.
Sec. 11.03.003 Disposition of revenue
The revenue derived from this tax will only be used for the purposes as authorized by applicable state law. The
town manager, upon approval by the town council, may contract with an approved organization for the
disposition of revenues from this tax.
Sec. 11.03.004 Collection by operator
(a) All parties owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in section
11.03.002 for the town. As used in this article, the term “controlling” includes but is not limited to accepting
occupant reservations for rooms in a hotel if the occupant makes or pays a deposit, advance payment, or other
service fee associated with or attributable to the use, possession, or any right to use or possess a sleeping room
or space whether or not such charges are separately listed in an invoice, transaction receipt, or other list of
charges provided to the occupant.
(b) All parties collecting the subject tax are hereby authorized to deduct and withhold from the party's
payment to the town, as reimbursement for the cost of collecting the tax, 1% of the amount of tax collected and
required to be reported to the town.
(c) All parties collecting the subject tax shall forfeit the 1% reimbursement for failure to pay the tax or to file
reports as required by this article.
Sec. 11.03.005 Reports
(a) Every person required to collect the tax by section 11.03.004 shall file a report with the town manager
showing: the consideration paid for all sleeping room or sleeping space occupancies in the preceding month; the
amount of tax collected on such occupancies; and any other useful and relevant information as the town manager
may reasonably require. This report is timely if filed on the tenth day following the end of each monthly period.
(b) Every person required to collect the tax by section 11.03.004 shall provide the town with a copy of all
reports related to sleeping room or sleeping space occupancy filed with the state comptroller. This report is
timely filed with the town if filed no later than 10 days from the last day of each quarterly period.
(c) Persons filing reports under subsections (a) or (b) shall pay the tax due to the town on such occupancies at
the time of filing such report.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/665
Sec. 11.03.006 Rules and regulations; access to records
The town manager shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect
the tax levied herein, and the town manager shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records
necessary to enable him or her to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the
amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article.
Sec. 11.03.007 Penalty; delinquency
(a) If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed in this article or shall fail to file a report as required
herein, or shall fail to pay to the town manager the tax as imposed herein when said report or payment is due, or
shall file a false report, then such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be
punished by a fine of no less than $100.00, but not to exceed the sum of $500.00, for each offense, and each and
every day such offense shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(b) In addition, such person who fails to remit the tax imposed by section 11.03.002 within the time required
shall forfeit 5% of the amount due as a penalty and after the first 30 days shall forfeit an additional 5% of such
tax; provided, however, the penalty shall never be less than $1.00. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate
of 10% per annum beginning 60 days from the date due.
(c) The penalties described in subsections (a) and (b) are in addition to other available remedies, including
civil suits authorized by section 11.03.008. The town's prosecution of, or decision not to prosecute, a person
failing to timely remit the tax or file required reports shall have no effect on any other remedy available to the
town.
(d) Payment of any fine or penalty shall not reduce the tax due to the town by a person found to have violated
this article.
Sec. 11.03.008 Suit to enjoin hotel operations
(a) The town manager shall refer any hotel occupancy tax account that has a delinquent balance older than
sixty days to the town attorney for the purpose of filing a suit to enjoin the hotel owner, operator, manager, and
other persons in control from operating any hotel in the town until the tax is paid and/or the appropriate report
filed. This remedy shall be in addition to any collection suit, municipal court criminal complaint, or other
remedy available to the town.
(b) The town attorney is authorized to bring suit against a person who is required to collect the tax imposed by
this article and pay the collections over to the municipality and who has failed to file a tax report or pay the tax
when due to collect the tax not paid or to enjoin the person from operating a hotel in the municipality until the
tax is paid or the report filed, as applicable, as provided by the court's order. In addition to the amount of tax
owed under this chapter, the person is liable to the municipality for:
(1) The town's reasonable attorney's fees;
(2) The costs of an audit conducted in accordance with Texas Tax Code, chapter 351 (as amended),
as determined by the town using a reasonable rate, but only if the tax has been delinquent for at least
two complete quarterly periods at the time the audit is conducted; and
(3) A penalty equal to 15 percent of the total amount of the tax owed.
(c) The remedies provided by this section are in addition to other available remedies. The town's filing of suit
in accordance with this section shall have no effect on any other remedy available to the town.
Sec. 11.03.009 Surety bond in lieu of injunction suit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/665
The town manager shall not be required to refer a delinquent account to the town attorney for the purpose of
enjoining the hotel operators from doing business in the town if the owner, manager, operator, or other person(s)
in control provides an acceptable surety bond in an amount equal to the municipal hotel occupancy tax collected
on behalf of the subject hotel in the six best net revenue months of the twelve full calendar months immediately
prior to the acquisition of the bond, said bond to ensure payment for a one-year period, and be updated and
approved by the town manager annually if said hotel operators desire to continue such protection from businessclosing
during a period of delinquency.
(Ordinance 2012-1-3D adopted 1/3/12)
ARTICLE 11.04 PROPERTY TAX
Sec. 11.04.001 Homestead exemptions
Pursuant to the Texas Property Tax Code, an adult who is disabled or is 65 years or older is entitled to an
exemption from taxation by the town of $60,000.00 of the appraised value of his residential homestead. Disabled
means that an adult suffers a disability for purposes of payment of disability insurance under the Federal Old
Age Survivors or Disability Insurance Act. (Ordinance 2008-9-16B adopted 9/16/08)
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 Penalty
(a) Whenever in this chapter an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or wherever in this chapter the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared
to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is otherwise provided in this Code of Ordinances, the violation shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00; provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the
penalty provided for the same or a similar offense of the laws of the state.
(b) Each day a violation of this code or of any ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(1998 Code, sec. 70.99)
ARTICLE 12.02 OPERATION OF VEHICLES†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.02.001 School zones; signs
(a) A person commits an offense if he/she operates or drives a vehicle in a school zone in the following
designated areas or on the following designated streets at a speed greater than the speed designated by this
section for that area or street or portion thereof, and any speed in excess of the limit provided in this section shall
be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable nor prudent and is unlawful. Based on recommendations
of the town engineer, the town council shall designate school zones with appropriate street markings, warnings
or signs, which street markings, warnings or signs shall be placed at the school zones by the town engineer. The
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/665
speed limit designated for school zones shall be effective only at times when appropriate flashing warnings
and/or signs advising motorists of the speed limit are placed in conspicuous places.
(b) In accordance with the recommendations of the town engineer, the following designated locations,
measured from centerline of roadway to centerline of roadway, and areas are declared to be school zones and the
maximum speed limit for all motor vehicles operated within such areas and locations and on such streets on
school days, when either a flashing warning signal is in operation, or when appropriate signs are in place and
conspicuous shall be as follows:
(Ordinance 2008-8-5F adopted 8/5/08)
(1) Sloan Creek Middle School. Thirty-five (35) miles per hour. Located at 90 feet north of the
northern school property line to 90 feet south of the southern school property line, a distance of 1,059
feet. (Ordinance 2009-12-1B adopted 12/1/09)
(2) Puster Elementary School. Twenty (20) miles per hour. Hart Road, from its western terminus
east a distance of 1,650 feet; and Stoddard Road, from the southern right-of-way of FM 1378 to the
southern terminus of Stoddard.
(c) School days, as that term is used herein, shall be each Monday through Friday throughout the calendar
year when the school nearest the school zone is in session, and for purposes of this section, shall include the time
period between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on such days.
(Ordinance 2008-8-5F adopted 8/5/08)
Secs. 12.02.002–12.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Speed Limits**
Sec. 12.02.031 Generally
(a) (1) No person shall operate or drive any motor vehicle on any street within the town at a
greater speed than 25 miles per hour, unless signs are erected designating another speed in
accordance with this section.
(2) No person shall operate or drive any motor vehicle on any alley within the town at a greater
speed than 15 miles per hour, unless signs are erected designating another speed in accordance with
this section.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no person shall drive a motor vehicle on a street at a
speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential
hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with
any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street in compliance with legal requirements and the
duty of all persons to use due care.
(c) The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of subsection (b), drive at an
appropriate reduced speed when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway,
and when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians, children, bridges or other traffic or by reason of
weather or street or road conditions.
(d) The town council may alter the maximum speed limit of 25 miles per hour, as established by subsections
(a) through (c), on any street or portion thereof within the town in accord with the provisions of Tex. Transp.
Code section 545.356. Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established
for a particular street or portion thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a
rate of speed in excess of such limit.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/665
(e) The provisions of this section and other ordinances of the town regulating the speed of vehicles shall not
apply to vehicles of the fire department when responding to a call, nor to police patrols, nor to physicians or
ambulances when actually engaged in responding to emergency calls.
(1998 Code, sec. 70.01)
State law reference–Prima facie speed limits, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.352.
Sec. 12.02.032 Determination of limits; posting of signs
The director of traffic control shall determine on the basis of engineering and traffic surveys the reasonable and
safe maximum speed limits for each street within the town and submit recommendations based upon his
investigation to the town council. On the basis of the recommendations of the director of traffic control, the town
council may alter the maximum speed limit established by this code as the council deems necessary. The director
of traffic control shall post the maximum and minimum speeds established by this code by appropriate signs in
conspicuous places so that every motorist may be aware of the speed limits. The director of public works shall
serve as the director of traffic control in the absence of other specific appointment. (1998 Code, sec. 70.02)
Sec. 12.02.033 Speed limits on specific streets
Ordinances establishing speed limits for specific streets or portions of streets have not been included in this
code, but all such ordinances are on file in the town secretary's office and are specifically saved from repeal
upon adoption of the Code of Ordinances. A person commits an offense if he operates or drives a vehicle on the
designated streets at a speed greater than the speed designated by the schedule on file in the town secretary's
office for that street or portion of that street, and any speed in excess of the limit provided in the schedule shall
be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable nor prudent and is unlawful. (1998 Code, ch. 71, sched.
I; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 12.02.034–12.02.060 Reserved
Division 3. Stop Signs*
Sec. 12.02.061 Locations
Stop signs as are authorized in writing by the public works director shall be erected and maintained by the town.
(1998 Code, sec. 70.03(A))
Sec. 12.02.062 Observance
Except when directed to proceed by a police officer, every driver of a motor vehicle approaching a stop
intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection
or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but, if none, then at the point
nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection. (1998 Code, sec. 70.03(B))
State law references–Manner of stopping at stop or yield sign, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.010; vehicle entering stop or
yield intersection, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.153.
Sec. 12.02.063 Standards
Every said sign shall conform to the manual and specifications for uniform traffic-control devices as adopted by
the state department of transportation. Every stop or yield sign shall be located as near as practicable at the
nearest line of the crosswalk thereat, or, if none, at the nearest line of the roadway. (1998 Code, sec. 70.03(C))
Secs. 12.02.064–12.02.090 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/665
Division 4. Golf Carts and Undersized Motor Vehicles in Public Areas
Sec. 12.02.091 Definitions
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Golf cart. A motor vehicle designed by the manufacturer primarily for transporting persons on a golf course, and has a
normal maximum speed between 15 and 25 mph.
Motor carrier. An individual, association, corporation, or other legal entity that controls, operates, or directs the operation
of one or more vehicles that transport persons or cargo over a road or highway in this state.
Public street. A publicly owned or dedicated road, street, drive, or other right-of-way for the use of vehicles within the
corporate boundaries of the town; this definition does not include public sidewalks or trails.
Undersized motor vehicle. A golf cart and all those classes of vehicles qualifying for issuance of license plates from the
Texas Department of Motor Vehicles under Texas Transportation Code sec. 551.452, including all-terrain vehicles,
neighborhood electric vehicles, recreational off-highway vehicle, or utility vehicle.
Sec. 12.02.092 Minimum requirements
A person may operate a golf cart or other undersized motor vehicle on a public street if all of the following conditions are
met:
(1) The time when the undersized motor vehicle is being operated is after sunrise and before
sunset;
(2) The maximum posted speed limit on the public street is thirty (30) miles per hour or less (or the
undersized motor vehicle is on a public street that has a posted speed limit of more than thirty (30)
miles per hour and the undersized motor vehicle is otherwise legally crossing at an intersection of
such public street); except for motor carriers picking up or delivering mail, parcels, or packages, who
may operate undersized motor vehicles on roads having speed limits of thirty-five (35) miles per hour
or less;
(3) The person has a valid drivers license;
(4) The person maintains current financial responsibility for the undersized motor vehicle, as
required of other passenger vehicles in Texas Transportation Code section 601.051;
(5) The person complies with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and ordinances governing
the operation of the undersized motor vehicle;
(6) The person is the holder of an undersized motor vehicle permit duly issued by the town under
section 12.02.094 of this division and has said permit on the undersized motor vehicle;
(7) The undersized motor vehicle has the following equipment in good working condition:
(A) Headlamps;
(B) Tail lamps;
(C) Reflectors;
(D) Parking brake;
(E) Horn;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/665
(F) Mirrors;
(G) A slow moving vehicle emblem;
(H) For undersized motor vehicles purchased after the effective date of this division, brake
lights; and
(8) The vehicle bears a valid license plate issued by the Texas Department of Motor Vehicles if
required under applicable state law; and
(9) Vehicles owned and operated by the town are exempt from the requirements of this division.
Sec. 12.02.093 Additional regulations
(a) While a golf cart or undersized motor vehicle is in motion on a public street, the driver and every
passenger in the vehicle must be seated in a seat designed to hold passengers. No person may stand, or ride in
the lap of the driver and/or other passenger of a golf cart while it is moving on a public street. The number of
passengers riding in an undersized motor vehicle may not exceed the number of riders that the vehicle is
designed to transport.
(b) Animals riding in an undersized motor vehicle that is operated on a public street must be reasonably
secured (i.e. safety harness, crate, passenger's lap).
(c) Any person operating an undersized motor vehicle on a public street must use proper hand signaling to
illustrate intent of direction being traveled, or the undersized motor vehicle must be equipped with turn signal
lamps.
(d) In any park containing playground equipment, undersized motor vehicles are not permitted to be operated
or parked more than 6 feet from paved sidewalks or hike and bike trails.
Sec. 12.02.094 Permit requirement
(a) Before operating a golf cart or undersized motor vehicle on a public street a person must possess an
unexpired town-issued undersized motor vehicle permit. An initial permit fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) must be
paid to the town for the issuance of a new permit, which shall be valid for a period of two years. A biennial
renewal fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) is required to be paid to the town to maintain the permit. The permit does
not constitute a property right. In addition to other applicable penalties, the town may suspend or revoke a townissued
permit held by a person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the requirements under this
division. Persons who receive town-issued permits will receive permit stickers that must be affixed to the front
and rear of the undersized motor vehicle as set forth in further detail herein.
(b) The registration permit process includes the following specifics:
(1) The applicant shall complete the town-supplied registration permit application form, which
shall contain the:
(A) Name and address of the applicant and owner of the undersized motor vehicle;
(B) Location where the vehicle is regularly stored overnight;
(C) Model, make, name and golf cart or undersized motor vehicle identification number;
(D) Current driver's license number of applicant;
(E) Statement that all operators are required to be licensed pursuant to Texas Transportation
Code sections 521.001(3) and 521.021, as amended, and that all equipment required under
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/665
division is installed and will be kept current during the registration period;
(F) Statement that the registration permit holder and any user shall indemnify and hold
harmless the town, for any and all civil liability associated with said registration, and waives
any and all rights to sue or allow subrogation by insurance company; and
(G) Other information the town may require.
(2) The permit application shall be:
(A) Accompanied by a fee of $60.00;
(B) Accompanied by proof of financial responsibility consistent with the minimum
requirements of Texas Transportation Code section 601.051, as amended, for operation of
motor vehicles. Applicant owner must also show their original driver's license and shall provide
copies of both the owner's drivers license and proof of financial responsibility; and
(C) Signed by the applicant.
(3) Upon issuance, the permit stickers shall be attached and displayed upon the right front panel
(driver's side) of the undersized motor vehicle and upon the left rear panel so as to be clearly visible.
Sec. 12.02.095 Prohibition against operating golf carts and undersized motor vehicles in public parks and on
public trails and sidewalks
The operation of a golf cart or undersized motor vehicle in any area designated by the town as a public park or trail, or
which comprises a public sidewalk, is strictly prohibited.
(Ordinance 2017-22 adopted 10/4/17)
ARTICLE 12.03 PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.03.001 Parking prohibited on certain streets
(a) Ordinances prohibiting parking on specific streets or portions of streets have not been included in this
code, but all such ordinances are on file in the town secretary's office and are specifically saved from repeal
upon adoption of the Code of Ordinances. No person shall park, stop, or stand any motor vehicle, boat, trailer,
recreational vehicle, or camper on the portions of the named streets on file in the town secretary's office.
(b) It shall be unlawful to park a commercial semi-tractor, tractor-trailer rig, or any trailer of more than fifteen
feet (15') in length on any public street or roadway for any purpose other than loading or unloading, and in no
case shall such vehicle or trailer be parked on a public street or roadway overnight.
Sec. 12.03.002 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the definitions provided by the Texas Transportation Code shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Official sign. Includes standard traffic regulatory, advisory and informational signs and pavement and/or curb
markings approved by the traffic director.
Smart key. An electronic device that can disengage the ignition lock of a motor vehicle and activate the ignition
without inserting a key in the ignition.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/665
Sec. 12.03.003 Signs or markings indicating angle parking
The town traffic director shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or
sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal-aid or state highway within the
town unless the Texas Department of Transportation has determined that the roadway is of sufficient width to
permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
Sec. 12.03.004 Designation of loading zones
The town traffic director is hereby authorized to determine the location of approved loading zones and passenger
loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs and/or markings indicating the same and stating the
hours during which such restrictions are applicable. If the town traffic director does not erect a sign or a marking
indicating the hours when restrictions under this section are applicable, the restrictions are deemed to be
effective 24 hours per day.
Sec. 12.03.005 Unattended motor vehicles
An operator may not leave a vehicle unattended without stopping the engine, removing the key from the ignition
switch and locking the ignition switch (or removing the smart key from the passenger compartment for vehicles
with keyless ignition systems in a manner that prevents an unauthorized operator to use the smart key to activate
the ignition), and–if standing on a grade–setting the parking brake effectively and turning the front wheels to the
curb or side of the highway.
Sec. 12.03.006 Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places
(a) An operator may not stop, stand, or park a vehicle:
(1) On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
(2) On a sidewalk;
(3) In an intersection;
(4) On a crosswalk;
(5) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within 30 feet of a place on the curb
immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the town traffic director designates a different
length by signs or markings;
(6) Alongside or opposite a street excavation or obstruction if stopping, standing, or parking the
vehicle would obstruct traffic;
(7) On a bridge or other elevated structure on a highway or in a highway tunnel;
(8) On a railroad track; or
(9) Where an official sign prohibits stopping.
(b) An operator may not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger, stand or park an occupied or
unoccupied vehicle:
(1) In front of a public or private driveway;
(2) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
(3) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/665
(4) Within 30 feet on the approach to a flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic-control
signal located at the side of a roadway;
(5) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station and on the side of a street opposite the
entrance to a fire station within 75 feet of the entrance, if the entrance is properly marked with a sign;
or
(6) Where an official sign prohibits standing.
(c) An operator may not, except temporarily to load or unload merchandise or passengers, park an occupied or
unoccupied vehicle:
(1) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; or
(2) Where an official sign prohibits parking.
(d) A person may stop, stand, or park a bicycle on a sidewalk if the bicycle does not impede the normal and
reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic on the sidewalk.
(e) Subsections (a), (b), and (c) do not apply if the avoidance of conflict with other traffic is necessary or if the
operator is complying with the law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.
Sec. 12.03.007 Parking not to obstruct traffic
(a) No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular
traffic.
(b) No person shall park any vehicle upon the street in such a manner or under such conditions as to cause the
obstruction of pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk area.
(c) No person shall park any vehicle upon the street within 25 feet of a construction site or construction
barricades.
Sec. 12.03.008 Impoundment of standing or parked vehicles–Generally
(a) Authority. Any vehicle which shall be, or remain, standing or parked upon any public street, avenue, way,
alley, or other public place may be removed by or upon order of the chief of police, or any police officer
designated by the chief of police, and placed in storage in a privately operated garage or other place designated
or maintained by the town, under the following circumstances set forth in subsection (b) of this section.
(b) Removal and storage circumstances. The circumstance for removal and placement in storage is when any
vehicle is left standing or parked unattended for more than 24 hours in violation of any applicable section of this
code, the state law or town ordinances, rules or regulations; provided that, in the event such vehicle is parked or
standing immediately in front of or immediately adjacent to property owned by the owner of such vehicle, or
property rented by such owner, before such vehicle shall be removed, the owner thereof shall be given written
notice after the expiration of 24 hours and shall be given an additional 24 hours to remove or cause to be
removed such vehicle. Such written notice may be given by depositing the same in the United States mail,
addressed to the owner at the address given on the registration receipt of the vehicle, or his last known address.
Any vehicle moved during any given 24-hour period and relocated within 100 feet from the original parking
space shall not be entitled to have the 24-hour period tolled.
(c) Notice to owner. Should a vehicle be removed under the provisions of this section, a notice shall be mailed
on or before the next business day after the vehicle is towed for a vehicle registered in the state, and no later than
the fourteenth calendar day after the vehicle is towed for a vehicle registered outside of the state, to the owner of
the vehicle by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the last address shown for the owner according to the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/665
vehicle's registration records. Said notice shall state a description of the vehicle, that the vehicle was parked in
violation of this division, a description of the location where the vehicle was parked, that the vehicle was towed
and stored at the expense of the owner or operator of the vehicle, and a telephone number that is generally
answered 24 hours per day to enable the owner or operator to locate the vehicle.
Sec. 12.03.009 Same–Liability of town
The provisions of section 12.03.008 shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any
person who shall leave his vehicle parked on the streets of the town in such a manner that the vehicle may be
impounded; nor shall the town be held as assuming any liability by reason of impounding or causing to be
impounded such vehicle.
Sec. 12.03.010 Special parking
(a) The town traffic director with the concurrence of the chief of police may issue special permits for a
definite period of time to allow parking of an unusual nature which may be contrary to or in violation of any of
the provisions of this article.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to use a permit provided under subsection (a) of this section for
purposes, places, or times other than those which are clearly indicated in the written permit.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person other than those named in the permit to use such permit for any purpose
whatsoever.
Sec. 12.03.011 Fire lane zones on private and public property
(a) Designation. For the purpose of providing a speedy and unobstructed passage for fire equipment of the
town en route to extinguish a fire or to protect property from fire or for access to water hydrants, the fire marshal
is hereby authorized and empowered to establish and designate fire lanes upon the premises of any business,
commercial, or industrial establishment, or multiple-family dwelling or upon public property for the purpose of
providing access to such property for firefighting equipment.
(b) Marking. When a fire lane is designated in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, the fire marshal
shall cause to be marked along the perimeter of such fire lane, with conspicuous signs, which comply with the
International Fire Code as adopted by the town.
(c) Parking of nonemergency vehicles declared unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or
leave standing any nonemergency vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in a designated fire lane; except for
the immediate loading or discharging of passengers or to comply with other traffic-control devices.
(d) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a penalty of fine
not to exceed the sum of $2,000.00 or the highest amount allowed by law, whichever is less, for each offense and
each and every day such offense shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 12.03.012 Regulation of certain parking on private property
It shall be unlawful for any person, or any owner, to leave, park, or stand any truck tractor, semitrailer, bus, truck
or trailer with a rated capacity in excess of 1-1/2 tons, according to the manufacturer's classification, upon
nonresidentially zoned property unless such parking or standing is in conjunction with an accessory to an
approved on-premises use.
Sec. 12.03.013 Presumption; registered owner responsible for violations by certain operators
(a) In any prosecution for an offense under state law involving the stopping, standing, or parking of an
unattended motor vehicle, it is presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle is the person who stopped,
stood, or parked the vehicle at the time and place the offense occurred. A computer-generated record of the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/665
Texas Department of Transportations' files showing the current registered owner is prima facie evidence of the
contents of the record.
(b) For all provisions of this chapter that prohibit the stopping, standing, or parking of an unattended motor
vehicle, a registered owner of a motor vehicle commits an offense by causing, allowing, permitting, or suffering
another person to stop, stand, or park that motor vehicle in violation of this article. If any registered owner of a
vehicle operated in violation of this article is a corporation, trust, partnership, or other legal construct, the
president, secretary, or treasurer of such corporation, the trustee(s) of such trust, the general partner(s) of such
partnership, or any manager, agent, or employee of such legal construct are severally responsible for such
violation and the penalty provided therefor.
(c) The registered owner and the operator of the vehicle, when not the same, are jointly and severally
responsible to the town for a violation of this article relating to stopping, standing, or parking.
(d) The registered owner will not be held liable if the registered owner proves (in the manner of an affirmative
defense under Texas Penal Code section 2.04) that the vehicle was operated without his or her express or implied
consent. A report made to police that the registered owner's vehicle was stolen shall be prima facie evidence that
the operation of the vehicle was without the registered owner's consent, so long as the report was made prior to
the violation in question.
(e) A registered owner in the business of renting vehicles will not be held liable if the lessor supplies a sworn
affidavit to the town which provides:
(1) All information necessary to verify the registered owner's status as a lessor of motor vehicles;
(2) That no employee or agent of the lessor was operating the vehicle at the time of the offense;
(3) Includes the lessee's full name, current address information, and driver's license number; and
(4) An attached copy of the signed rental agreement listing all persons authorized to operate the
rental vehicle.
Said affidavit must be received by the town no later than 30 days following the date of violation to claim the
exemption from liability provided by this subsection. This section does not prohibit anyone engaged in the
business of renting motor vehicles from accepting liability for an operator's violation of this article and pursuing
compensation from the lessee in accordance with the provisions of a rental contract or other law.
Sec. 12.03.014 Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code.
(Ordinance 2014-8-5A, sec. 2, adopted 8/5/14)
Secs. 12.03.015–12.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Parking Vehicle for Sale Visible from Public Roadway
Sec. 12.03.031 Penalty
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction be subject to a fine in accordance with the general provisions of the town
Code of Ordinances. (1998 Code, sec. 100.99)
Sec. 12.03.032 Prohibition; exceptions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/665
(a) No person shall park, stop, or stand on public or private property any motor vehicle, boat, trailer,
recreational vehicle, or camper (collectively called “vehicle” or “vehicles”) having displayed thereon any
writing indicating that such vehicle is for sale and which is visible from a public roadway. However, a vehicle
thus indicated for sale may be parked on a lot, parcel, or tract of land owned or occupied by the registered owner
of said vehicle under the following conditions:
(1) The vehicle is registered to the same address at which it is presented for sale;
(2) The period during which the vehicle is permitted for sale on any one lot, parcel, or tract of land
does not exceed 30 days in duration in any single calendar year;
(3) No more than one vehicle is presented for sale on the premises of the owner/occupier at the
same time; and
(4) The vehicle presented for sale in no way encroaches on or interferes with the public way or
otherwise obscures the vision of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any public roadway so as to cause
a safety hazard.
(b) A violation of this section shall constitute a class C misdemeanor.
(c) The provisions of this division shall not apply to a vehicle parked in an area having both a certificate of
occupancy issued by the town for the sale of vehicles and a license from the state department of transportation
for the sale of vehicles at that location, nor shall it apply in an area that is designed and used for the purpose of
parking a vehicle while the owner of said vehicle is transacting business thereon.
(1998 Code, sec. 100.01)
Sec. 12.03.033 Towing of vehicles
(a) The town manager or his or her designee may, after receiving authorization from the town police
department, without the consent of the owner or operator of a vehicle parked in violation of this division, cause
the vehicle and any property on or in the vehicle to be removed or stored at a vehicle storage facility at the
owner's or operator's expense.
(b) Prior to a vehicle being towed, the owner or operator of the vehicle must receive actual notice that the
vehicle is in violation of this division and that it will be towed and stored at the vehicle owner's or operator's
expense if it is not removed.
(c) If actual notice cannot be determined, a conspicuous notice shall be attached to the vehicle's front
windshield or, if the vehicle has no front windshield, to a conspicuous part of the vehicle. Said notice shall state
that the vehicle is in violation of this division and that the vehicle will be towed and stored at the owner's or
operator's expense if it is not removed from the area within 72 hours.
(1998 Code, sec. 100.02)
Sec. 12.03.034 Storage of towed vehicles
Should a vehicle be towed under the provisions of this division, a notice must be mailed on the next business day
after the vehicle is towed for a vehicle registered in the state, and no later than the fourteenth calendar day after
the vehicle is towed for a vehicle registered outside of the state, to the owner of the vehicle by certified mail,
return receipt requested, at the last address shown for the owner according to the vehicle's registration records.
Said notice shall state a description of the vehicle, that the vehicle was parked in violation of this division, a
description of the location where the vehicle was parked, that the vehicle was towed and stored at the expense of
the owner or operator of the vehicle, and a telephone number that is generally answered 24 hours per day to
enable the owner or operator to locate the vehicle. (1998 Code, sec. 100.03)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/665
ARTICLE 12.04 WEIGHT LIMITS*
Sec. 12.04.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the town and the
general public and to preserve and protect the functionality and integrity of the town's streets by prohibiting the
operation of certain overweight vehicles at designated areas within the town.
Sec. 12.04.002 Reference to state law
This article is primarily adopted pursuant to Texas Transportation Code, section 621.303 and the town's police
powers as a state home-rule municipality.
Sec. 12.04.003 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them by this
article. All terminology used in this article and not specifically defined herein, shall retain its meaning in
conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor
body or if not defined therein the latest volume of Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary.
Gross weight. The total mass of a vehicle when loaded including the weight of the vehicle, fuel, passengers,
livestock, cargo, trailer weight and all other parts of the vehicle.
Overweight vehicle. A vehicle that exceeds the maximum gross weight limits set forth in this article.
Passenger car. A vehicle used primarily for the transportation of individuals, and not primarily for the transport
of goods, property, commodities, freight or waste.
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, political subdivision, or other
organization of any kind.
Semitrailer. A vehicle designed or used with a motor vehicle so that part of the weight of the vehicle and its load
rests on or is carried by another vehicle.
Street. Any paved or unpaved surface of road, highway, alley or other public way designated or used for public
vehicular traffic and the right-of-way for same, including but not limited to adjoining sidewalks, drainage
ditches and utility easements; provided, however, that this definition does not include state highways.
Town. The Town of Fairview, Texas.
Trailer. A vehicle that is designed or used to carry a load wholly on its own structure; and is drawn or designed
to be drawn by a motor vehicle.
Truck-tractor. A vehicle that is designed and used primarily for drawing another vehicle and is not constructed
to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load to be drawn.
Vehicle. Any automobile, truck, semitrailer, camper, van, trailer, truck-tractor or any device - in both moving and
stationary modes, irrespective of condition - or any combination of any of same connected in any manner for
traveling together as a unit that is capable of transporting persons, goods, property, commodities, freight or
waste.
Sec. 12.04.004 Weight limits
A gross weight maximum limit of 58,420 lbs. is established for any vehicle on the following street(s) or segment
of street(s) within the town:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/665
An approximately one-mile in length segment of Stacy Road from the intersection of Stacy Road and
Stone Hinge Drive to the intersection of Stacy Road and County Road 317 (said County Road 317
otherwise being known as Orr Road).
Sec. 12.04.005 Permit for greater weight allowance
(a) Special permits to exceed the gross weight maximum limits set forth in this article may be granted by the
town manager upon application in writing to allow overweight vehicles to operate on town streets during
emergency situations or under special circumstances as set forth in this section. The town manager should grant
a permit application only if has been clearly demonstrated by an applicant that all other alternative routes,
equipment disassembly measures, and/or divisions of an overweight vehicle load are impracticable.
Inconvenience or increased cost for the applicant does not, in itself, indicate that a potential alternative to the
grant of a permit is impracticable.
(b) Permits are to be granted on a trip-by-trip basis only. All permits granted by the town manager under this
section shall be valid only:
(1) For a single, identified vehicle for a single trip in one direction along any street in the town to
which the weight limit(s) in this article apply;
(2) For the period of time described in the permit;
(3) For travel on the specific route designated on the permit; and
(4) To the extent that the permitted vehicle's actual weight does not exceed the special allowance
granted by the permit.
(c) Permits granted under this section cannot be transferred, modified, or applied to cover vehicles other than
those specified in the permit.
(d) If an applicant who has been denied a permit under this section believes that this section has been
misapplied, the applicant may appeal the denial to the town council and request a public hearing. Requests for a
public hearing before the town council must be in writing and made on or before the seventh business day
following denial by the town manager. If the town council determines that a hearing is warranted, it will place
the matter on the meeting agenda for the next regularly scheduled town council meeting open to the public that
allows enough time to post notice of the hearing in compliance with applicable law.
(e) Any person moving a greater weight upon a street pursuant to such special permit shall have the written
permit in the possession of the driver of any such overweight vehicle while upon a street of the town.
(f) It is an affirmative defense to enforcement of a violation of this article that the driver of an overweight
vehicle:
(1) Possessed a valid permit granted under this section for that overweight vehicle; and
(2) The route, time, and manner of travel on a street of the town is within the terms defined by said
permit.
(g) The actions taken under authority of this article are undertaken by the town in the interest of the general
public as part of the town's governmental functions of providing for street maintenance, regulation of traffic, and
transportation systems.
(h) Nothing in this article is intended to waive the town's immunity from suit or liability, nor any immunities
applicable to any town official or employee.
(i) Any permit issued by the town under this article is not a property interest.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/665
Sec. 12.04.006 Overweight vehicles prohibited
(a) Within the town and on any street set forth in section 12.04.004, it shall be unlawful for any person to
operate, drive, move, park, or otherwise place or cause to be operated, driven, moved, parked or placed any
overweight vehicle.
(b) The town manager or his or her designee is authorized and directed to place appropriate signs indicating
the gross weight maximum limit at appropriate place(s) on or near the streets referenced in section 12.04.004.
Sec. 12.04.007 Prohibition of through-truck operation of certain vehicles on certain streets
(a) From and after the effective date of this article it shall be unlawful for any person to - within the town on
Stone Hinge Drive or Elisabeth Way - operate, drive, move, park, or otherwise place or cause to be operated,
driven, moved, parked or placed any one or more of the following types of vehicles:
(1) Overweight vehicles;
(2) Trailers in excess of 20 feet in length;
(3) Truck-tractors; or
(4) Semitrailers.
(b) The town manager or his or her designee is authorized and directed to place appropriate signs indicating
“No Through Trucks” or similar words at appropriate place(s) on or near the streets referenced in this section.
Sec. 12.04.008 Exemptions
The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
(1) Emergency vehicles operating in response to any emergency call;
(2) An owner and/or operator of a commercial vehicle driving to and from his residence;
(3) Vehicles owned and/or operated by or on behalf of the town, while engaged in the repair,
maintenance or construction of streets and/or performing official, authorized town-related business;
and
(4) Vehicles operating upon a route officially designated as a detour route when there is no
reasonable alternative route for reaching the ultimate destination of the vehicle.
Sec. 12.04.009 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or the maximum amount allowed under law,
whichever is less, in accordance with section 12.01.001 of this chapter.
(Ordinance 2011-8-2D adopted 8/2/11)
ARTICLE 12.05 TRAFFIC DIRECTOR
Sec. 12.05.001 Established; powers and duties; vacancy
(a) The position of town traffic director is hereby established. The town traffic director, sometimes referred to
in this code as the “director of traffic,” shall be the town engineer and shall exercise the powers and duties with
respect to traffic as provided in this code.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/665
(b) When the position of town traffic director is vacant or unable to act, the police chief shall exercise the
duties of the town traffic director.
Sec. 12.05.002 Responsibility and authority
(a) The town traffic director shall have the general responsibility and authority to determine the installation
and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic
accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, to plan
the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of the town, to cooperate with other officials in the
development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties
imposed by ordinances of the town or state law.
(b) The town traffic director shall also have the responsibility and authority to determine the installation of
traffic-control devices to regulate the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in the town in accordance with
state law.
Sec. 12.05.003 Promulgation of rules, emergency/experimental regulations; testing
(a) The town traffic director is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the
provisions of the traffic ordinances of the town and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations
to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect
for more than 90 days.
(b) The town traffic director may test traffic-control devices under actual conditions of traffic.
Sec. 12.05.004 Additional authority and presumptions
(a) Whenever in this chapter the authority is given to the town traffic director to do acts as he deems or, in his
opinion, are advisable or necessary or desirable, such acts shall be based on his observations and studies,
according to generally used, accepted traffic-control principles or techniques.
(b) Traffic innovations and experiments, however, are not to be inhibited by the provisions of this section.
(c) As to any given traffic-control device, signal, sign, marker, or marking, it shall be initially presumed that
such device, signal, sign, marker, or marking independently erected at the direction of the town traffic director
has been installed pursuant to his observations and studies, based on generally used and acceptable trafficcontrol
principles or techniques.
(d) Any responsibility or authority imposed or conferred on the town traffic director by the provisions of this
code may be performed by the town traffic director or by those officers, employees, or agents of the town
working under his supervision and control and designated by him to perform the same.
(e) For the purposes of this article, the definitions provided by the Texas Transportation Code shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Sec. 12.05.005 Manual and specifications for traffic-control devices
All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control
Devices and specifications approved by the state transportation commission (“the manual”). All signs and
signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location
throughout the town. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law
and this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices.
Sec. 12.05.006 Duty to install
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/665
The town traffic director shall have the duty of erecting or installing upon, over, along or beside any highway,
street, or alley signs, signals and markings, or causing the same to be erected, installed, or placed in accordance
with state law, this code, and consistent with the manual. Such traffic-control devices shall be installed as soon
as is practicable under the circumstances after the specific device, sign, or signal can be procured.
Sec. 12.05.007 Designation of crosswalks, safety zones, and traffic lanes
The town traffic director is hereby authorized to:
(1) Designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular
danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and such other places as he may deem necessary, by use
of appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway;
(2) Establish safety zones of such kind and character, and at such places, as he may deem
necessary for the protection of pedestrians; and
(3) Mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of
traffic is necessary.
Sec. 12.05.008 Authority to designate through streets, etc.
The town traffic director is hereby authorized to:
(1) Designate through highways or streets;
(2) Erect and maintain stop signs, yield signs, or other official traffic-control devices at specified
entrances thereto; and
(3) Designate stop or yield intersections at other roadway junctions.
Sec. 12.05.009 Authority to place devices altering or restricting turns
The town traffic director is hereby authorized to:
(1) Place official traffic-control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to
be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and by doing so may require vehicles to either
conform to, or take deviate from, the course normally specified by state law in absence of such
traffic-control devices; and
(2) Determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn, left turn,
or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be
prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same
shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.
Sec. 12.05.010 Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys and restrict direction of movement on streets
The town traffic director is hereby authorized to:
(1) Determine and designate one-way streets or alleys and shall place and maintain signs giving
notice of said designation; and
(2) Determine and designate streets, parts of streets, or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular
traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period of the day and the opposite direction during
another period of the day and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers, or other
devices to give notice thereof. The town traffic director may erect signs temporarily designating lanes
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/665
to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the color or placement of the
centerline of the roadway.
Sec. 12.05.011 Existing devices affirmed and ratified
All traffic-control signs, signals, devices, and markings placed or erected prior to the effective date of this
article, whether by the town or its agents, and now in use for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding
traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified, and confirmed to be official traffic-control devices; provided, however, that
the ratification of said existing traffic-control devices is not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this
code.
Sec. 12.05.012 Unauthorized installation
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the town traffic director or his duly authorized representative,
acting pursuant to an ordinance or resolution of the town, to install or cause to be installed or placed any signal,
sign, marking or device purporting to direct the use of the streets or the activities on those streets by pedestrians,
vehicles, motor vehicles or animals. In any prosecution of a violation of this article, the manual, or any other
traffic ordinance of the town, proof that any traffic-control device, sign, signal or marking was actually in place
on any street in conformance with the manual shall constitute prima facie evidence that the same was installed
by the town traffic director pursuant to the authority of this chapter.
Sec. 12.05.013 Obedience to devices
(a) The operator of a vehicle or streetcar shall comply with an applicable official traffic-control device placed
as provided by this code unless:
(1) The operator is otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer; or
(2) Is operating an authorized emergency vehicle and is responding to an emergency.
(b) Persons violating this subsection are deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, are subject to
a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code.
Sec. 12.05.014 Certain proofs not required
(a) In any prosecution for any violation of this article, it shall not be necessary for the state to prove the
installation or authority therefor, of any sign, signal, traffic-control device, or marking.
(b) Any person charged with a violation of this article shall have the right to prove the sign, signal, trafficcontrol
device, or marking was not so installed or authorized as a defense.
Sec. 12.05.015 Interference with official traffic-control devices
(a) A person may not, without lawful authority, attempt to or actually alter, injure, cover, conceal, knock
down, or remove:
(1) An official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal;
(2) An inscription, shield, or insignia on an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal;
or
(3) Another part of an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal.
(b) Persons violating this subsection are deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, are subject to
a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/665
(Ordinance 2014-8-5A, sec. 3, adopted 8/5/14)
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 13.02 SOLID WASTE†
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 13.02.001–13.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Collection and Disposal
Sec. 13.02.031 Title
This article shall be known as the town solid waste disposal code. (1998 Code, sec. 50.01)
Sec. 13.02.032 Definitions
Brush. Tree and shrub trimmings, which are not easily placed in disposable containers.
Bulky waste. Stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, furniture, construction debris and other waste
materials generated from a residential unit only, other than dead animals, hazardous waste, or stable matter with
weights or volumes greater than those allowed for the applicable bins or polycarts. Customer shall be
responsible for the proper removal of refrigerants and other hazardous wastes from bulky waste and shall
properly tag bulky waste as being free of refrigerants and other hazardous wastes prior to removal by contractor.
Bundle. Tree, shrub and brush trimmings or newspapers and magazines securely tied together forming an easily
handled package not exceeding four feet in length, six inches in diameter, or fifty (50) pounds in weight.
Commercial unit. Any structure or business other than residential, including without limitation hotels, motels,
restaurants, structures containing more than four (4) dwellings, residential care facilities, and industrial
structures.
Construction debris. Waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition
operations.
Contractor. Allied Waste Systems, Inc., a Delaware corporation and its successor(s) and/or affiliates under the
“waste collection and disposal agreement” with the town.
Curbside service. Garbage, trash and recyclable materials to be picked up by contractor, which will be located at
the curbside of the street bearing the customer's address.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/665
Customer. An occupant of a residential, commercial or industrial unit where refuse is generated, except that this
definition does not include persons that generate solely construction debris.
Commercial customer. A customer that generates refuse at any premises that is not a residential unit, but does
not include persons that generate solely construction debris.
Dead animal. Animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten (10) pounds in weight that have expired
from any cause except those slaughtered or killed for human use.
Disposable containers. Any plastic bag or cardboard box with a capacity or volume of thirty (30) gallons or less
and which if capable of containing garbage or trash without leaking remitting odors, and which weighs, when
loaded, less than fifty (50) pounds.
Garbage. Any and all dead animals of less than ten (10) pounds in weight, except for those slaughtered for
human consumption; every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable and/or other matter) that results from the
preparation, processing, consumption, dealing in, handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or
decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or other animal or vegetable mater (including, but not by
way of limitation, used tin cans and other food containers; and all putrescent or easily decomposable waste
animal or vegetable mater, which is likely to attract flies or rodents); except (in all cases) any matter included in
the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste, rubbish or stable matter.
Handicapped customers. A residential household in which all members of the household are physically
handicapped to the extent that they are unable to place garbage at curbside. The fact of such handicap must be
certified to contractor by the town manager.
Hazardous waste. Solid waste, in any amount, identified or listed as hazardous waste by the administrator of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (42 U.S.C. section 6901), or appropriate state agency by or pursuant
to federal or state law, or waste, in any amount, which is regulated under federal or state law. This includes
motor oil, gasoline, paint and paint cases.
Landfill. A facility used by contractor where trash and garbage are disposed of by burying between layers of
earth.
Permanent containers. Closed, waterproof, plastic containers with a capacity of ninety-five (95) gallons
provided by contractor for containing garbage or trash. Contractor shall be entitled to charge the customer
$75.00 replacement cost for each permanent container that is lost, stolen, destroyed or requested after a
residential customer is initially provided a permanent container.
Recyclable materials. Material that has been recovered or diverted from the nonhazardous waste stream for the
purpose of reuse, recycling, or reclamation, including, but not limited to, newspapers (including glossy inserts);
plastic jugs and bottles; aluminum and metal cans; and glass food and beverage containers.
Recycling container. A plastic receptacle, designed for the purpose of curbside collection of recycling
commodities, with a capacity of ninety-five (95) gallons provided by contractor. Contractor shall be entitled to
charge the customer $75.00 replacement cost for each recycling container that is lost, stolen, destroyed or
requested after a residential customer is initially provided a recycling container. If contractor begins providing
recycling services under this agreement, residential customers may obtain at no charge two recycling containers
for their use.
Refuse. Residential or commercial refuse, bulky waste, construction debris and stable matter generated at a
residential unit, unless the context requires otherwise.
Residential or commercial refuse. All garbage and rubbish generated by a customer at a residential or
commercial unit.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/665
Residential unit. Residential is a dwelling within the corporate limits of the town occupied by a person or group
of persons comprising not more than four families. A residential unit shall be deemed occupied when either
water or domestic light and power services are being supplied thereto. A condominium dwelling, whether of
single or multi-level construction, shall be treated as a residential unit, except that each single-family dwelling
within any such residential unit shall be billed separately as a residential unit.
Rubbish. All waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees
or branches thereof, chips, shavings, sawdust, printed mater, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded
mattresses, used and discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste pulp, and other
products such as are used for packaging, or wrapping crockery and glass, ashes, cinders, floor sweeping, glass
mineral or metallic substances, and any and all other waste materials not included in the definition of bulky
waste, construction debris, dead animals, garbage, hazardous waste or stable matter.
Stable matter. All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or about a stable, or any animal,
livestock or poultry enclosure and resulting from the keeping of animals, poultry, or livestock.
Town. The Town of Fairview, Texas, a municipal corporation of Collin County, Texas.
Trash. All household refuse other than garbage, debris, brush and bulky wastes; trash shall include grass, yard
clippings, weeds, heavy accumulation of newspapers and magazines, recyclable materials, old clothes, and other
household trash of the like kind, but shall not include hazardous waste or special waste.
Sec. 13.02.033 Mandatory collection
(a) The town's contractor has exclusive rights to engage in the business of collection and disposing of
residential, commercial and industrial garbage, trash, rubbish, debris, other refuse and residential recyclable
materials, brush, and bulky waste within the corporate limits of the town. The exclusivity granted to the
contractor includes commercial and industrial customers, except where the contractor stipulates they will not
pursue such customers, as approved by the town. This exclusivity does not include commercial or industrial
recyclable materials, commercial or industrial accounts for which the contractor receives a release from the
town, or construction debris. Construction debris or other trash resulting from construction, major remodeling,
general cleanup of property, or resulting from sizable amounts of trash and debris being cleared in preparation
for construction will be removed by the property owner at their expense using their own crew or removal may be
individually negotiated between the property owner and the contractor. Should the contractor for town waste
collection and disposal services not be used for these services, a permit hauling fee would need to be paid to the
town in the amount of $100.00 at the time of building permit.
(b) All owners, lessees, or persons in possession of residential, commercial or industrial property within the
corporate limits of the town shall be required to use the garbage control disposal service offered directly by the
town or through an authorized independent franchisee, including a curbside recycling service provided by the
town through its recycling franchisee, utilizing only approved containers provided by the town's franchisee.
Should a resident want to discontinue their waste collection and disposal services due to traveling for six months
or more consecutively, the resident may request this option only after their water and wastewater (if applicable)
services have been discontinued as well. This would require the contractor to recover the provided polycart
containers prior to discontinuing services. Once the resident returns to the town after traveling all services
collectively, including waste collections and disposal services, water service, and wastewater service (if
applicable), may be reactivated. Upon payment of any utility connection fees, the necessary polycarts would be
provided by the contractor.
(Ordinance 2016-21 adopted 9/6/16)
Sec. 13.02.034 Charges generally; collection regulations
(a) Residential monthly charges; collection regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/665
(1) A charge of $18.18 per month plus sales tax shall be made to each residential water customer of
the town. This monthly charge shall include collection and disposal services weekly, once a month
brush/bulk pickup, recycling services weekly, and town administrative fee.
(2) A “senior rate” charge of $16.89 per month plus sales tax shall be made to each residential
water customer of the town. This monthly charge shall include collection and disposal services
weekly, once a month brush/bulk pickup, recycling services weekly, and town administrative fee.
(A) A residential water customer account holder of the town may receive the “senior rate”
once they provide a valid document verifying an occupant of the residence is age sixty-five (65)
or over. Valid documents could include a driver's license, passport or other government issued
document identifying the occupant's date of birth and current address.
(3) A special “carry out” charge shall apply to those residents requesting contractor to recover
weekly trash and recycling carts at the residents “backdoor” instead of at the resident's curb.
(A) A charge of $18.18 per month plus sales tax shall be made to nonhandicapped customers.
This monthly charge shall include “backdoor” collection and disposal services weekly, once a
month curbside brush/bulk pickup, “backdoor” recycling services weekly, and town
administrative fee.
(B) A charge of $28.99 per month plus sales tax shall be made to nonhandicapped customers.
This monthly charge shall include “backdoor” collection and disposal services weekly, once a
month curbside brush/bulk pickup, “backdoor” recycling services weekly, and town
administrative fee.
(4) A penalty of 10% or $100.00, whichever is greater, shall be assessed on any utility bill not paid
within fifteen (15) days after its bill date.
(5) Garbage service shall be limited to polycart collection once per week on a regularly scheduled
service day.
(A) The only waste that will be picked up will be household waste, grass clippings, leaves
and similar yard waste placed in a container provided by the contractor.
(B) A single cart will be provided for no charge. An extra cart may be requested at a cost of
$6.51 per month for weekly collections. An extra cart for “carry out” services may be requested
at a cost of $9.69 per month for weekly collections.
(C) Such carts shall remain the property of the contractor.
(D) Customers will be charged a replacement fee of $75.00 for each lost cart.
(E) An additional cart for recyclable materials may be requested at no additional charge.
(F) No collections will be made on Sundays. Contractor shall be exempt from making
collections on the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. Contractor may decide to observe any or all of the
above-mentioned holidays by suspension of collection service on the holiday, but contractor
shall continue with its other regularly scheduled collections during such holiday weeks, and
shall provide collection services on an alternative day of the same holiday week for any
collection service suspended.
(6) All residents shall receive brush, bulky wastes and/or bundle collections once per month, not to
exceed twelve (12) cubic yards per collection, unless otherwise specified.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/665
(7) Contractor shall not be obligated to pick up hazardous waste including, but not limited to,
refrigeration appliances that have not had CFC's removed by a certified technician, tires,
automobile/vehicle batteries, petroleum products, paints and other chemicals and solvent identified as
hazardous by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
(8) Additional curbside collection shall be provided upon request by resident, of residential items
which are not disposed of during normal residential pickup or are in excess of the twelve (12) cubic
yard collection limit for normal residential pickup. This special bulk and brush pickup will be
charged $97.85 per hour with a one-hour minimum.
(9) Sand, gravel, dirt, petroleum products or filters, carpeting, construction materials and debris,
hazardous or toxic waste, auto parts, fencing, rock, and human or animal waste are excluded from
this service, and shall be the responsibility of the customer.
(10) Town will bill residential customers the monthly charges as part of their water, sewer (if
applicable) and stormwater (if applicable) bill.
(11) No polycarts or recycling containers shall be allowed to be placed at the collection point prior
to 5:00 p.m. on the day before collection nor remain after 6:00 a.m. on the day after collection. At all
other times, polycarts and recycling containers shall be left behind the front building line of the
residential structure.
(12) No bulk, brush or woody wastes shall be allowed to be placed at the collection point prior to
6:00 p.m. on the Friday before the scheduled collection week nor remain after 6:00 a.m. on the
Monday after the scheduled collection week. All bulk, brush or woody wastes must be placed at the
collection point by 7:00 a.m. on the Monday of the scheduled collection week. The contractor has all
week to collect those bulk, brush or woody waste items.
(b) Commercial and industrial charges.
(1) Commercial service charges. Front load:
SIZE 1X 2X 3X 4X 5X 6X EXTRA
Commercial hand
collect 95 gallon
(2 carts)
$36.88 $68.53 $10.00 per
additional cart
2 yard $74.09 $137.06
$50.00
4 yard $105.23 $196.85 $286.47 $364.62
$75.00
6 yard $129.94 $243.37 $347.94 $530.50
$125.00
8 yard $173.68 $283.25 $386.25 $489.25 $540.75 $669.50 $125.00
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/665
(2) Caster and locks.
(A) $3.61 per caster, per month.
(B) $1.38 per lock, per month.
(C) $1.38 per gate, per month.
(3) Excess trash on ground or overloaded containers charged at $38.63 per yard.
(4) Delivery fees: $128.75.
(5) Exchange fees: $206.00.
(6) Relocate or removal: $128.75.
(7) Contractor will bill commercial and industrial customers directly. All commercial and
industrial customers will be billed a 5% franchise fee included on each bill issued by the contractor.
(8) Industrial service charges include: 20 and 30 yard open top units for business and construction,
compactor unit sizes on a per customer basis, five (5) percent franchise fees on all industrial loads;
haul rate, disposal rate and rental charges negotiated with customer at time of services.
(Ordinance 2017-16 adopted 9/5/17)
(c) The charges noted in subsection (a) and (b) above shall increase every year automatically on October by an
amount equal to three (3) percent until the expiration of the agreement between the town and contractor on
September 30, 2021. (Ordinance 2016-21 adopted 9/6/16)
Sec. 13.02.035 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 13.02.035 pertaining to the charge for pickup of recyclables and deriving from the 1998 Code, sec.
50.05, was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance 2016-21, sec. 4, adopted 9/6/16.
Sec. 13.02.036 Payment of charges; delinquency
The rates or charges fixed and prescribed for the town's recycling service shall be paid to the town upon receipt
of the monthly statement, which charge shall be included on the user's monthly water bill. Such charge shall be
due and payable and shall become delinquent on the same dates as are applicable to the customer's water bill. In
addition to all other legal remedies available for the collection of a debt, including all expenses, court costs and
legal fees, the following remedy is authorized for the delinquent payment of the charges herein authorized: a
10% penalty added to the total net bill. (1998 Code, sec. 50.06)
Sec. 13.02.037 Dumping
No person shall dump, throw or place any garbage, rubbish, refuse, junk, or other waste matter of whatever kind
in or on any public street, alley or other public or private property except in connection with an authorized plan
of removal. (1998 Code, sec. 50.07)
State law reference–Illegal dumping, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 365.012.
Secs. 13.02.038–13.02.060 Reserved
Division 3. Facilities
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/665
Part I. In General
Sec. 13.02.061 Purpose, scope and applicability
(a) The purpose of these regulations is to establish minimum standards for the design, location, and operation
of solid waste facilities for the disposal of municipal solid waste. These minimum regulations ensure the
protection of the environment and the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the town.
(b) These regulations apply to owners/operators of new or existing solid waste facilities, except as otherwise
specifically provided herein.
(c) These regulations do not apply to closed facilities (as defined herein) or solid waste facilities that close
prior to the effective date of these regulations.
(d) Solid waste facilities failing to satisfy these regulations constitute open dumping, which is prohibited.
(e) These regulations apply only to solid waste facilities for the disposal of municipal solid waste and not the
disposal of hazardous or toxic waste.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.01)
Sec. 13.02.062 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Active life. That part of a facility or unit that has received or is receiving wastes that has not been closed in
accordance with section 13.02.136.
Aquifer. A geologic formation, group of formations, or portion of a formation capable of yielding significant
quantities of groundwater to wells or springs.
Closed unit. Any solid waste disposal unit that no longer receives solid waste and has received a final layer of
cover material.
Collector station (a.k.a. transfer station). A facility designed, constructed, and located to collect solid waste
from smaller vehicles in local areas and then transfer the waste to larger specialized vehicles for conveyance to
the landfill.
Commercial solid waste. All types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and other
nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes.
Existing unit. Any solid waste disposal unit that is receiving solid waste as of the effective date of these
regulations and has not received a final layer of cover material.
Facility. All contiguous land and structures, other appurtenances and improvements on the land used for the
disposal of solid wastes.
Groundwater. Water below the land surface in a zone of saturation.
Household waste. Any solid waste (including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks) derived from
households (including single and multiple residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, ranger stations, crew
quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day-use recreation areas).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/665
Industrial solid waste. Solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes. Such waste may include,
but is not limited to, the following manufacturing processes: electric power generation; fertilizer/agricultural
chemicals; food and related products/byproducts; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel manufacturing; leather and
leather products; nonferrous metals manufacturing/foundries; organic chemicals; plastics and resins
manufacturing; pulp and paper industry; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay and
concrete products; textile manufacturing; transportation equipment; and water treatment. This term does not
include mining waste or oil and gas waste.
Landfill. An area of land or an excavation in which wastes are placed for permanent disposal, and which is not a
land application unit, surface impoundment, injection well, or waste pile.
Lateral expansion. A horizontal expansion of the waste boundaries of a landfill unit.
Leachate. A liquid that has passed through or emerged from solid waste and contains soluble, suspended, or
miscible materials removed from such wastes.
Municipal solid waste. Solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, commercial,
institutional, and recreational activities, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, and all other solid waste other than industrial solid waste.
Municipal solid waste landfill. Any landfill or landfill unit that receives household waste. This landfill may also
receive other types of wastes, such as commercial waste, nonhazardous sludge, and industrial solid waste. Such
a landfill may be publicly or privately owned.
New unit. Any solid waste disposal unit that has not previously received solid waste prior to the effective date of
these regulations. A new unit also means lateral expansions of units as defined herein.
Open burning. The combustion of solid waste without:
(1) Control of combustion air to maintain adequate temperature for efficient combustion;
(2) Containment of the combustion reaction in an enclosed device to provide sufficient residence
time and mixing for complete combustion; and
(3) Control of the emission of the combustion products.
Operator. The person responsible for the overall operation of a facility.
Owner. The person who owns a facility or part of a facility.
Person. An individual, corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business
trust, partnership, association, or any other legal entity.
Run-off. Any rainwater, leachate, or other liquid that drains over land from any part of a facility.
Run-on. Any rainwater, leachate, or other liquid that drains over land onto any part of a facility.
Saturated zone. That part of the earth's crust in which all voids are filled with water.
Sludge. Any solid, semisolid, or liquid waste generated from a municipal, commercial, or industrial wastewater
treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility.
Solid waste. Any garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air
pollution control facility and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous
material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from community
activities, but does not include solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved materials in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/665
irrigation return flows or industrial discharges which are point sources subject to permits under 33 USC 1342, or
source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, being 42 USC 2011
et seq., as amended.
Solid waste facility. All contiguous land, and structures, other appurtenances, and improvements on the land,
used for processing, storing, or disposing of solid waste. A facility may be publicly or privately owned and
consist of several processing, storage, or disposal operational units, e.g., one or more landfills, surface
impoundments, or combinations of them. Reference to a solid waste facility shall in these regulations include
references to a “municipal solid waste landfill.”
Waste management unit boundary. A vertical surface located at the hydraulically downgradient limit of the unit.
This vertical extends down into the uppermost aquifer.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.02)
Sec. 13.02.063 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of these regulations shall, upon conviction, be fined in an amount not
to exceed $2,000.00, and each and every day that the provisions of these regulations are violated will constitute a
separate and distinct offense. (1998 Code, sec. 95.99)
Sec. 13.02.064 Compliance with other laws
The owner/operator of a solid waste facility must comply with any other applicable federal, state, or county
rules, laws, regulations, or requirements. (1998 Code, sec. 95.03)
Sec. 13.02.065 Protection of citizens
The location, design, and operation of a solid waste facility in the town must conform to standards that will
protect the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens, will avoid or minimize any negative effects on the quality of
life of its citizens, and will not directly or indirectly cause a financial burden on the town or its citizens. (1998
Code, sec. 95.04)
Sec. 13.02.066 Building permit
No person shall construct a solid waste facility in the town or its extraterritorial jurisdiction without first
obtaining a building permit. The building permit application shall contain a detailed site design and utilization
plan that meets the regulations established herein. (1998 Code, sec. 95.05; Ordinance 2016-28, sec. 4, adopted
10/11/16)
Sec. 13.02.067 Conditional use permit
(a) No person shall operate a solid waste facility within the town or its extraterritorial jurisdiction without first
obtaining a conditional use permit as provided in article 14.02 of this code. Any conditional use permit issued by
the town shall not be for more than three years. The application for a conditional use permit for the operation of
a solid waste facility shall contain detailed operational plans that meet the regulations established herein,
together with a final closure plan. The completion/closure plan must include a closure schedule, final contours,
final landscaping, final land use, and a bond payable to the town that the complete closure will be in accordance
with the closure plan. (1998 Code, sec. 95.06)
(b) An initial nonrefundable fee in an amount as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code must
accompany the application, the purpose of which will be to defray the cost of technical and expert assistance the
town will require to assure the planned operations will comply with the regulations established herein. Any
additional amounts incurred by the town over the amount of the initial deposit to analyze and evaluate the
operational plan of the applicant, if any, shall be reimbursed to the town by the applicant. (1998 Code, sec.
95.06; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/665
(c) Prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit, the owner/operator must obtain three appraisals of the
real property (subject property) within a one-mile radius of the boundary of the proposed solid waste facility
site. The appraisers must be qualified MIA appraisers in good standing, one approved by the town, one approved
by the owner/operator, and one approved by both the town and the owner/operator. The appraisers shall first
appraise the subject property for the year prior to the year that the proposed solid waste facility was first publicly
announced or became public knowledge. The appraisers shall then appraise the subject property for the year that
the owner/operator receives a permit to operate from the department of state health services or the state
commission on environmental quality. If, after taking into account all other market forces, the appraisers
determine that the proposed solid waste facility has caused the subject property to suffer a reduction in value, or
a reduction in appreciation as compared to similar property greater than one mile from the proposed solid waste
facility site, then the owner/operator shall compensate the owners of the subject property for such loss in value
or loss in appreciation. (1998 Code, sec. 95.06)
Sec. 13.02.068 Financial indemnification
(a) The owners/operators of a solid waste facility shall financially indemnify the town for all costs, both direct
and indirect, incurred by the town as a result of the construction or operation of a solid waste facility within the
town or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Such costs include, but are not limited to:
(1) The construction and maintenance of roads resulting from increased and heavier weight
vehicles traveling to and from the solid waste facility.
(2) The additional cost of equipment of the fire department to provide adequate fire protection
resulting from additional risks associated with a solid waste facility.
(3) Technical consultants to provide expert assistance to the town, to perform studies, to conduct
monthly inspections, and to make recommendations as regards any building permit or specific use
permit or renewal for the construction or operation of a solid waste facility and the ongoing
operations of a solid waste facility, as they may impact the town.
(4) Any other costs to the town which can be directly or indirectly attributed to operations or
existence of a solid waste facility.
(b) The amount of such fee shall be established upon the granting or renewal of the specific use permit
required herein and paid annually upon the anniversary date of the specific use permit. Such fees shall be
deposited in a separate account maintained by the town and an annual accounting of how such fees are expended
by the town will be made available upon written request of an affected owner/operator.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.07)
Sec. 13.02.069 Civil remedies
In addition to the penalty provided for in this division, the right is hereby reserved by the town to bring suit in
such court or courts having jurisdiction thereof and to obtain such remedies that may be available at law and
equity, including injunctive relief, in the protection of the rights of the town and its citizens relating to solid
waste disposal. (1998 Code, sec. 95.08)
Secs. 13.02.070–13.02.090 Reserved
Part II. Location Restrictions
Sec. 13.02.091 Approval of location
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/665
To the extent allowed by federal or state law, the location of any proposed solid waste facility must receive the
approval of the town at the building permit issuance stage. In granting approval, the town will consider the
current land use plan for the immediate and surrounding area, accessibility, and impact on the health, safety,
welfare, and quality of life of town citizens. (1998 Code, sec. 95.20)
Sec. 13.02.092 Floodplains
(a) A solid waste facility shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain.
(b) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Floodplain. The lowland and relatively flat areas adjoining inland waters which are inundated by the 100-year
flood.
100-year flood. A flood that has a 1% or greater chance of recurring in any year or a flood of a magnitude
equaled or exceeded once in 100 years on the average over a significantly long period.
Washout. The carrying away of solid waste by waters of the base flood.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.21)
Sec. 13.02.093 Wetlands
(a) No solid waste facilities shall not be located in wetlands.
(b) As used in this section, “wetlands” means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated solid conditions. Wetlands include, but are not
limited to, swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.22)
Sec. 13.02.094 Fault areas
(a) New units of a solid waste facility shall not be located within 1,000 feet (305 meters) of a fault that has
had displacement in Holocene time.
(b) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Displacement. The relative movement of any two sides of a fault measured in any direction.
Fault. A fracture along which rocks on one side have been displaced with respect to those on the other side.
Holocene. The most recent epoch of the Quaternary period, extending from the end of the Pleistocene to the
present.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.23)
Sec. 13.02.095 Seismic zones
(a) A new solid waste facility shall not be located in a seismic zone.
(b) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/665
Maximum horizontal acceleration in hard rock. The maximum expected horizontal acceleration depicted on a
seismic hazard map, with a 90% probability that the acceleration will not be exceeded in 250 years, or the
maximum expected horizontal acceleration based on a site-specific seismic risk assessment.
Seismic zone. An area with a 10% probability that the maximum horizontal acceleration in hard rock, expressed
as a percentage of the earth's gravitational pull (g), will exceed 0.10 g in 250 years.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.24)
Sec. 13.02.096 Unstable areas
(a) Owners/operators of a new solid waste facility located in unstable areas must demonstrate that standard
engineering measures have been incorporated into the unit's design to ensure the stability of structural
components of the unit. The owner/operator must consider the following factors, at a minimum, when
determining whether an area is unstable:
(1) On-site or local soil conditions that may result in significant differential settling;
(2) On-site or local geologic or geomorphologic features; and
(3) On-site or local man-made features or events (both surface and subsurface).
(b) As used in this section, “structural components” means liners, leachate collection systems, final cover, and
run-on/run-off systems, and any other component necessary for protection of human health and the environment.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.25)
Sec. 13.02.097 Airport safety
Unless exempt by federal or state law, a municipal solid waste landfill unit shall not be located within 10,000
feet (23,048 meters) of any airport runway. (1998 Code, sec. 95.26)
Secs. 13.02.098–13.02.120 Reserved
Part III. Operating Regulations
Sec. 13.02.121 Operating hours
Operating hours must be approved by the town and specified in the specific use permit issued by the town for
the operation as a solid waste facility. The approved hours of operation will take into account noise, traffic, and
dust emitting from or attributed to operation of the solid waste facility and which may infringe on the safety or
quality of life of town citizens. Should the owner/operator not be required by law to obtain a specific use permit
for the operation of a solid waste facility, then operations will not be conducted outside the hours of 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. on weekdays and 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. on Saturdays. No operations will be conducted on Sunday.
“Operations” is defined as the acceptance of waste or the operating of any equipment used in disposal operations
or preparation for disposal. (1998 Code, sec. 95.35)
Sec. 13.02.122 On-site manager
At a minimum, an on-site manager with a class A letter of competency from the department of state health
services shall be available on the site during operating hours. (1998 Code, sec. 95.36)
Sec. 13.02.123 Access
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/665
(a) The owner/operator of a solid waste facility shall control public access using artificial barriers, natural
barriers, or both, as appropriate, to protect human health and the environment, and to prevent unauthorized
vehicular traffic and illegal dumping of wastes.
(b) Truck routes to and from the solid waste facility and entrance locations must be approved by the town and
must be comprehended in the site plan filed with an application for a building permit. The total costs to design,
construct, and maintain appropriate roads, including the acquisition of required rights-of-way to safely handle
the increased and heavier traffic generated by a solid waste facility, are the responsibility of the owner/operator
of a solid waste facility and must be expended directly by the owner/operator or reimbursed to the town upon
demand.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.37)
Sec. 13.02.124 Cleaning of streets and rights-of-way
The owners/operators of a solid waste facility will be responsible for removing all debris, paper, garbage cans,
bottles, and discarded or waste materials from the streets and street rights-of-way and along all major road
thoroughfares leading to the solid waste facility for a distance of five miles from the entrance of the facility.
Cleaning of these areas will be not less than daily and may be required more frequently by the town if conditions
so warrant. (1998 Code, sec. 95.38)
Sec. 13.02.125 Collector stations
(a) The owner/operator of a solid waste facility must provide or require collector stations convenient to the
communities or areas generating municipal solid waste so that municipal solid waste must be deposited at the
local collection station for transfer to the solid waste facility, thereby avoiding the vehicular traffic, litter, and
attendant problems of many small municipal, commercial, or personal vehicles.
(b) As a minimum, collection stations must be open for operation during the same hours as the corresponding
solid waste facility is open.
(c) The initial opening of collection stations must correspond with the opening of a solid waste facility that
accepts municipal solid waste generated outside the town.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.39)
Sec. 13.02.126 Vehicles
(a) All vehicles entering a solid waste facility transporting municipal solid waste must have a valid permit
issued by the owner/operator of a solid waste facility or the department of state health services under a strict
inspection code that will assure the vehicle meets all federal and state rules and regulations and the regulations
set out herein for hauling municipal solid waste. Permits will only be issued to municipal, industrial, and
commercial haulers with automated unloading systems and an unheaped hauling capacity greater than 70 cubic
yards. Smaller nonautomatic unloading vehicles and private individuals will not be issued permits. The
permitting procedure and conditions used by the owner/operator of a solid waste facility must be approved by
the town at the time the specific use permit is approved or renewed. Special permits may be authorized for 20 to
40 cubic yard roll-off containers for hauling inorganic debris only.
(b) A surcharge must be imposed on vehicles entering a solid waste facility without a valid permit. The
surcharge must be an amount not less than 50% of the standard dumping fee such that the surcharge plus fee will
be no less than 150% of the stated fee.
(c) The owner/operator of a solid waste facility shall assess a surcharge on any vehicle entering a solid waste
facility that is not covered with a tarp or closure to prevent spilling or blowing debris. The surcharge must be a
minimum of 50% higher than the standard fee.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/665
(d) All incoming vehicles must stay on a paved surface and deposit their waste on the tipping floor/pit in an
enclosed building. At no time should incoming vehicles leave a paved surface prior to returning to town streets.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.40)
Sec. 13.02.127 Procedure for excluding receipt of hazardous waste
(a) The owner/operator of a solid waste facility must implement a program that detects and prevents the
disposal of regulated hazardous or toxic wastes at the facility. This program must include at a minimum:
(1) Utilization of the latest technology and equipment in hazardous waste detection;
(2) Random inspections of incoming loads;
(3) Inspection of suspicious loads;
(4) Records of any inspections;
(5) Training of facility personnel to recognize regulated hazardous waste; and
(6) Procedures for notifying town, county, and state authorities if a regulated hazardous waste is
discovered at the facility.
(b) A solid waste facility owner/operator shall obtain written guarantees from each user that all their routes
and customers are prescreened to preclude collection of hazardous or toxic waste. A solid waste facility
owner/operator shall provide a state-of-the-art household hazardous waste collection program for users to collect
household municipal waste.
(c) As used in this section, “regulated hazardous waste” means a solid waste that is a hazardous waste either
as defined in 40 CFR 261.3 or as generated by a small quantity generator as defined in 40 CFR 261.5.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.41)
Sec. 13.02.128 Cover material
(a) The owner/operator of a solid waste facility must cover disposed solid waste with suitable materials at the
end of each operating day, or at more frequent intervals, if necessary, to control disease vectors, fires, odors,
blowing litter, and scavenging.
(b) The town may grant a temporary waiver from the requirements of subsection (a) of this section if it
determines that there are extreme seasonal climatic conditions that make meeting such requirements impractical.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.42)
Sec. 13.02.129 Disease vector control
(a) The owner/operator of a solid waste facility shall prevent or control on-site populations of disease vectors
using techniques appropriate for the protection of human health and the environment.
(b) For purposes of this section, “disease vectors” means any rodents, flies, or mosquitoes, or other animals or
insects capable of transmitting disease to humans.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.43)
Sec. 13.02.130 Explosive gases
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/665
(a) The owner/operator of a solid waste facility shall ensure that:
(1) The concentration of methane generated by the facility does not exceed 25% of the lower
explosive limit for the gases in facility structures (excluding gas control or recovery system
components); and
(2) The concentrations of methane gas do not exceed the lower explosive limit for the gases at the
facility property boundary.
(b) The owner/operator of a solid waste facility must implement a routine methane monitoring program to
ensure that the standards of subsection (a) are met.
(1) The type and frequency of monitoring must be determined based on the following factors:
(A) Soil conditions;
(B) The hydrogeologic conditions surrounding the disposal area;
(C) The hydraulic conditions surrounding the disposal site; and
(D) The location of the facility structures and property boundaries.
(2) The minimum frequency of monitoring shall be quarterly.
(c) If methane gas levels exceeding the limits specified in subsection (a) of this section are detected, the
owner/operator must:
(1) Immediately take all necessary steps to ensure immediate protection of human health;
(2) Immediately notify the town of the methane gas levels detected and the immediate steps taken
to protect human health; and
(3) Within 14 days, submit to the town for approval a recommendation plan for the methane gas
releases. The plan shall describe the nature and extent of the problem and the proposed remedy. The
plan must include specifics of how the owner/operator plans to meet these regulations, an audit plan
to assure compliance, provision for records and access to records, means to notify the town,
procedure to shut down the facility and means to notify users in the event of a shutdown. The plan
shall be implemented upon approval by the town.
(d) As used in this section, “lower explosive limit” means the lowest percent by volume of a mixture of
explosive gases which will propagate a flame in air at 25° C and atmospheric pressure.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.44)
Sec. 13.02.131 Air pollution
(a) A solid waste facility shall not violate applicable requirements developed under a state implementation
plan (SIP) approved or promulgated pursuant to section 110 of the Clean Air Act, being 42 USC 7410, as
amended.
(b) The town may establish additional clean air criteria depending upon the specific location and impact on
the health and quality of life of its citizens.
(c) The owner/operator of a solid waste facility shall incorporate an air monitoring and reporting system into
the operating plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/665
(d) Open burning of solid waste, except for the infrequent burning of diseased trees, or debris from emergency
cleanup operations, is prohibited at municipal solid waste landfill units. Any open burning necessary as a result
of emergency or other reasons must have prior approval of the town.
(e) The town requires the owner/operator to provide the town with an ambient air model sufficient to
determine if methane gas should be collected and flared, or, if any of the surrounding residents will be impacted
by a threshold odor, then the owner/operator will provide a technical solution to eliminate the odor problem.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.45)
Sec. 13.02.132 Run-on and run-off control
(a) The owner/operator of a solid waste facility must design, construct, and maintain:
(1) A run-on control system to prevent flow onto the active portion of the facility during peak
discharge from a 25-year storm; and
(2) A run-off control system from the active portion of the facility to collect and control at least the
water volume resulting from a 24-hour, 25-[year] storm.
(b) Run-off from the active portion of the facility must be handled in accordance with section 13.02.133.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.46)
Sec. 13.02.133 Surface water
Municipal solid waste landfill units shall not:
(1) Cause a discharge of pollutants into waters of the United States, including wetlands, that
violates any requirements of the Clean Water Act (being 33 USC 1251 et seq.) including, but not
limited to, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
(2) Cause a nonpoint source of pollution of waters of the United States, including wetlands, that
violates any requirement of an areawide or statewide water quality management plan that has been
approved under section 208 of the Clean Water Act, being 33 USC 1288, as amended.
(3) Cause a subsurface discharge of leachate from solid waste facilities to any surface water or
groundwater.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.47)
Sec. 13.02.134 Liquid waste
(a) Bulk or noncontainerized liquid waste shall not be placed in municipal solid waste landfill units unless:
(1) The waste is household waste other than septic waste; or
(2) The waste is leachate or gas condensate derived from the municipal solid waste landfill unit
and the landfill unit is equipped for leachate recirculation.
(b) Containers holding liquid waste shall not be placed in municipal solid waste landfills unless:
(1) The container is a small container similar in size to that normally found in household waste.
(2) The container is designed to hold liquids for use other than storage, such as a battery or
capacitor.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/665
(3) The waste is household waste.
(c) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Gas condensate. The liquid generated as a result of the gas collection and recovery process at the municipal
solid waste landfill unit.
Leachate recirculation. The recycling or reintroduction of leachate into or on municipal solid waste landfill
units.
Liquid waste. Any waste material that is determined to contain “free liquids,” as defined by Method 9095 (Paint
Filter Liquids Test), as described in “Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Wastes, Physical/Chemical Methods”
(EPA Pub. No. SW-846).
(1998 Code, sec. 95.48)
Sec. 13.02.135 Recordkeeping
(a) The operational plan approved at the time that the conditional use permit is issued or renewed must include
provisions to make available to the town all data relating to tests, analysis, procedures, inspections, receipts,
fines, compliance reports, and state and federal communications which relate to operations of a solid waste
facility in the town.
(b) The operational plan must include procedures for self-audit to assure compliance with requirements
herein.
(c) The following information must be recorded, as it becomes available, and retained by the owner/operator
of any solid waste facility:
(1) Monitoring, testing, or analytical data required in part V of this division;
(2) Inspection records, training procedures, and notification procedures required in section
13.02.127;
(3) Gas monitoring results for monitoring required by section 13.02.130;
(4) Clean air monitoring results required by section 13.02.131; and
(5) Closure and post-closure care plans as required by sections 13.02.136 and 13.02.137.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.49)
Sec. 13.02.136 Closure requirements
(a) The owner/operator of a solid waste facility must close the facility in a manner that minimizes both
infiltration of water through the cover system and the need for further maintenance. In addition, the facility
should be closed in such a way as to minimize the post-closure generation or release of leachate to the ground or
surface waters to the extent necessary to protect human health and the environment.
(b) The owner/operator must prepare a written plan that describes the steps necessary to close the solid waste
facility at any point during its intended operating life in accordance with the requirements of section 13.02.137.
The closure plan, at a minimum, must include the following information:
(1) A description of the methods, procedures, and processes that will be used to partially close, if
applicable, and finally close a solid waste facility in accordance with the closure performance
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/665
standard in section 13.02.137; and
(2) A description of other activities necessary to satisfy the closure performance standard,
including, but not limited to, the removal or disposal of all wastes at the solid waste facility.
(c) A copy of the closure plan required by subsection (b) of this section must be kept at the facility or at an
alternate location designated by the owner or operator and which meets with the approval of the town until final
closure of a solid waste facility.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.50)
Sec. 13.02.137 Post-closure care
(a) The owner/operator of a solid waste facility must conduct extended post-closure care after the completion
of closure. Post-closure care must consist of at least the following:
(1) Maintaining the integrity and effectiveness of the final cover, including making repairs to the
cover as necessary to minimize leachate generation and correct the effects of settling, subsidence,
erosion, or other events, and preventing run-on and run-off from eroding or otherwise damaging the
final cover;
(2) Maintaining and operating the leachate collection system until leachate is no longer generated;
(3) Maintaining and monitoring the groundwater monitoring system in accordance with the
requirements of part V of this division; and
(4) Maintaining and operating the gas monitoring program in accordance with the requirements of
section 13.02.130.
(b) Post-closure use of property must never be allowed to disturb the integrity of the final cover, liner(s), or
any other components of the containment system, or the function of the monitoring system, unless the town
determines that:
(1) The activities will not increase the potential threat to human health or the environment; or
(2) The activities are necessary to reduce a threat to human health or the environment.
(c) The owner/operator of a solid waste facility must prepare a written plan that describes monitoring and
routine maintenance activities that will be carried out during post-closure care in accordance with the
requirements of this division. The post-closure plan must include, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) A description of the monitoring and maintenance activities required by this section, and the
frequency at which these activities will be performed;
(2) Name, address, and telephone number of the person or office to contact about the facility
during the post-closure period; and
(3) A description of the planned uses of the property during the post-closure care period in
accordance with this section.
(d) Following final closure of the solid waste facility, the owner/operator must:
(1) Record a notation on the deed to the landfill property, or some other instrument that is normally
examined during title search, that will in perpetuity notify any potential purchaser of the property
that:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/665
(A) The land has been used as a solid waste facility; and
(B) Its use is restricted under this section.
(2) If the owner/operator or any subsequent owner/operator of the land upon which a solid waste
facility is located wishes to remove wastes and waste residues, the liner, or contaminated soils, the
owner/operator must request approval from the town.
(e) A copy of the post-closure plan required under subsection (c) of this section must be kept at the facility or
at an alternate location designated by the owner/operator and approved by the town during the facility's
operating life and through the closure and post-closure care periods.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.51)
Sec. 13.02.138 Closure cost estimates and bond
(a) The requirements of this section apply to owners and operators of a solid waste facility, except federal or
state government entities whose debts and liabilities are the debts and liabilities of the United States or the state.
(b) The owner/operator must have a detailed written estimate, in current dollars, of the cost of closing the
solid waste facility that is consistent with the closure plan developed in accordance with the closure
requirements in section 13.02.136. The estimate must equal the maximum cost of final closure at any time
during the active life of the facility and must include at a minimum all elements of cost described in the
California Waste Management Board Publication, “Initial Cost Estimates and Alternative Financial Mechanisms
for Solid Waste Landfills,” dated August, 1988.
(1) Until final closure of a solid waste facility, the owner/operator must annually adjust the closure
estimate for inflation.
(2) The owner/operator may request to reduce the amount of the closure cost estimate if the
owner/operator demonstrates that the cost estimate exceeds the maximum cost of closure over the life
of the facility.
(c) Until closure of a solid waste facility has been completed, an owner/operator of each solid waste facility
must post a good and sufficient bond payable to the town for the costs of closure, in an amount equal to the
closure cost estimate prepared in accordance with this section.
(d) The owner/operator must have a detailed written estimate, in current dollars, of the annual cost of postclosure
care monitoring and maintenance of a solid waste facility that is consistent with the post-closure care
plan developed in accordance with the post-closure requirements in section 13.02.137. The post-closure care
cost estimate is calculated by dividing the annual post-closure care cost estimate by one percent (0.01).
(1) Until final closure of the solid waste facility, all owners/operators, except those using a fully
funded trust fund to demonstrate post-closure financial assurance as specified in subsection (e) of this
section, must annually adjust the post-closure cost estimate for inflation and post a good and
sufficient bond in the amount of post-closure cost estimate. Such bond shall be made payable to the
town and shall be conditioned that the owner/operator of a solid waste facility will perform all
closure requirements provided herein.
(2) The owner/operator may request the post-closure cost estimate be reduced if the amount of
financial assurance exceeds the cost estimate.
(e) The owner/operator of a solid waste facility subject to corrective action under section 13.02.198 must have
a detailed written estimate in current dollars of the cost of performing the corrective action. Except as otherwise
provided in this subsection, the corrective action cost estimate must be equal to the sum of the annual corrective
action costs for the entire period over which corrective action will be conducted.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/665
(1) The owner/operator must annually adjust the corrective action cost estimate for inflation until
the corrective action is completed.
(2) The town may approve a request by the owner/operator to deduce the corrective action cost
estimate if the owner/operator demonstrates that the cost estimate exceeds the sum of the annual
corrective action costs, in current dollars, for the remaining period over which corrective action will
be conducted.
(f) An owner/operator of a solid waste facility that becomes subject to the corrective action requirements
under section 13.02.198 must post a good and sufficient bond payable to the town for the cost of corrective
action in an amount equal to the corrective action cost estimate prepared and adjusted in accordance with this
section.
(g) The owner/operator will be released from the requirements of a bond for closure upon notification by the
town that closure has been completed in accordance with the closure plan and the town has verified that closure
has been completed in accordance with the closure plan.
(h) The owner/operator will be released from the requirements for financial responsibility for corrective action
upon notification by the town that the corrective action, as specified under section 13.02.198, has been
completed and the town has verified that such corrective action has been completed.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.52)
Sec. 13.02.139 Final covering and revegetation of individual sections
Each year, the land that received solid waste for the previous 12 months will be brought to final grade, receive
final cover, and be revegetated. (1998 Code, sec. 95.53)
Sec. 13.02.140 Recycling program
The owner/operator shall develop a recycling program that will recycle 10% of its waste stream during the first
year of operation. While maintaining a minimum 10% recycling, the recycling plan must be continuously
improved each year until it complies with state and federal guidelines. (1998 Code, sec. 95.54)
Secs. 13.02.141–13.02.160 Reserved
Part IV. Design and Construction
Sec. 13.02.161 Design standards; cover and leachate collection system
(a) The site design and utilization plan shall be such that no municipal solid waste disposal or disposal
operations shall occur:
(1) Within 500 feet of an existing or planned residential, retail, or commercial area; or
(2) Within 200 feet of any public road, street, or adjoining property.
(b) An earthen berm having a minimum height of ten feet and minimum base width of 50 feet shall be
constructed around the entire outer perimeter of a solid waste facility to serve as a sound and visual barrier. The
base of the berm must be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the property line and/or street right-of-way to
preserve an open space appearance.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/665
(c) Appropriate landscaping of grass, shrubbery, and trees must be placed and maintained around the outer
perimeter of a solid waste facility, to include all open area and berms as viewed from public streets or from
adjoining property. The landscape plan must be approved by the town during the building permit approval stage.
(d) A 50-foot-wide buffer, to include a 24-foot-wide all-weather road surface, must be located inside the berm
area and along the outer perimeter of the disposal area to provide for emergency vehicles.
(e) Protective fencing a minimum of 12 feet high and satisfactory to retain and hold blowing debris must be
located between the emergency perimeter road and berm.
(f) The maximum design elevation at which fill operations are conducted shall be that elevation which is not
visible within one-half mile of the perimeter of the facility when screened by a ten-foot perimeter berm as
described in subsection (b). An enclosed building such as a transfer station, baler building, or recycling center
must be provided for acceptance of all incoming waste.
(g) Interior access roads between the public road and disposal area must be paved.
(h) A truck wash facility must be located on-site and must be used to wash down muddy/dirty vehicles before
existing onto town streets.
(i) New municipal solid waste facilities must be designed with a composite liner, leachate collection system,
and final cover system. These design components must ensure that the groundwater protection standards
(GWPS) as defined in part V of this division are met in the aquifer at the waste management unit boundary, or
an alternative boundary as specified by the town under subsection (l) of this section.
(1) The composite liner shall consist of two components, an upper flexible membrane liner (FML)
component and a lower component of compacted low-permeability soil.
(2) The upper FML component should be of at least a 40-mil membrane; some units will require a
thicker liner to meet the site conditions without probable failure during construction and while the
unit is operating, including any post-closure monitoring period. The adequacy of the selected
thickness should be demonstrated by an assessment of the type of liner material and site-specific
factors.
(3) The upper FML component of the composite liner should be protected from damage from
above by at least 30 centimeters (12 inches) of bedding material no coarser than Unified Soil
Classification System (USCS) sand (SP) that is free of rock, fractured stone, debris, cobbles, rubbish,
and roots, unless it is known that the liner material under load is not physically impaired by the
material. The subgrade to the upper FML component will be the uppermost lift of the compacted
lower component. This lift should be sufficiently smoothed to provide a good bed for the overlying
FML. The leachate collection and removal system serves as the top bedding material and the lowpermeable
solid component of the liner serves as the lower bedding material and should meet the
requirements specified herein. Polymeric materials such as geotextiles may be used in conjunction
with granular material as top bedding materials if the combination of materials provides equivalent
protection. They should not be used as the bedding below the FML, as they would increase the
transmissivity between the two components of the liner.
(4) The FML upper component and the solid lower component interface should be in direct
contact, and be designed and constructed to minimize flow between them.
(5) The soil component of the composite liner should be at least 90 centimeters (36 inches) of
compacted low-permeability soil with an in-place saturated hydraulic conductivity of 1 x 10-7 cm/sec
or less. The compacted material must be free of rock, fractured stone, debris, cobbles, rubbish, and
roots that would increase hydraulic conductivity or serve to promote preferential leachate flow paths.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/665
(6) The foundation subsoil that underlies the compacted low-permeability soil component should
be structurally immobile during construction and operation of the unit (including any post-closure
monitoring period).
(7) The leachate collection system should be designed to ensure that the leachate depth above the
composite liner does not exceed 30 centimeters (12 inches); be designed and constructed so as to
withstand stresses and disturbances from overlying waste, cover materials and equipment operations;
and be designed and operated to function without clogging through the post-closure monitoring
period. The leachate collection system should have:
(A) At least a 12-inch (30-centimeter) thick granular drainage layer with a hydraulic
conductivity of 1 x 10-2 cm/sec and a minimum bottom slope of 2%. Innovative drainage
systems may be used if they can be shown to be at least as effective as the granular design.
(B) A graded granular or synthetic fabric filter above the drainage layer to prevent clogging.
(C) A drainage network of appropriate pipe size and spacing on the bottom of the unit to
efficiently collect leachate. The pipe system should be strong enough to withstand the weight of
all overlying materials and vehicular traffic.
(D) A leachate collection system that covers the bottom and side walls of the unit.
(E) A sump in each unit or cell should be capable of automatic and continuous functioning.
The sump should have a conveyance system for the removal of leachate from the unit such as
either a sump pump and conveyance pipe or gravity drains.
(8) The final cover system should be designed to provide long-term minimization of liquid
migration and leachate formation in the closed landfill by minimizing the infiltration of surface water
into the facility. The final cover should also control the venting of gas generated in the facility and
isolate wastes from the surface environment. The final cover system should be constructed so that it
functions with minimum maintenance, minimizes erosion or abrasion of the cover, accommodates
settlement and subsidence so that integrity of the cover is maintained, and has a permeability less
than or equal to the permeability of the liner system. Specific subcomponents of the final cover
system should include the following:
(A) A gas collection and venting system;
(B) A stable foundation layer;
(C) A composite hydraulic barrier system similar to the composite liner system described in
subsections (1) through (5) of this subsection;
(D) A drainage and filter layer similar to that described in this subsection;
(E) Soil and topsoil layers sufficient to sustain the vegetative cover through a drought that
would occur every 25 years;
(F) A self-sustaining vegetative cover that is drought resistant, disease resistant, and requires
very low long-term maintenance.
(j) Existing municipal solid waste facilities must be equipped with a final cover system and other design or
operational features that are designed and implemented to ensure that the unit will meet the GWPS as defined in
part V of this division in the aquifer at the waste management unit boundary, or an alternative boundary as
specified by the town under this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/665
(k) When establishing the designs necessary to comply with subsections (i) and (j) of this section, the
owner/operator shall consider at least the following factors:
(1) The hydrogeological characteristics of the facility and surrounding land;
(2) The climatic factors of the area;
(3) The volume and physical characteristics of the leachate;
(4) Proximity of groundwater users;
(5) The potential proximity for future groundwater users; and
(6) Quality of groundwater.
(l) The town may establish an alternative boundary to be used in lieu of the waste management unit boundary.
The alternative boundary shall not go beyond the property boundary and in no case shall exceed 150 meters
from the waste management unit boundary. The finding shall be based on analysis and consideration of at least
the following factors:
(1) The hydrogeological characteristics of the facility and surrounding land;
(2) The volume and physical chemical characteristics of the leachate;
(3) The quantity, quality, and direction of flow of groundwater;
(4) The proximity and withdrawal rate of the groundwater users;
(5) The potential proximity for future groundwater users;
(6) The availability of alternative drinking water supplies;
(7) The existing quality of the groundwater including other sources of contamination and their
cumulative impacts on the groundwater; and
(8) Public health, safety, and welfare effects.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.65)
Secs. 13.02.162–13.02.190 Reserved
Part V. Groundwater Monitoring and Corrective Action*
Sec. 13.02.191 Applicability
(a) The requirements in this part apply to municipal solid waste landfill units which are within the town or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(b) Groundwater monitoring requirements under sections 13.02.192 through 13.02.197 of these regulations
will be suspended for a landfill unit if the owner/operator can demonstrate to the town that there is no potential
for migration of hazardous constituents from that unit to the uppermost aquifer during the active life, including
the closure period, of the unit and for the post-closure care period. This demonstration must be certified by a
qualified geologist or geotechnical engineer, approved by the town and the owner/operator, and must incorporate
reliable site-specific data. If detailed hydrogeologic data is unavailable, the owner/operator must provide an
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/665
adequate margin of safety in the prediction of potential migration of hazardous constituents by basing such
predictions on assumptions that maximize the rate of hazardous constituent migration.
(c) New municipal solid waste units must comply with this part.
(d) The town shall specify a schedule for owners/operators of existing municipal solid waste landfill units to
comply with this part. This schedule will be specified by the town after considering the potential risks posed by
the municipal solid waste landfill unit to human health and the environment. Compliance with this part will be
achieved for all existing landfill units within two years of the effective date of this rule.
(e) Once established at a unit, groundwater monitoring shall be conducted throughout the active life and postclosure
care period of the solid waste facility as specified in part III of this division.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.75)
Sec. 13.02.192 Groundwater monitoring systems
(a) A groundwater monitoring well system approved by the town must be installed at the existing waste
management unit boundary, the alternative boundary specified by the town under section 13.02.161, or the
closest practical distance from the appropriate boundary. Where subsurface conditions cause hazardous
constituents to migrate horizontally past the boundary specified under section 13.02.161 before descending to
the uppermost aquifer, the town can designate another appropriate downgradient location for the groundwater
monitoring wells.
(b) A groundwater monitoring system must consist of a sufficient number of wells, installed at appropriate
locations and depths, to yield groundwater samples from the uppermost aquifer that represent the quality of
background groundwater that has not been affected by leakage from a landfill unit; and represent the quality of
groundwater passing the waste management unit boundary specified under subsection (a) of this section.
(1) Monitoring wells must be cased in a manner that maintains the integrity of the monitoring well
bore hole. This casing must be screened or perforated and packed with gravel or sand, where
necessary, to enable collection of groundwater samples. The annular space (i.e., the space between
the bore hole and well casing) above the sampling depth must be sealed to prevent contamination of
samples and the groundwater.
(2) The number, spacing, and depths of monitoring systems shall be proposed by the
owner/operator and approved by the town based upon site-specific technical information that must be
developed by the owner/operator and must include thorough characterization of:
(A) Aquifer thickness, flow rate, and flow direction;
(B) Saturated and unsaturated geologic units and fill materials overlying the uppermost
aquifer, including but not limited to thickness, stratigraphy, lithology, hydraulic conductivities,
and porosities.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.76)
Sec. 13.02.193 Groundwater sampling and analysis requirements
(a) The groundwater monitoring program must include consistent sampling and analysis procedures that are
designed to ensure monitoring results that provide an accurate representation of groundwater quality at the
background and downgradient wells installed in compliance with section 13.02.192 of this division. At a
minimum the program must include the procedures and techniques for:
(1) Sample collection;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/665
(2) Sample preservation and shipment;
(3) Analytical procedures;
(4) Chain-of-custody control; and
(5) Quality assurance and quality control procedures.
(b) The groundwater monitoring program must include sampling and analytical methods that are appropriate
for groundwater sampling and that accurately measure hazardous constituents and other monitoring parameters
in groundwater samples.
(c) Groundwater elevations must be measured in each well immediately prior to sampling. The
owner/operator must determine the rate and direction of groundwater flow in the uppermost aquifer each time
groundwater gradient changes as indicated by previous sampling period elevation measurements.
(d) The owner/operator must establish background groundwater quality in hydraulically upgradient well(s) for
each of the monitoring parameters or constituents required in the particular groundwater monitoring program
that applies to the municipal solid waste landfill unit, as determined under sections 13.02.194 through 13.02.196
of this division. The minimum number of samples used to establish background groundwater quality must be
consistent with the appropriate statistical procedures determined pursuant to subsection (g) of this section.
(e) Background quality at existing units may be based on sampling of wells that are not upgradient from the
waste management area where:
(1) Hydrogeologic conditions do not allow the owner/operator to determine what wells are
upgradient; and
(2) Sampling at other wells will provide an indication of background groundwater quality that is as
representative or more representative than that provided by upgradient wells.
(f) The town may determine alternate background groundwater quality on a site-specific basis if true
background groundwater quality cannot be detected on-site.
(g) In detection monitoring or where appropriate in compliance monitoring, data on each hazardous
constituent specified in the permit will be collected from background wells and wells at the compliance point(s).
The sampling procedures and frequency must be protective of human health and the environment. The sampling
requirements must ensure that the statistical procedure has an acceptably low probability of failing to detect
contamination. The owner/operator will specify one or more of the following requirements in the permit for each
hazardous constituent to be monitored for:
(1) Obtain a sequence of daily (or near daily) samples at least twice a year, unless it is found that
this frequency of sampling results in autocorrelation of the observations that cannot be corrected by
the statistical procedure used.
(2) Obtain a sequence of weekly samples at least twice a year, provided that weekly observations
are not autocorrelated and that no seasonal effects are present in the data used in each periodic
comparison.
(3) Obtain monthly samples, provided the data exhibits no seasonal effects.
(4) Use an alternate sampling procedure specified by the town.
(h) The owner/operator must determine whether or not there is a statistically significant increase over
background values for each parameter or constituent required in the particular groundwater monitoring program
that applies to the landfill unit, as determined under sections 13.02.194 through 13.02.196 of this division. The
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/665
owner/operator must make these statistical determinations each time (s)he assesses groundwater quality at the
waste management unit boundary designated under section 13.02.161.
(1) In determining whether a statistically significant increase has occurred, the owner/operator
must compare the groundwater quality of each parameter or constituent at each monitoring well
designated pursuant to section 13.02.192 to the background value of that parameter or constituent,
according to the statistical procedures specified under subsection (g) of this section.
(2) The owner/operator must determine whether there has been a statistically significant increase
over background at each monitoring well within 30 days after completing sampling.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.77)
Sec. 13.02.194 Phase I monitoring program
(a) Phase I monitoring is required at municipal solid waste landfills except as otherwise provided in sections
13.02.195 and 13.02.196 of this division.
(b) At a minimum, a Phase I monitoring program must include the following monitoring parameters or
constituents:
(1) Ammonia (as N);
(2) Calcium;
(3) Chloride;
(4) Iron;
(5) Magnesium;
(6) Manganese (dissolved);
(7) Nitrate (as N);
(8) Potassium;
(9) Sodium;
(10) Sulfate;
(11) Chemical oxygen demand (COD);
(12) Total dissolved solids (TDS);
(13) Total organic carbon (TOC);
(14) pH; and
(15) Appendix I.
(c) The town will determine an appropriate monitoring frequency on a site-specific basis by considering
aquifer flow rate and resource value of the groundwater. The minimum monitoring frequency for parameters (1)
through (14) of subsection (b) of this section is semiannual, except during the post-closure care period, when a
minimum monitoring frequency shall be determined by the town on a site-specific basis. The minimum
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/665
monitoring frequency for appendix I constituents is annual, except during the post-closure period, when
minimum monitoring frequency shall be determined by the town on a site-specific basis.
(d) If the owner/operator determines, pursuant to section 13.02.193(g) of this division, that there is a
statistically significant increase over background for two or more of parameters (1) through (14) under
subsection (b) of this section at any monitoring well at the waste management unit boundary, he/she:
(1) Must notify the town within 14 days of this finding. The notification must indicate what Phase
I parameters have shown statistically significant increases over background levels.
(2) Within 30 days, must establish a Phase II monitoring program meeting the requirements of
section 13.02.195 of this division.
(3) May demonstrate that a source other than a municipal solid waste landfill caused the
contamination, or that the contamination resulted from error in sampling, analysis, or evaluation.
While the owner/operator may make a demonstration under this subsection in lieu of establishing a
Phase II monitoring program, he/she is not relieved of the requirement to establish a Phase II
monitoring program within 30 days unless the demonstration made under this subsection successfully
shows that a source other than a municipal solid waste landfill caused the increase, or that the
increase resulted from error in sampling, analysis, or evaluation. In making a demonstration under
this subsection, the owner/operator must:
(A) Notify the town in writing within seven days of determining statistically significant
evidence of contamination that (s)he intends to make a demonstration under this subsection;
(B) Within 90 days, submit to the town a report that demonstrates that a source other than a
municipal solid waste landfill unit caused the contamination or that the contamination resulted
from error in sampling, analysis, or evaluation; and
(C) Continue to monitor in accordance with the Phase I monitoring program.
(e) If the owner/operator determines, pursuant to section 13.02.193(h), that there is a statistically significant
increase over background for any one or more of the appendix I constituents at any monitoring well at the waste
management unit boundary, he or she:
(1) Must notify the town within 14 days of this finding. The notification must indicate what
constituents have shown statistically significant increases over background levels.
(2) Within 30 days, must establish a Phase III monitoring program meeting the requirements of
section 13.02.196 of this division.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.78)
Sec. 13.02.195 Phase II monitoring program
(a) Phase II monitoring is required whenever statistically significant increases over background have been
detected for two or more of the non-VOC Phase I parameters under section 13.02.194(b).
(b) At a minimum, a Phase II monitoring program must include the following parameters:
(1) The following metals:
(A) Arsenic;
(B) Barium;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/665
(C) Cadmium;
(D) Chromium;
(E) Cyanide;
(F) Lead;
(G) Mercury;
(H) Selenium; and
(I) Silver.
(2) The list of organic compounds identified in appendix I.
(c) The town shall determine an appropriate monitoring frequency on a site-specific basis by considering
aquifer flow rate. The minimum monitoring frequency is semiannual for Phase II parameters, except during the
post-closure care period, when monitoring frequency shall be determined by the town on a site-specific basis.
(d) If, after conducting Phase II monitoring for an appropriate time period approved by the town, the
owner/operator determines that there has not been a statistically significant increase of parameters or
constituents specified pursuant to subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section at any monitoring well, that unit may
return to Phase I monitoring. The following factors should be considered by the town when determining an
appropriate time period for sampling before allowing a unit to return to Phase I monitoring:
(1) Lithology of aquifer and unsaturated zone;
(2) Hydraulic conductivity of aquifer and unsaturated zone;
(3) Aquifer flow velocities; and
(4) Maximum distance between upgradient edge of unit and downgradient monitoring well screen
(maximum distance of travel).
(e) If the owner/operator determines, pursuant to section 13.02.193(h), that there is a statistically significant
increase over background for any one or more constituents specified pursuant to subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this
section at any monitoring well, he/she:
(1) Must notify the town of this finding in writing within 14 days. The notification must indicate
what Phase II parameters or constituents have shown statistically significant increases over
background levels.
(2) Must, within 30 days, establish a Phase III monitoring program meeting the requirements of
section 13.02.196 of this division.
(3) May demonstrate that a source other than a municipal solid waste landfill caused the
contamination, or that the contamination resulted from error in sampling, analysis, or evaluation.
While the owner/operator may make a demonstration under this subsection in lieu of establishing a
Phase III monitoring program[, a Phase III monitoring program shall be established] within 30 days
unless the demonstration made under this subsection successfully shows that a source other than a
municipal solid waste landfill caused the increase, or that the increase resulted from an error in
sampling, analysis, or evaluation. In making a demonstration under this subsection, the
owner/operator must:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/665
(A) Notify the town in writing within seven days of determining statistically significant
evidence of contamination that he or she intends to make a demonstration under this subsection;
(B) Within 90 days, submit to the town a report that demonstrates that a source other than a
municipal solid waste landfill caused the contamination or that the contamination resulted from
error in sampling, analysis, or evaluation; and
(C) Continue to monitor in accordance with the Phase II monitoring program.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.79)
Sec. 13.02.196 Phase III monitoring program
(a) Phase III monitoring is required whenever any parameter under section 13.02.194(b) and section
13.02.195(b) has been detected at statistically significant levels above background concentrations.
(b) Phase III monitoring parameters must include all constituents in appendix II.
(c) Within 90 days of triggering a Phase III monitoring program, or an alternative time period approved by the
town, the owner/operator must sample the groundwater in all monitoring wells identified pursuant to section
13.02.192 of this division and analyze those samples for all constituents identified in appendix II.
(d) If any appendix II constituents are detected at statistically significant levels above background in response
to subsection (c) of this section, the owner/operator must, within 90 days, submit a report to the town containing:
(1) The concentrations of those appendix II constituents detected at statistically significant levels
above background; and
(2) All data necessary for establishing a groundwater protection standard under section 13.02.197
of this division.
(e) The minimum monitoring frequency under the active life and closure period of the unit is quarterly for
those constituents in appendix II that are determined to be present at levels above background concentrations at
the waste management unit boundary or the alternative boundary as specified in section 13.02.161 of these
regulations.
(f) The town shall determine an appropriate minimum monitoring frequency for all parameters listed in
appendix II that are not being monitored at the frequency designated under subsection (e) of this section.
(g) During the post-closure period, the town shall determine an appropriate minimum monitoring frequency
for all appendix II constituents.
(h) If any appendix II parameters or constituents are identified under subsection (g) of this section that had not
previously been identified under subsection (d)(1) of this section, then, within 90 days or an alternate time
period approved by the town, the owner/operator must:
(1) Submit to the town a report on the concentration of any appendix II constituents detected at
statistically significant levels above background concentrations; and
(2) Establish, in conjunction with the town, the groundwater protection standard established under
section 13.02.197 of this division.
(i) If, after conducting Phase III monitoring for an appropriate time period approved by the town, the
owner/operator determines that there has not been a statistically significant increase of parameters or
constituents specified pursuant to subsection (b) of this section at any monitoring well at the waste management
unit boundary or at the alternative boundary, that unit may return to Phase II monitoring. The following factors
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/665
will be considered by the town when determining an appropriate time period for sampling before allowing a unit
to return to Phase II monitoring:
(1) Lithology of the aquifer and unsaturated zone;
(2) Hydraulic conductivity of aquifer and unsaturated zone;
(3) Aquifer flow velocities; and
(4) Maximum distance between upgradient edge of unit and downgradient monitoring well screen
(maximum distance of travel).
(j) If one or more hazardous constituents identified under subsection (h)(1) or (2) of this section exceed the
groundwater protection standard established under section 13.02.197 of this division, the owner/operator must:
(1) Notify the town of this finding in writing within 14 days. The notification must indicate what
Phase III parameters or constituents have exceeded the groundwater protection standard.
(2) Within 90 days, or an appropriate time period approved by the town, submit a report to the
town containing:
(A) Any proposed changes to the groundwater monitoring system at the facility necessary to
meet the requirements of section 13.02.198.
(B) Any proposed changes to the monitoring frequency, sampling and analysis procedures or
methods, or statistical procedures used at the facility necessary to meet the requirements of
section 13.02.198.
(C) An engineering feasibility plan for a corrective action program necessary to meet the
requirements of this section.
(3) Within a time period determined by the town, establish a corrective action program meeting the
requirements of section 13.02.198 of this division.
(4) Continue to monitor in accordance with the Phase III monitoring program established under
this section.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.80)
Sec. 13.02.197 Determination of groundwater protection standard
(a) Groundwater protection standards (GWPS) will be established by the town for any of the constituents
listed in appendix II that have been detected at statistically significant levels above background during the Phase
III monitoring program as required under section 13.02.196(e).
(b) The concentration levels established for the GWPS shall be protective of human health and the
environment, to be specified as:
(1) Maximum contaminant level (MCL) promulgated under section 1412 of the Safe Drinking
Water Act, being 42 USC 300g-1 (regulations codified under 40 CFR part 141, subpart B); or
(2) For constituents for which MCLs have not been promulgated, an appropriate health-based level
established by the town which satisfies the following criteria:
(A) The level is derived in a manner consistent with the agency guidelines for assessing the
health risks of environmental pollutants (FR 33992, 34006, 34014, 34028).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/665
(B) For carcinogens, the level represents a concentration associated with an excess lifetime
cancer risk level (due to continuous lifetime exposure) within the 10-4 to 10-7 range.
(C) For systematic toxicants, the level represents a concentration which the human
population (including sensitive subgroups) could be exposed to on a daily basis that is likely to
be without appreciable risk or deleterious effects during a lifetime.
(3) For constituents for which no health-based level is available or for which background levels are
higher than the health-based levels, the background concentration.
(c) In establishing the concentration level, the town may consider the following:
(1) Multiple contaminants in the groundwater;
(2) Actual or potential exposure threats to sensitive environmental receptors; or
(3) Other site-specific exposure to contaminated groundwater.
(d) The town may establish alternatives to the concentration limits required under subsection (b) of this
section if:
(1) The aquifer underlying the unit is not a current or potential source of underground drinking
water, or water which could be used for agricultural, industrial, or other beneficial human purposes;
(2) The aquifer underlying the unit is not interconnected with any other aquifer, unless all other
interconnected aquifers are also unsuitable for human consumption or other beneficial human
purposes; and
(3) The aquifer underlying the unit is not hydraulically connected with surface waters to which the
hazardous constituents could migrate in concentrations that could pose a threat to human health and
the environment.
(e) When establishing an alternative standard, the town shall consider the following factors:
(1) Proximity of contaminated groundwater to human or environmental receptors.
(2) Ability to monitor and control movement of contaminants in the groundwater.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.81)
Sec. 13.02.198 Corrective action program
(a) A corrective action program is required whenever the groundwater protection standard under section
13.02.197 is exceeded.
(b) A corrective action monitoring program must comply with the Phase III monitoring requirements under
section 13.02.196 of this division. Additional monitoring must be implemented as necessary to:
(1) Determine the areal extent of any plume of contamination for each constituent under section
13.02.197 that has been measured at concentrations that exceed limits established under section
13.02.197(b) or (c); and
(2) Demonstrate the effectiveness of the corrective action program.
(c) The owner/operator must design and implement a corrective action program, approved by the town, to
achieve the groundwater protection standard established in section 13.02.197 by removing or heating [sealing] in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/665
place and/or eliminating the releases of any appendix II hazardous constituent released by the municipal solid
waste landfill unit at levels that exceed the groundwater protection standards.
(1) Corrective action programs under this subsection must achieve the groundwater protection
standard established in section 13.02.197 at all points within the plume of contamination that lie
beyond the groundwater monitoring well system established under section 13.02.192(a).
(2) Corrective action programs under this subsection must be initiated and completed within 90
days. The town may shorten or lengthen the time allowed for completion of a corrective action
program under this subsection after consideration of the following factors:
(A) Potential risks to human health and the environment from exposure to contamination
prior to completion of the corrective action program;
(B) Extent and nature of contamination;
(C) Resource value of the aquifer including:
(i) Current and future uses;
(ii) Proximity and withdrawal rates of users;
(iii) Groundwater quantity and quality;
(iv) The potential drainage [damage] to wildlife, crops, vegetation, and physical
structures caused by exposure to waste constituents;
(v) The hydrogeologic characteristics of the facility and surrounding land;
(vi) Groundwater removal and treatment costs; and
(vii) The cost and availability of alternative water supplies.
(D) Availability of treatment of disposal capacity for waste managed during implementation
of the program;
(E) Desirability of utilizing technologies which are not currently available, but which may
offer significant advantages over already available technologies in terms of effectiveness,
reliability, safety, or ability to achieve program objectives;
(F) Practicable capabilities of remedial technologies in achieving compliance with the
groundwater protection standard established under section 13.02.197 and other objectives of the
remedy; and
(G) Practicable capability of the owner/operator.
(3) Corrective action programs under this section must comply with all applicable federal, state,
and local regulations and requirements.
(4) If, in the judgment of the town, the most desirable overall corrective remedy action is one that
does not meet the groundwater protection standard established under section 13.02.197, but does
meet an alternative level that is also protective of human health and the environment, the town may
accept the most desirable remedy.
(5) Corrective action programs that do not achieve the groundwater protection standard under
section 13.02.197 may be accepted by the town in the following situations:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/665
(A) It is not technically feasible to achieve the groundwater protection standard;
(B) Available methods will result in undesirable cross-media effects, including, but not
limited to, irreparable damages to scenic areas, surface waters, air quality, interconnected
aquifers, and habitats of endangered or threatened species; or
(C) Available methods will result in high hazard situations such as unacceptable air
contamination, dangers to cleanup personnel, or dangers to the surrounding community from
weakening of structural support of roads, building, and other structures.
(d) The owner/operator must implement as soon as is practical a corrective action program to:
(1) Notify all persons who own the land or reside on the land that directly overlies any part of the
plume defined in subsection (c)(1) of this section; and
(2) Replace any currently used sources of groundwater that lie within any part of the plume as
defined in subsection (c)(1) of this section by making water available that is of appropriate quality for
its current use and that has been approved by the town. The amount of water supplied under this
subsection must be equal to the usage rates of the replaced groundwater. The town may waive this
replacement requirement if the current usage is not adversely affected by the contaminated
groundwater.
(e) The owner/operator must implement any interim measures deemed necessary by the town to ensure the
protection of human health and the environment. The following factors may be considered by the town in
determining whether interim measures are necessary:
(1) Actual or potential exposure of nearby populations or animals to hazardous constituents;
(2) Actual or potential contamination of drinking water supplies or sensitive ecosystems;
(3) Weather conditions that may cause hazardous constituents to migrate or be released; and
(4) Risks of fire or explosion, or potential for exposure to hazardous constituents as a result of an
accident or failure of a container or handling system.
(f) A corrective action program is completed when the groundwater protection standard under section
13.02.197 is achieved as specified in subsection (c)(1) of this section for three consecutive years unless a
corrective action program described under subsection (c)(5) is implemented. Completion of corrective action
programs under subsection (c)(5) shall be determined on a site-specific basis by the town.
(1998 Code, sec. 95.82)
ARTICLE 13.03 WATER AND SEWERS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.03.001 Penalty
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article, and any person violating or failing to
comply with any provision hereof shall be fined, upon conviction, in an amount not more than $500.00, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1998
Code, sec. 51.999)
Sec. 13.03.002 Use of town water system required
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/665
All persons seeking to purchase water for use on or off their premises shall be required to purchase said water
from the town and connect to said town's water distribution system. (1998 Code, sec. 51.01)
Sec. 13.03.003 Water distribution
The water department shall distribute water purchased by the town through the town's water distribution system.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.02)
Sec. 13.03.004 Use of water from groundwater or surface water sources
The removal of water from groundwater or surface water sources in the town is prohibited, except for emergency
or public safety purposes or for use by the landowner. (1998 Code, sec. 51.10)
Sec. 13.03.005 Rebates for installation of water-saving equipment; rain and freeze sensors; hours for
watering lawns
(a) The town hereby establishes a rebate program for persons purchasing and installing certain low water use
household appliances and fixtures for retrofitting existing single-family structures. The public works director or
his or her designee shall be authorized to prepare a list on an annual basis of appliances and fixtures for which
rebates shall be given, and shall be further authorized to establish administrative procedures for implementing
the rebate program. Rebates shall be $50.00 per appliance, or the full cost of the replacement appliance,
whichever amount is less.
(b) The town hereby establishes a rebate program for persons purchasing and installing certain residential rain
and freeze sensors for retrofitting existing single-family irrigation systems. The public works director or his or
her designee shall be authorized to prepare a list on an annual basis of irrigation systems for which rebates shall
be given, and shall be further authorized to establish administrative procedures for implementing the rebate
program. Rebates shall be $50.00 per system, or the full cost of the retrofit, whichever amount is less.
(c) The town hereby establishes a rebate program for persons purchasing and installing certain residential rain
barrels for harvesting rainwater for irrigation uses. The public works director or his or her designee shall be
authorized to prepare a list on an annual basis of barrels for which rebates shall be given, and shall be further
authorized to establish administrative procedures for implementing the rebate program. Rebates shall be $25.00
per barrel, or the full cost of the barrel, whichever amount is less.
(d) All new or replacement irrigation systems must have an approved rain and freeze sensor, and shall also be
designed to reduce water demand through the use of zones.
(e) It shall be unlawful to water any lawn area between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. any day between June 1 and
September 15.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.12)
Secs. 13.03.006–13.03.040 Reserved
Division 2. Water Rates and Charges
Sec. 13.03.041 Rates
The town council shall establish rates to be charged water users of the town water system. Such rates shall be
published in the fee schedule as set out in appendix A of this code. (1998 Code, sec. 51.03)
Sec. 13.03.042 Installation of service
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/665
(a) The town council shall establish the service fees for installation of new service and other services for water
users. The fees to be charged shall be determined on the basis of service as listed below and published in the fee
schedule as set out in appendix A of this code.
(1) Installation of new service:
(A) Tapping a water main;
(B) Installation of meter box, meter, and curb stop cutoff valve; and
(C) Extension of water line from the tap to the meter box for a distance not to exceed ten
linear feet.
(2) Supplying and setting of a replacement meter box where the previously installed meter box is
damaged. If a meter box cannot be located, its replacement will be considered new service.
(3) Supplying and connecting a water meter.
(4) Reconnection of water service after water service has been terminated for failure to pay for
water service.
(5) Reconnection or reinstatement of water service after termination of water service for an
unauthorized connection or tampering with a water connection or meter.
(b) The service fees do not include materials other than the water line between the tap and the meter box for a
distance not to exceed ten linear feet. Installation of taps on a water main may only be performed by an
authorized employee or agent of the town, or the installation must be observed and inspected by an authorized
employee or agent of the town.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.04)
Sec. 13.03.043 Installation of meter
The town council shall establish a service charge to be charged for the installation of a meter where there has
previously been service and all connections are available, and such charge shall be published in the fee schedule
as set out in appendix A of this code. (1998 Code, sec. 51.05)
Sec. 13.03.044 Reconnection of service
If the water service is discontinued because of the failure to pay a water statement, the town council shall
establish a charge to be paid before water service will be reinstalled, and such charge shall be published in the
fee schedule as set out in appendix A of this code. (1998 Code, sec. 51.06)
Sec. 13.03.045 Deposit
The town council shall establish deposit fee regulations for water service users. Such regulations and required
deposit shall be published in the fee schedule as set out in appendix A of this code. (1998 Code, sec. 51.07)
Sec. 13.03.046 Payment; delinquency
(a) All water statements shall be payable to the town and shall be due 15 days after billing. All water
statements not paid by the fifteenth day shall incur an additional late payment charge. The amount of such late
payment charge shall be published in the fee schedule.
(b) Disconnection for late payment.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/665
(1) It is the policy of the town to discontinue utility service to customers by reason of nonpayment
of bills only after notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The town's form
for application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address, room
number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly visible and easily readable
provisions to the effect that:
(A) All bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on the bill;
(B) If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill will be mailed containing a
cutoff notice that, if the bill is not paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service
will be discontinued for nonpayment; and
(C) Any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill shall have a right to a hearing at
which time he or she may be represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his or
her choosing and may present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the
town official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that the
customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final
determination of the customer's complaint.
(c) Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only questions of proper and correct
billing will be considered. In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure
provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event until the charges have been
due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
(d) When it becomes necessary for the town to discontinue utility service to a customer for nonpayment of
bills, service will be reinstated only after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a reconnection
charge as set forth in section 13.03.044.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.08)
Sec. 13.03.047 Tampering with meter
If a resident should turn on water from the system or tamper with a meter, it shall be cause to terminate certain
service. On resumption of water service the user shall pay the above-stated reconnection charge. (1998 Code,
sec. 51.09)
Sec. 13.03.048 Illegal connections; theft
(a) A person commits an offense of theft of water by any of the following actions:
(1) A person may not knowingly tamper, connect to, or alter any component of the town's water
system including valves, meters, meter boxes, lids, hydrants, lines, pump stations, ground storage
tanks, and elevated storage tanks. This shall include direct or indirect efforts to initiate or restore
water service without the approval of the town.
(2) If, without the written consent of the town manager or the town manager's designee, the person
knowingly causes, suffers or allows the initiation or restoration of water service to the property after
termination of service(s). For purposes of this section, it shall be assumed that the owner, occupant,
or person in control of the property caused, suffered, or allowed the unlawful initiation or restoration
of service(s).
(3) A person may not knowingly make or cause a false report to be made to the town of a reading
of a water meter installed for metered billing.
(4) A person commits a separate offense each day that the person performs an act prohibited by
this section or fails to perform an act required by this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/665
(b) An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) and/or discontinuance of water service by the town.
(Ordinance 2009-5-5A adopted 5/5/09)
Secs. 13.03.049–13.03.070 Reserved
Division 3. Sewer Rates and Charges
Sec. 13.03.071 Rates
The town council shall establish rates to be charged users of the town sanitary sewer system. Such rates shall be
published in the fee schedule as set out in appendix A of this code. (1998 Code, sec. 51.71)
Secs. 13.03.072–13.03.100 Reserved
Division 4. Construction of Water Lines and Mains
Sec. 13.03.101 Plans and specifications
The plans and specifications for water line construction must be prepared by a registered professional engineer
who has experience with water utilities construction in accordance with AWWA standards and the standards
generally used by municipal water departments. (1998 Code, sec. 51.25)
Sec. 13.03.102 Approval of plan
The above plan must be submitted to the water commissioner of the town, and he must approve same by issuing
a permit for construction before any construction may begin. (1998 Code, sec. 51.26)
Sec. 13.03.103 Submission of copy of construction contract
Before the start of any construction, the property owner must furnish to the town a copy of his contract or
agreement with the contractor who is to construct and install the water transmission mains, valves, and
associated equipment. (1998 Code, sec. 51.27)
Sec. 13.03.104 Water lines; connections; meters
The following provisions and specifications are approved specifications and provisions for the construction of
water lines in the town:
(1) All water line mains less than six inches in diameter shall be constructed of 160 polyvinyl
chloride pipe with rubber gasket joints.
(2) All water line mains six inches or larger will be C900 polyvinyl chloride, hereinafter referred to
as PVC.
(3) All water line pipe shall be imbedded with free-running fill sand with a minimum depth of four
inches under the pipe and four inches above the pipe.
(4) All pipe shall have a minimum backfill cover as follows:
Pipe Diameter Inches of Backfill Cover
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/665
Less than six inches 30
Six inches 36
Eight inches 42
Greater than eight inches 48
(5) All water lines shall have a 150 psi hydrostatic test for a four-hour period and said test must be
witnessed by a member of the town water department.
(6) All water line mains must be chlorinated by the contractor and water samples then must be
taken and sent to a laboratory properly qualified to certify that the water passing through the
aforementioned water line is adequate for human consumption. This certification, when received,
must be filed with the town secretary.
(7) All lots in a subdivision within the jurisdiction of the town shall have water services installed
by the developer of the subdivision concurrent with the installation of new water lines. Such services
to be provided by the developer shall include tapping of the water main, running of supply line to a
meter box, setting of a metal meter box of a type and size approved by the town and connection of a
curb stop cutoff valve of a lockable type. At time of installation, an employee or agent of the town
shall approve all materials supplied and all installation services performed.
(8) A one-inch water meter shall be the maximum size water meter installed for water usage on
residential property, except a two-inch water meter shall be allowed for sprinkler systems.
(9) All connections to the existing water line system shall be made by the town water department.
The cost of labor and material necessary for connecting to this system shall be borne by the property
owner.
(10) All water line valves, main line taps, fittings, and fire hydrants shall be placed in a concrete
saddle and thrush blocks.
(11) All valve boxes shall be adjustable cast iron type and shall be placed on a concrete base.
(12) All water service shall be marked with blue plastic tape.
(13) All standard specifications for construction of any water line system as defined above shall be
according to the specifications as set out in this Code of Ordinances and made a part of this article for
all purposes.
(14) All water lines shall be constructed within the right-of-way easement of the state, the county
or any political subdivision, or easement dedicated to the town. All water meters shall be installed
within two feet of any one of the previously described right-of-way easements.
(15) Each residential dwelling shall be connected to a minimum of one water meter and one
service line. It shall be prohibited for any two residential dwellings to be connected to the same water
meter and service line unless approved by the director of public works or the town engineer. The
minimum service line size shall be a continuous one-inch type K copper line with no unions allowed
between the meter and water main. A reducer at the water meter may be installed for a 5/8-inch or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/665
3/4-inch water meter. A minimum two-inch PVC schedule 40 sleeve shall be required on all service
lines crossing under public or private streets, to be extended one inch beyond the edge of pavement
with a minimum of three feet of cover.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.28)
Sec. 13.03.105 Exterior sprinkler systems
All exterior sprinkler systems installed in the town must comply with the following requirements:
(1) No person, partnership, or corporation may install an exterior sprinkler system within the town
without first obtaining a permit from the town.
(2) Before the town may issue a permit for the installation of an exterior sprinkler system, the
owner of the property on which the system is to be installed shall file with the director of public
works the following:
(A) A plan of the system demonstrating the general layout of the system on the subject
property; and
(B) An affirmative statement by the owner of an exterior sprinkler system that, if any part of
the system be constructed in any easement or right-of-way dedicated to the public, the owner
acknowledges that [neither] the town nor any of its agents, contractors, or employees shall be
liable for or obligated to repair or replace any part of the system within such easements or
rights-of-way that may be damaged or destroyed.
(3) Each exterior sprinkler system must be equipped with a backflow preventer of the type
approved by the department of state health services and/or the director of public works.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.29)
Sec. 13.03.106 Standards for water system and mains; fire hydrants
(a) Adequacy of system. Water systems shall be constructed of sufficient size to furnish adequate domestic
water, and to furnish fire protection to all lots, and shall conform with the town's comprehensive plan and meet
the requirements, in all respects, of the department of state health services. The town shall make the final
determination of the adequacy of water mains proposed.
(b) Materials.
(1) Mains.
(A) All water mains 12 inches in diameter and smaller may be either ductile iron pipe,
thickness class 50 minimum, or AWWA C900 polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe. Water mains
larger than 12 inches in diameter may be constructed with either pretensioned or prestressed
concrete steel cylinder pipe or ductile iron pipe.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.30)
(B) The contractor or subdivider shall comply with all applicable requirements of division 2,
item 2.12, sections 2.12.5, 2.12.8, and 2.12.20, of Standard Specifications for Public Works
Construction, 1995 edition, published by the North Central Texas Council of Governments.
(2) Gate valves. Gate valves shall be furnished in accordance with the applicable requirements of
division 2, item 2.13, section 2.13.1, of Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, 1995
edition, published by the North Central Texas Council of Governments.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/665
(3) Fire hydrants.
(A) Fire hydrants shall be furnished in accordance with the division 2, item 2.14, of Standard
Specifications for Public Works Construction, 1995 edition, published by the North Central
Texas Council of Governments.
(B) The subdivider shall furnish drawings with complete detailed dimensions of the fire
hydrant proposed for the subdivision.
(c) Installation and testing.
(1) Water mains, fittings, gate valves, and fire hydrants.
(A) The subdivider shall comply with all applicable standard specifications in subsection (b)
of this section for installing materials that comply with the standards of the town.
(B) Prior to approval of plans and specifications for ductile iron pipe, the subdivider shall
perform a soil survey to establish the corrosive characteristics of the soil at and along the
alignment of the proposed water mains. If the corrosive characteristics of the soil are found to
be excessive or indicate a potential for a corrosive condition, then an approved polyethylene
encasement or wrapping shall be installed to protect the pipe in accordance with division 2,
item 2.9, section 2.9.5, of Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, 1995 edition,
published by the North Central Texas Council of Governments.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.30; Ordinance adopting Code)
(C) Tap installations on PVC pipe will be made by attaching a bronze service clamp equipped
with a sealed threaded port on the periphery of the main, then drilling through the pipe wall to
complete each service port. Taps may be made either on an uncharged system or into a main
under pressure.
(2) Location.
(A) All water mains shall be constructed within street rights-of-way or easements dedicated
to the town.
(B) Easements shall be provided for water mains which parallel any state numbered highway.
(C) (i) Water mains shall be installed in or extended along all frontage streets of the
proposed subdivision and shall be connected to all existing water mains where convenient.
(ii) Provision of water mains in conjunction with cul-de-sac streets shall be at the
discretion of the town engineer. To insure reliability of service, dead-end mains of
adequate capacity shall not exceed 3,000 feet in length. Adequate capacity shall be
determined by the standards for fire flow as accepted by the state department of insurance
and the Insurance Services Office.
(iii) All trenches must be a minimum of two feet in width. Trench cover must be a
minimum of two feet of sand and backfilled with sandy loam and rock (no rock larger
than three inches in diameter).
(D) In zoning districts commonly referred to as “residential sections,” the minimum size of
water mains shall be eight inches in diameter. Where intervals between cross-connecting mains
must exceed 1,200 feet, or where dead-ends must exist, ten-inch diameter or larger mains shall
be installed.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/665
(E) Eight-inch diameter and larger mains shall be installed in all streets in zoning districts
commonly referred to as “commercial” with minimum size eight-inch diameter intersecting
mains every 600 feet. Where dead-ends must exist, eight-inch diameter or larger mains shall be
installed. The minimum limits set forth in the above shall not be exceeded except upon the
specific approval by the town engineer, town building official, and fire chief, but in no event
shall these requirements be less than the minimum required by the state department of insurance
and the Insurance Services Office.
(F) Twelve-inch diameter or larger mains shall be installed in all streets in zoning districts
commonly referred to as “commercial” or “industrial” where service is to be provided to
developments that may require fire sprinkler systems.
(G) (i) All valves buried in the ground shall be provided with cast-iron valve boxes of
proper dimensions to fit over the valve bonnets and to extend to such elevation at or
slightly above the finished street grade or ground line, as approved by the town. Tops shall
be complete with covers marked “water” and shall be adjustable. Valve boxes shall be set
vertical and concentric with the valve stem.
(ii) Any valve box which has so moved from its original position as to prevent the
application of the valve key shall be satisfactorily reset by the developer at his own
expense. A reinforced concrete pad of the dimensions 3'0" x 3'0" x 6" shall be poured
around all valve boxes that are outside the pavement section, unless otherwise directed by
the town.
(H) (i) Fire hydrants shall be placed to conform with the requirements of the state
department of insurance and the Insurance Services Office. Each hydrant shall be set upon
a slab of stone or concrete not less than four inches thick and not less than one square foot
of surface area. Where solid rock exists in the bottom of the trench and same is excavated
to the proper depth to form a foundation for the hydrant, the slab of stone or concrete
above specified may be omitted.
(ii) The hydrant shall be set perpendicular, and to the proper depth, and shall be
carefully and substantially blocked against firm trench walls using class 2,000 concrete.
(I) Fire hydrants shall be installed and operable prior to the erection of any building in which
any combustible material is used, as determined by the fire chief of the town.
(J) The maximum distance between fire hydrants shall be 300 feet in all zoning districts
throughout the town as well as the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the town. Fire hydrants
shall also be placed at all intersections and ends of cul-de-sacs.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.30)
Secs. 13.03.107–13.03.130 Reserved
Division 5. Construction of Sewers*
Sec. 13.03.131 Adequacy of facilities
Sanitary sewer facilities shall be furnished and installed to adequately service the developments and shall
conform to the town's sanitary sewer plan. The adequacy of the sewer facilities provided by the subdivider shall
be determined by the town. (1998 Code, sec. 51.60)
Sec. 13.03.132 General standards for mains and connections
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/665
(a) Sanitary sewer mains may be vitrified clay sewer pipe (extra strength), conforming to ASTM C700, latest
revision, or cement-lined bituminous coated ductile iron pipe or polyethylene-lined ductile iron pipe.
(b) As approved by the town, sanitary sewer mains may also be constructed of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe
conforming to the specifications of ASTM D 3034, SDR 35, or equal. Joints for the PVC pipe and fittings shall
be compression rubber gasket joints. The bell shall consist of an integral wall section with a factory-installed
ring securely locked in a bell groove to provide a positive seal under all installation conditions. Fittings and
accessories shall be manufactured and furnished by the pipe supplier, or approved equal, and shall have a bell
and/or spigot configuration identical to that of the pipe.
(c) Connections shall be made with a fabricated fitting. Field-glued connections are not allowed. When PVC
pipe passes through a manhole wall, asbestos cement sleeves with a rubber ring joint shall be used to provide a
positive watertight connection.
(d) The PVC pipe shall be placed on a four-inch layer of crushed rock or rounded gravel bedding material.
The trench shall be backfilled with a minimum of six inches of sand over the sides and 12 inches loose sand over
the top of the pipe and consolidated to a minimum of 90% standard proctor density. This is basic class B
embedment as defined by ASCE Manual No. 37 and AWWA C900-75 and ASTM D2321, with 5% maximum
Mandrell test to be performed. Final backfill is to conform to section S.4.17. The class B embedment material is
further defined as follows:
(1) 95% of material passing a three-fourths-inch screen.
(2) 95% of material retained on a no. 4 screen.
(e) PVC pipe shall be encased in concrete. PVC pipe, vitrified clay pipe, and ductile iron pipe shall be
embedded in four inches of crushed stone and covered with one foot of free-flowing sand.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.61)
Sec. 13.03.133 Minimum size of main
The minimum diameter of sewer mains shall be eight inches. Six-inch diameter sewer mains may be acceptable
only for short distances (not to exceed 400 feet) and only in locations approved by the town. (1998 Code, sec.
51.62)
Sec. 13.03.134 Pipe joints
All vitrified clay sanitary sewer pipe joints shall be of the premolded type conforming to ASTM designation
C425. (1998 Code, sec. 51.63)
Sec. 13.03.135 Location
Wherever possible, sewers shall be located in the alleys or easements and shall be a minimum of five feet to six
and one-half feet deep to the invert. (1998 Code, sec. 51.64)
Sec. 13.03.136 Alignment and grades
All sewers shall be laid in straight alignment where possible, with a uniform grade between the manhole. In
those cases where horizontal curvature must be utilized to serve a particular area, the minimum radius of
curvature shall be 100 feet. Grades and appurtenances of sanitary sewers shall conform to the requirements of
the department of state health services, and the following are the minimum slopes which should be provided for
a velocity of at least 2.0 feet per second; however, slopes greater than these are desirable:
Sanitary Sewer (Diameter) Minimum Slope in Feet Per 100
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/665
Feet
4-inch (service mains) 1.000
6-inch 0.500
8-inch 0.330
10-inch 0.250
12-inch 0.200
15-inch 0.150
18-inch 0.110
21-inch 0.090
24-inch 0.080
27-inch 0.060
30-inch 0.055
36-inch 0.045
(1998 Code, sec. 51.65)
Sec. 13.03.137 Leakage tests
Prior to acceptance, the sanitary sewers shall be subject to leakage tests. The leakage outward or inward
(exfiltration or infiltration) shall not exceed 200 gallons per inch of the pipe diameter per mile per 24 hours for
any section of the system. Other testing procedures (exfiltration, air, and the like) may be used subject to the
approval of the town. (1998 Code, sec. 51.66)
Sec. 13.03.138 Lift stations
All lift stations shall be designed and constructed with two or more sewage pumps, and the stations shall be
capable of pumping the design maximum flow with the largest pump-out of service. Detailed design data, plans,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 431/665
and specifications of the pumps shall be submitted to the town engineer prior to the purchase and installation of
the lift station unit. (1998 Code, sec. 51.67)
Sec. 13.03.139 Force mains
(a) All force mains shall be ductile cast iron pipe, minimum class 50, with rubber gasket joint, and shall have a
cement mortar lining with a seal cast of bituminous material, or may have a polyethylene lining.
(b) Force mains constructed of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe, as required for water mains, may be used
where adequate provisions are made for the embedment of the pipe.
(c) At design for average flows, a cleansing velocity of at least two feet per second shall be maintained. Where
necessary, automatic air relief valves shall be placed at high points in the force main to prevent air locking.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.68)
Sec. 13.03.140 Manholes
(a) Manholes shall be placed at points of change in alignment, grade, or size of the sewer, the intersection of
sewers, and the end of all sanitary sewer mains that will be extended at a later date.
(b) Maximum manhole spacing for sewers with straight alignment and uniform grades should be determined
so as to assure continuous operation based on available cleaning equipment. The maximum manhole spacing
shall be as follows:
MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS
Sewer Pipe Size Manhole Diameters
Maximum Distance
Between Manholes
6" 4'-0" 400 ft.
8" 4'-0" 600 ft.
10" 4'-0" 800 ft.
12" 4'-6" 900 ft.
15" 4'-6" 1,000 ft.
18" 5'-0" 1,100 ft.
21" 5'-0" 1,200 ft.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 432/665
24" 5'-0" 1,300 ft.
30" 6'-0" 1,500 ft.
36" 6'-0" 1,500 ft.
(c) All sewer and storm sewer manhole lids shall include the words “Town of Fairview” and shall be
submitted to the director of public works or town engineer for approval.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.69)
Sec. 13.03.141 Cleanouts
Standard cleanouts shall be constructed at the ends of all sanitary sewers where no further extensions will ever
be made to the main. (1998 Code, sec. 51.70)
Secs. 13.03.142–13.03.170 Reserved
Division 6. Extension of Service
Part I. In General
Sec. 13.03.171 Definitions
For the purposes of division, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
Associated or other eligible facility. An apparatus or improvement that is used in conjunction with a water or
wastewater line or a drainage facility that provides water, wastewater or drainage service to a tract of land, regardless of
location. The term includes a lift station, a force main, a pump station, a storage tank, a drainage detention facility or other
drainage-related facility or an addition to any such existing line or facility that increases the capability of the existing
facility to provide water, wastewater or drainage service.
Developer. The person, business, corporation or association responsible for the development of a lot, parcel or tract, and
includes the property owner or subdivider.
Drainage facility. Any above ground or below ground structures, designed to carry, flow, receive or detain stormwater
across or from more than one property.
Oversize or oversizing. With reference to a water or wastewater line or an associated or other eligible facility, means an
increase in the size or capacity of the line or associated or other eligible facility above the minimum size or capacity,
including without limitation fire flow requirements, that is necessary to provide complete utility or drainage service to a
particular development.
Pro-rata application. A request in writing to the town for a service extension.
Pro-rata contract. A legal document that defines the responsibilities and requirements of the entity requesting a service
and the town with regard to the service extension. A pro-rata contract may be required at the sole discretion of the town.
Pro-rata fee. A charge made against a lot, tract or parcel for the purpose of reimbursing the town or a developer a
proportionate share of the service extension costs for extending a water or wastewater line and/or associated or other
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 433/665
eligible facility that serves the property against which the charge is made.
Service extension. A water or wastewater line or an associated or other eligible facility that is necessary to extend water,
wastewater or drainage service to or from a major town transmission main, collection main, or collection point to a tract of
land and across the tract or frontage of the tract to a point determined by the town engineer to be consistent with further
service extensions of the town.
Service extension costs. The total costs of any off-site service extension, as initially determined by the town's engineer,
including but not limited to costs of land/easement acquisition, design and construction costs, and any permitting or
administrative fees required for such extension, but not including amounts expended solely for oversizing.
Standard size. The size of water or wastewater line or associated or other eligible facility(ies) needed to serve a particular
development as determined by the town from time to time.
Water or wastewater line. A necessary appurtenance to a water distribution or wastewater collection system. The term
includes a valve, manhole, connection, air release, diversion, and other equipment necessary to make the water distribution
or wastewater collection system operable in compliance with the design criteria and standards of the town.
Sec. 13.03.172 Responsibilities of developer; application
(a) The developer shall extend all water and wastewater lines and associated or other eligible facility(ies)
needed to connect the development or land use with the town's approved water distribution system, wastewater
collection system, and drainage system. The developer shall further extend all lines across the property currently
being developed or to the point on such property from which such lines will be extended to serve adjoining land
as determined by the town. As a condition of acceptance of water or wastewater lines or associated or other
eligible facility(ies), the town may require conveyance of an easement on or across the property currently being
developed as well as other contiguous property owned by the developer for purposes of future extension of the
water or wastewater lines or associated or other eligible facility(ies). All initial service extension costs and all
initial costs of oversizing, shall be borne by the developer or property owner, subject to reimbursement from
proceeds of pro-rata fees or cost participation pursuant to sections 13.03.202 and 13.03.203. Requests for
extension of water and wastewater lines or other associated or eligible facility(ies) shall be as provided for in
this section.
(b) A pro-rata application is required to:
(1) Connect a tract of land to the existing town system; or
(2) Provide utility or drainage service to a tract of land if an existing line or associated facility or
other eligible facility is unsuitable or insufficient to provide such service to the tract.
(c) A developer or property owner must submit an application for a service extension to the town engineer.
(d) An application for a service extension must:
(1) Include a general description of the location, size, and capacity of the service extension; and
(2) If within the town's ETJ, be accompanied by an irrevocable petition to the town for voluntary
annexation at such time and under such conditions as deemed appropriate by the town.
(e) If either water, wastewater or drainage service is to be provided by an entity other than the town, the
application must be accompanied by evidence of a commitment from the other entity to provide the other
required service. The evidence must be in the form of:
(1) A contract with the entity;
(2) A letter from the entity; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 434/665
(3) The minutes of the relevant meeting of the governing body of the entity.
Sec. 13.03.173 Administrative approval
(a) The town manager may approve a pro-rata application or pro-rata contract for a service extension or
oversizing if:
(1) The requested service extension or oversizing does not include a request for establishment of
pro-rata fees or cost participation by the town; and
(2) The town manager determines that sufficient capacity exists or will be available to meet the
projected demands of the development or land use to be served.
(b) If a requested service extension or oversizing includes a request for establishment of pro-rata fees or cost
participation by the town, or if the town manager does not determine that sufficient capacity exists or will exist,
the application must be processed under sections 13.03.204 (contract required) and 13.03.205 (review and
approval) and requires a pro-rata contract.
Sec. 13.03.174 Construction standards; submission of construction plans
(a) After a pro-rata application or pro-rata contract has been approved, an applicant must submit the
construction plans for needed improvements to the town engineer for review and approval of the size, capacity,
and routing of the improvements.
(b) The town engineer may approve the size, capacity, or routing of an improvement only if it complies with
generally accepted engineering practices and each applicable town requirement.
(c) Water and wastewater lines and associated or other eligible facility(ies) shall be oversized where needed to
provide capacity to other existing or new developments in the area to be served in order to avoid duplication of
facilities, in conformity with the town's generally accepted engineering practices.
(d) The location and size of all water and wastewater lines or associated or other eligible facility(ies)
necessary to serve land to be developed shall be in accordance with the town's generally accepted engineering
practices and in accordance with the town's subdivision regulations.
(e) When an existing water or wastewater line or associated or other eligible facility provides service to a
proposed development, the developer shall pay all applicable pro-rata fees pursuant to section 13.03.205 or
13.03.207 before a connection is made.
Sec. 13.03.175 Submission of additional information
An applicant for a service extension shall provide information determined by the town engineer to be necessary to
demonstrate that construction of the service extension complies with the requirements of the town.
Sec. 13.03.176 Expiration of approval
(a) Unless extended under subsection (b) or (c), the approval of a pro-rata application remains valid until the
latest of:
(1) The date on which the preliminary plat expires for the property to be served by the service
extension;
(2) The second anniversary of the date on which the pro-rata application was approved, if on or
before that date:
(A) A preliminary plat for the property to be served has not been approved; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 435/665
(B) Construction of the service extension has not begun; or
(3) The date established in the pro-rata contract.
(b) If construction of a service extension begins before the approval expires under subsection (a), the town
manager may extend the approval of a service extension for the period of time estimated to be necessary to
complete construction of the service extension.
(c) Under this section, if the approval of a service extension requires a pro-rata contract:
(1) Construction of the service extension shall not begin until fiscal security is posted or money is
deposited in compliance with section 13.03.177; and
(2) The service extension approval is extended until construction of the service extension is
complete and the town accepts the lines and/or associated or other eligible facility(ies) facilities
constructed under the contract.
Sec. 13.03.177 Fiscal security
(a) For construction pro-rata contracts administered by the town, fiscal security in an amount approved by the
town engineer to be equal to 100% of the estimated service extension costs and 100% of the costs of any
oversizing, must be deposited in cash with the town prior to entering into a construction contract.
(b) For construction contracts administered by a party other than the town, the fiscal security must be posted
prior to the execution of a construction contract and must be in the form of:
(1) An irrevocable letter of credit that has a minimum term of three years and is acceptable to the
town;
(2) A performance bond; or
(3) A cash deposit.
Sec. 13.03.178 Hardship policy for extension to single dwelling unit
(a) The town may, at its expense and in its sole discretion, upon written request of a property owner, extend a
water or wastewater line or associated or other eligible facility(ies) of a size determined by the town to serve a
single dwelling unit if funds are available to pay the cost of installing the line and the extension or associated or
other eligible facility(ies) meets the standards in subsection (b).
(b) (1) The person requesting the extension must demonstrate that:
(A) A substantial hardship would result if the service extension is not made;
(B) Denial of the service extension would result in potential water quality degradation or
drainage obstructions or other inadequacies; and
(C) The service extension is necessary to provide like benefits to similarly served property.
(2) The town may require that the property owner making the request share in the service extension
costs, and that the property owner grant all necessary easements to continue line service extensions to
serve adjoining land.
(c) This policy has no application to circumstances in which multiple connections are requested or necessary
to serve existing or proposed development, or in which the town determines to initiate construction of a water or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 436/665
wastewater line or associated facility or associated or other eligible facility(ies) that serves multiple users. This
policy may not be invoked to finance serial connections to lots in an existing subdivision.
Secs. 13.03.179–13.03.200 Reserved
Part II. Pro Rata Fees and Cost Participation
Sec. 13.03.201 Eligibility
A developer that agrees to construct a water or wastewater line, drainage facility, or an associated or other eligible facility
that on acceptance will become part of the town's water and wastewater system and/or drainage system and which supplies
capacity to other existing or new developments, and that is not a facility included on the capital improvements plan for
water or wastewater facilities and/or drainage facilities, may apply to the town to establish pro-rata fees to be paid by other
users of the facilities and to reimburse the developer a proportional amount of the service extension costs or other eligible
costs. The developer also may apply for cost participation by the town for the costs of oversizing water or wastewater lines
or associated or other eligible facility(ies) in excess of one size larger than the standard size required to serve the
development.
Sec. 13.03.202 Calculation of pro-rata fees
(a) The amount of the cost reimbursement for an extension of a water or wastewater line, if any, shall be
computed as the off site length of a water or wastewater line that has been extended by a developer multiplied by
the then-current average cost, per linear foot, of the service extension costs as determined by the town engineer.
The amount of the pro-rata fee based upon such computation shall be established for each side of the line to
which connections are to be made. For mains that can be connected to from both sides, the fee for each side shall
be equivalent to 1/2 of the average linear foot cost referenced above, multiplied by the length of the water or
wastewater line on or abutting the property being charged. For mains that can be connected to from one side
only, the fee shall be equivalent to the average linear foot cost referenced above, multiplied by the length of the
line on or abutting the property being charged.
(b) In the alternative, the developer may apply for a different cost reimbursement formula, based upon
engineering cost estimates of the service extension costs agreed upon in writing by the town manager and the
applicant, and verified in a study provided by the applicant approved by the town engineer. The study shall
aggregate the costs of associated facilities where feasible. The town engineer may establish guidelines for
eligible costs to administer the policy in this section. The amount of the pro-rata fee shall be that calculated in
the approved study. The study shall contain the following minimum elements:
(1) Identification of the area and all properties to be served by the water or wastewater lines or
associated or other eligible facility(ies) to be installed;
(2) Identification of the costs of the facilities to be installed;
(3) Apportionment of the costs of the facilities to be installed among lots, tracts or parcels to be
served by the improvements, based upon capacity to be utilized by such properties, using accepted
engineering standards and practices;
(4) Calculation of the maximum amount of the costs which are to be reimbursed to the developer
or property owner, net of costs attributable to the developer's or property owner's utilization of
capacity of the lines or associated facilities or other eligible facilities; and
(5) Calculation of a pro-rata fee to be charged per unit of land that is to be connected to the water
or wastewater lines or associated or other eligible facility(ies).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 437/665
(c) In making the initial determination of appropriate pro-rata fees under subsections (a) or (b), above, the
town engineer shall certify in writing that the amount of the pro-rata fee is roughly proportionate to the impact
that the properties to be charged will have on the town's water and wastewater utility system and/or drainage
system.
(d) After construction of off-site improvements by a developer that are subject to reimbursement from pro-rata
fees, but before the town's acceptance of such improvements, the town engineer may request, and the developer
shall be required to promptly supply, verifiable proof of the actual costs expended as to all such off-site
improvements. If the actual costs to complete such improvements - including but not limited to costs of
land/easement acquisition, design and construction costs, and any permitting or administrative fees required for
such extension, but not including amounts expended solely for oversizing - are less than the town engineer's
initial determination of the service extension costs or oversizing costs under subsection (a) or (b), above, then
the amount of pro-rata fees as relates to those improvements shall be decreased to correspond to said actual
costs.
Sec. 13.03.203 Cost participation for oversized lines
The town may participate in the reasonable construction costs of oversizing water or wastewater lines or associated or
other eligible facility(ies) that exceed the standard size of a water or wastewater line, and/or associated or other eligible
facility(ies). The developer initially shall be responsible for the entire cost of the oversized facilities. Town oversize
participation shall be in accordance with this section and any applicable provisions of the town's subdivision regulations.
The town in its sole discretion shall determine the amount of any cost participation based on engineering estimates of the
costs attributable to the increase in the size of lines or associated or other eligible facility(ies) exceeding the standard size,
taking into consideration the degree to which the need for such oversizing is created by the development for which service
extension is being requested. In no event may the town be required to participate in the costs of oversize facilities pursuant
to this section if there are no funds available for such purposes.
Sec. 13.03.204 Contract
(a) The applicant for approval of a service extension must request the establishment of pro-rata fees or cost
participation in writing at the time the applicant applies to the town manager for approval of the service
extension. If the applicant for approval of a service extension requests establishment of pro-rata fees or cost
participation, a written pro-rata contract is required.
(b) The pro-rata contract shall include at a minimum the pro-rata fee and cost participation, if any, approved
by the town, the duration of the right to collect pro-rata fees, and provisions for forfeiture of such fees to the
town in the event they are not collected by the contracting party, his or her successor-in-interest, or assignee.
(c) An executed pro-rata contract may be assigned by the party requesting service extension with the written
consent of the town, which shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Sec. 13.03.205 Review and approval; collection of pro-rata fees
(a) The town manager shall review each request for cost reimbursement from pro-rata fees or cost
participation for oversizing lines.
(b) The town manager shall formulate his or her recommendation concerning the cost reimbursement from
pro-rata fees or cost participation for oversizing lines, which shall address each of the following minimum
criteria:
(1) The line to be extended or other eligible facility has not been included on the impact fee capital
improvements plan for that category of capital improvement;
(2) The size of each proposed line or eligible facility complies with the generally accepted
engineering practices and other planning criteria of the town and final design and routing will comply
with the technical standards;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 438/665
(3) Any alternative study proposing pro-rata fees fairly apportions the extension/facility costs
among prospective users of the facilities to be installed;
(4) The proposed line or facility is a reasonable extension or addition to the water and wastewater
utility system and/or drainage system; and
(5) Funds for participation in the costs of oversizing lines/facilities are available from an identified
source of funds or funds will be available to meet the proposed payment schedule.
(c) The town manager shall forward his recommendation on pro-rata fees and cost participation, together with
the proposed pro-rata contract, for decision by the town council.
(d) Upon approval of the request for reimbursement from pro-rata fees, any developer or user of property with
frontage along the off-site portion of the water or wastewater line or of property that is identified in the approved
fee study thereafter that connects to or utilizes the capacity of the water or wastewater line or associated or other
eligible facility for which a pro-rata fee has been established shall pay the applicable fee. Pro-rata fees shall be
collected by the town from the developer or user before approval of the engineering plans for the development
required to pay the fee, or before connection to or use of the water or wastewater line or associated or other
eligible facility(ies) for which the fee has been established, whichever first occurs.
Sec. 13.03.206 Conditions
(a) A developer constructing a water or wastewater line or other facility that is eligible for cost reimbursement
from pro-rata fees or cost participation for oversizing may not receive cost reimbursement payment for the line
or facility unless the entity complies with each requirement or regulation of the town relating to:
(1) The public advertising of the line or facility;
(2) The bidding on the line or facility;
(3) A performance or payment bond for the line or facility; and
(4) A maintenance bond on the line or facility.
(b) The developer constructing the line or facility is not entitled to receive a cost reimbursement payment
from pro-rata fee proceeds or cost participation for oversizing lines or associated or other eligible facility(ies)
until the entity submits documentation showing the entity's compliance with each requirement described by
subsection (a) and the line or facility is accepted in writing by the town.
Sec. 13.03.207 Payments to developer
(a) For projects subject to a pro-rata contract approved by the town by April 1st of any year, the town shall
pay the developer holding the contract any eligible cost reimbursement for a service extension and/or oversizing,
without interest, within 60 days of completion and acceptance of the project by the town, but no earlier than the
following September 1st.
(b) For projects for which a pro-rata contract is approved by the town after April 1st of any year, the town
shall pay the developer holding the contract any eligible cost reimbursement for a service extension and/or
oversizing, without interest, for a completed and accepted project within 60 days of completion and acceptance
of the project by the town but no earlier than September 1st of the next calendar year.
(c) For a period of 15 years following the town's acceptance of the water line, wastewater line, or associated
facility or other eligible facility, the developer shall be entitled to reimbursement from the proceeds of the prorata
fees established pursuant to this division, up to the maximum amount of the reimbursement established in
the approved pro-rata contract. The town may deduct 2% of the amount of pro-rata fees collected from the
amount of the fees reimbursed to the developer as an administration fee.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 439/665
(d) Pro-rata fees which have been collected pursuant to the pro-rata contract shall be paid to the developer
annually no later than October 1st of each year, until the term of the agreement expires.
(e) The town may establish one or more pro-rata fee accounts for purposes of administering the policies of this
division. The town shall deposit all pro-rata fees collected pursuant to this article into such account(s).
Expenditures from such accounts shall be earmarked solely for reimbursement of developers for the installation
of water lines or wastewater lines or associated or other eligible facility(ies) for which pro-rata fees have been
established pursuant to this article.
(f) It shall be the responsibility of the pro-rata contract holder or his assignee to provide to the town in writing
current contact information. The town will mail reimbursement payments to the last contact of record reflected
on its books. In the event that the pro-rata contract holder or his assignee has not collected pro-rata payments or
cost participation in oversize lines/facilities sent to the contact of record for a period of one year from the date
such payments are due pursuant to this section, such accrued amounts shall become the funds of the town for
purposes of expenditure on cost participation for oversizing lines or other system improvements in the town's
sole discretion.
Sec. 13.03.208 Pro-rata fees for town projects
(a) The town may initiate capital projects from time to time involving construction of water or wastewater
lines or associated or other eligible facilities, and may seek to recoup its costs through establishment of pro-rata
fees.
(b) Prior to establishing fees, the town shall either compute fees based upon a per average linear foot formula
similar to the formula described in section 13.03.202(a) or pursuant to a study that satisfies the requirements of
section 13.03.202(b). The town council shall establish pro-rata fees based upon the front footage formula or
alternative study.
(c) Following establishment of pro-rata fees by the town council, the developer or user of property with
property frontage on the extended water or wastewater line or of property that was identified in the approved
pro-rata fee study thereafter that connects to or utilizes the capacity of the water or wastewater line or associated
or other eligible facility(ies) for which a pro-rata fee has been established shall pay the applicable fee. Pro-rata
fees shall be collected by the town from the developer or user before approval of the engineering plans for the
development required to pay the fee, or before connection to the water or wastewater line or associated or other
eligible facility(ies) for which the fee has been established, whichever first occurs.
(d) Pro-rata fees established under this section may be collected for a period of 15 years following final
construction by the town of the water line, wastewater line, or associated or other eligible facility.
(Ordinance 2018-5 adopted 3/6/18)
ARTICLE 13.04 WATER WELLS*
Sec. 13.04.001 Penalty
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article, and any person violating or failing to
comply with any provision hereof shall be fined, upon conviction, in an amount not more than $500, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1998
Code, sec. 51.999)
Sec. 13.04.002 Compliance
No person, firm, corporation or other business entity shall drill or attempt to drill or use any water well within
the corporate limits of the town except in compliance with the provisions of this article. (1998 Code, sec. 51.90)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 440/665
Sec. 13.04.003 Use generally
If town water service is available to any property, no water well shall be used for potable water purposes in place
of town water service. In the event a property owner desires to drill or use a water well to supplement town
water service, such well may be used only for irrigation and livestock purposes and shall not be connected to the
potable water system. In no case may a well be drilled or used on any lot or property of less than seven acres if
town water service is available, except that a homeowners' association may request from the director of public
works a permit to drill a well the sole purpose of which shall be irrigation of common areas owned and/or
maintained by the association. (1998 Code, sec. 51.91)
Sec. 13.04.004 Permit; water hygiene standards
(a) No water well may be drilled within the corporate limits of the town without first obtaining a permit from
the town, and such permit, when obtained, shall be affixed to a stake or other suitable marker at the well site.
(b) The application for a permit and the issued permit shall specify the location of the well; the depth and size
of hole to be drilled; the type, diameter and length of the inner casing and well screen; the type, diameter and
length of the outer steel casing (surface casing); and the size and type of the sanitary well seal. Such application
shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the well and the name, address and
telephone number of the well driller. The town inspector shall, before approving a permit, inspect drilling sites
and verify the location of the well site in compliance with the foregoing requirements by on-site observation.
Permits may be revoked by the town inspector for any deviation from the permit.
(c) No permit shall be issued unless a state-licensed water well driller is named as the water well driller. The
water well shall be drilled in accordance with the Texas Well Drillers Act or any statute which supersedes or
replaces that act.
(d) All water from a water well which is to be used for human consumption shall comply with all state and
federal water hygiene standards and requirements. No person shall operate or cause to be operated a water well,
the water from which is to be used for human consumption, unless the water from such water well complies with
all state and federal water hygiene standards and requirements.
(e) Applications for a water well permit shall be submitted to the town secretary at least two weeks prior to the
commencement of drilling activity, and drilling shall not occur until the permit is granted. The inspection fee for
a water well permit shall be $100; provided, however, if a water well requires more than two inspections, each
inspection in excess of two inspections shall require the payment of $50.00.
(1998 Code, sec. 51.92)
Sec. 13.04.005 Sanitary control easement
A sanitary control easement shall be filed in the county clerk's office restricting the construction of any water
well or septic sewer system within 150 feet of a water well, and such easement shall comply with all state laws
and all regulations of the state commission on environmental quality. (1998 Code, sec. 51.93)
ARTICLE 13.05 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES*
Sec. 13.05.001 Chapter 366 enforced
The town clearly understands that there are technical criteria, legal requirements, and administrative procedures
and duties associated with regulating on-site sewage facilities, and will fully enforce chapter 366 of the Texas
Health and Safety Code (H&SC) and chapters 7 and 37 of the Texas Water Code (TWC), and associated rules
referenced in section 13.05.004 of this article.
Sec. 13.05.002 Area of jurisdiction
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 441/665
The rules shall apply to all the area lying within the incorporated limits of the town.
Sec. 13.05.003 On-site sewage facility rules
Any permit issued for an on-site sewage facility within the jurisdictional area of the town must comply with the
rules adopted in section 13.05.004 of this article.
Sec. 13.05.004 On-site sewage facility rules adopted
The rules, title 30 Texas Administrative Code (TAC) sections 285.1–285.91 and TAC 30, attached to Ordinance
2009-2-10B, promulgated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality for on-site sewage facilities are
hereby adopted, and all officials and employees of the town having duties under said rules are authorized to
perform such duties as are required of them under said rules.
Sec. 13.05.005 Incorporation by reference
The rules, 30 TAC chapters 30 and 285 and all future amendments and revisions thereto are incorporated by
reference and are thus made a part of these rules. A copy of the current rules is attached to these rules as
appendix I of Ordinance 2009-2-10B on file in the office of the town secretary.
Sec. 13.05.006 Amendments
The town wishing to adopt more stringent rules for its on-site sewage facility ordinance understands that the
more stringent conflicting local rule shall take precedence over the corresponding Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality requirement. Listed below are the more stringent rules adopted by the town:
(1) An OSSF shall not be permitted on less than one acre, except where a residential lot of one-half
acre or more has already been platted within an existing subdivision.
(Ordinance 2009-2-10B adopted 2/10/09)
(2) Exception: The town engineer may approve construction of on-site sewage facilities (OSSF) on
residential lots of more than one-half acre but less than one acre, where the lot is not platted within an
existing subdivision, is not contiguous to undeveloped property that may reasonably be conjoined or
has the same property owner, and is not served by municipal wastewater service. (Ordinance 2009-4-
7B adopted 4/7/09)
(3) A permit shall be required for all OSSF regardless of acreage.
(4) The owner or person who has legal responsibility of an existing OSSF shall have the system
inspected before any sales and/or transfers of ownership.
(5) Grease trap sizing, if applicable, shall be done using the EPA method and the International
Plumbing Code method; the larger of the two resulting tank sizes shall be used.
(6) Calculations for hydraulic and organic load for both normal and peak flows on all commercial
systems shall be provided showing that both organic and hydraulic overloading of the treatment
and/or disposal method is prevented.
(7) All planning material must be prepared by a professional engineer or registered sanitarian
authorized to practice in the state.
(8) Aerobic plants tested under NSF standard 40 shall be sized for residential units based on an
assumed hydraulic load of 150 gallons per day per bedroom.
(9) New anaerobic systems shall not be permitted.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 442/665
(10) The allowable timeframe for a maintenance company to respond to a complaint from the
property owner or electronic notification shall be no longer than 48 hours.
(11) The maintenance frequency shall be as follows:
(A) Residential. Three (3) inspections per year;
(B) Residential electronically monitored. Two (2) inspections per year;
(C) Commercial. Twelve (12) inspections per year. (Requests for decreased frequency for
commercial systems will be considered on a case-by-case basis.)
(12) All new commercial systems requiring on-going maintenance by these rules shall be
electronically monitored. Other systems may be electronically monitored to reduce the number of
required maintenance visits.
(13) Electronic monitoring must be continuously maintained.
(14) For structures with more than one sewer stub out or other similar instances, all sewer lines
shall have a common connection prior to entering the main tank battery unless the tank battery is
designed with more than one entrance.
(15) All installers and their apprentices shall maintain copies of approved plans, contracts,
manifests, well data, and component specifications required and specified by the approved plans on
the job site and make available to the inspector until all required inspections are completed.
(16) Owners of OSSF requiring maintenance under these rules must acquire and maintain a
maintenance, testing, and reporting contract with a licensed maintenance company; homeowner
maintenance shall be prohibited.
(17) All components that need to be replaced on an aerobic treatment system must be replaced by a
licensed installer and must be component compatible.
Sec. 13.05.007 Duties and powers
The OSSF inspector of the town, must be certified by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality before
assuming the duties and responsibilities.
Sec. 13.05.008 Collection of fees
All fees collected for permits and/or inspections shall be made payable to the town.
Sec. 13.05.009 Appeals
Persons aggrieved by an action or decision of the designated representative may appeal such action or decision
to the town council.
Sec. 13.05.010 Penalties
This article adopts and incorporates all applicable penalty provisions related to on-site sewage facilities, which
includes, but is not limited to, those found in chapters 341 and 366 of the Texas Health and Safety Code,
chapters 7, 26, and 37 of the Texas Water Code and 30 TAC chapters 30 and 285.
(Ordinance 2009-2-10B adopted 2/10/09)
ARTICLE 13.06 MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 443/665
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.06.001 Generally
(a) The town council finds it to be in the public interest to protect the public health and safety from loss of life
and property caused by surface water overflows and surface water stagnation within the boundaries of the town,
and further finds that to protect such public interests:
(1) The town will establish a schedule of drainage charges against all real property in the town
subject to charges under subchapter C of chapter 402 of the Texas Local Government Code;
(2) The town will provide drainage for all real property in the town on payment of drainage
charges, except such real property which may be exempted therefrom as authorized by law; and
(3) The town will offer such drainage service on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable
terms.
(b) By the creation of the municipal drainage system via Ordinances 2003-0034 and 2003-0038, the town
makes no representation that all of the town drainage problems will be immediately solved, and the town council
is given full discretion in establishing time and quantitative priorities in expending funds as they become
available to meet the drainage needs of the town on a reasonable basis, nor will the passage of Ordinances 2003-
0034 and 2003-0038 be construed to relieve private landowners, developers and others from providing drainage
improvements pursuant to the subdivision control ordinance of the town, as well as any other ordinance of the
town and laws of this state which relate to drainage or drainage improvements.
(c) The town council may, by subsequent ordinance, adopt rules for the operation and conduct of the
municipal drainage system consistent with its authority and state law.
(1998 Code, sec. 53.01)
Sec. 13.06.002 System established; adoption of state law
The town municipal drainage utility system is herewith and hereby established and declared to be a public
utility. The town shall have full authority to operate the municipal drainage utility system pursuant to the
authority given and contained under subchapter C of chapter 402, Tex. Loc. Gov't Code. Subchapter C of chapter
402, Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, as now existing or as hereafter amended, is herewith adopted. (1998 Code, sec.
53.02)
Secs. 13.06.003–13.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Drainage Charges
Sec. 13.06.031 Public hearing
Prior to levying any drainage charges for the funding of the town municipal drainage utility system, the town
council shall hold a public hearing on such charges pursuant to state law. (1998 Code, sec. 53.03)
Sec. 13.06.032 Changes and adjustments
The town council may change, adjust, and/or readjust the rates and charges as established in the fee schedule in
appendix A of this code for drainage services from time to time. (1998 Code, sec. 53.04)
Sec. 13.06.033 Exemptions
The following properties are exempted from drainage charges:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 444/665
(1) Properties owned by the town and other governmental entities;
(2) Properties owned by the McKinney and Lovejoy Independent School Districts;
(3) Properties with proper construction and maintenance of a wholly sufficient and privately
owned drainage system;
(4) Properties held and maintained in their natural state, until such time that the property is
developed; and
(5) Any subdivided lot, until a structure has been built on the lot and the town has approved a final
inspection for the structure.
(1998 Code, sec. 53.05)
Sec. 13.06.034 Billing and collection
Except as may be otherwise provided herein, billing, penalties, interest, and collection procedures shall be
consistent with that of the town's water and sewer services. Drainage charges, when billed through utility bills,
shall be identified separately on such bills. Delinquent charges shall be collected in a manner consistent with
section 402.050 of the Texas Local Government Code. All billings shall be sent to the freehold landowner at any
known address if same be different from the utility billing. (1998 Code, sec. 53.06)
Sec. 13.06.035 Appeals
An owner of nonresidential property may appeal once per year the drainage charges by filing a written
application with the town. (1998 Code, sec. 53.07)
ARTICLE 13.07 WATER CONSERVATION PLAN
Sec. 13.07.001 Introduction and objectives
(a) Water supply has always been a key issue in the development of the state. In recent years, the growing
population and economic development of North Central Texas have led to increasing demands for water
supplies. At the same time, local and less expensive sources of water supply are largely developed. Additional
supplies to meet higher demands will be expensive and difficult to develop. It is therefore important that
NTMWD and its member cities and customers make the most efficient use of existing supplies. This will delay
the need for new supplies, minimize the environmental impacts associated with developing new supplies, and
delay the high cost of additional water supply development.
(b) Recognizing the need for efficient use of existing water supplies, the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (TCEQ) has developed guidelines and requirements governing the development of water conservation
and drought contingency plans for public water suppliers. The best management practices established by the
Water Conservation Implementation Task Force, established pursuant to SB1094 by the 78th Legislature, were
also considered in the development of the water conservation measures. The North Texas Municipal Water
District (NTMWD) also developed a model water conservation plan for its member cities and customers
following TCEQ guidelines and requirements. The town's water conservation plan was developed in concert
with that model and with the NTMWD's own water conservation plan.
(c) This plan includes measures that are intended to result in ongoing, long-term water savings. The drought
contingency and water emergency response plan addresses strategies designed to temporarily reduce water use in
response to specific conditions. The objectives of this model water conservation plan are as follows:
(1) To reduce water consumption from the levels that would prevail without conservation efforts;
(2) To reduce the loss and waste of water;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 445/665
(3) To improve efficiency in the use of water;
(4) To document the level of recycling and reuse in the water supply;
(5) To extend the life of current water supplies by reducing the rate of growth in demand; and
(6) To preserve supplies for essential uses under drought or water emergency conditions.
Sec. 13.07.002 Texas commission on environmental quality rules
Conservation plans. The TCEQ rules governing development of water conservation plans for public water
suppliers are contained in title 30, part 1, chapter 288, subchapter A, rule 288.2 of the Texas Administrative
Code. For the purpose of these rules, a water conservation plan is defined as “A strategy or combination of
strategies for reducing the volume of water withdrawn from a water supply source, for reducing the loss or waste
of water, for maintaining or improving the efficiency in the use of water, for increasing the recycling and reuse
of water, and for preventing the pollution of water.” The elements in the TCEQ water conservation rules covered
in this conservation plan are listed below.
(1) Minimum conservation plan requirements. The minimum requirements in the Texas
Administrative Code for water conservation plans for public water suppliers are covered in this report
as follows:
(A) 288.2(a)(1)(A): Utility profile.
(B) 288.2(a)(1)(B): Specification of goals.
(C) 288.2(a)(1)(C): Specific, quantified goals.
(D) 288.2(a)(1)(D): Accurate metering.
(E) 288.2(a)(1)(E): Universal metering.
(F) 288.2(a)(1)(F): Determination and control of unaccounted water.
(G) 288.2(a)(1)(G): Public education and information program.
(H) 288.2(a)(1)(H): Nonpromotional water rate structure.
(I) 288.2(a)(1)(I): Reservoir system operation plan.
(J) 288.2(a)(1)(J): Means of implementation and enforcement.
(K) 288.2(a)(1)(K): Coordination with regional water planning group.
(L) 288.2(c): Review and update of plan.
(2) Conservation additional requirements (population over 5,000). The Texas Administrative Code
includes additional requirements for water conservation plans for drinking water supplies serving a
population over 5,000:
(A) 288.2(a)(2)(A): Leak detection, repair, and water loss accounting.
(B) 288.2(a)(2)(B): Record management system.
(C) 288.2(a)(2)(C): Requirement for water conservation plans by wholesale customers.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 446/665
(3) Additional conservation strategies. The TCEQ requires that a water conservation
implementation report be completed and submitted on an annual basis. This report is included in
appendix A to Ordinance 2013-5-7B.
(A) In addition to the TCEQ required water conservation strategies, the NTMWD also
requires the following strategy:
(i) 288.2(a)(3)(F): Considerations for landscape water management regulations.
(B) TCEQ rules also include optional, but not required, conservation strategies, which may
be adopted by suppliers. The NTMWD recommends that the following strategies:
(i) 288.2(a)(3)(A): Conservation oriented water rates.
(ii) 288.2(a)(3)(B): Ordinances, plumbing codes or rules on water-conserving fixtures.
(iii) 288.2(a)(3)(C): Replacement or retrofit of water-conserving plumbing fixtures.
(iv) 288.2(a)(3)(D): Reuse and recycling of wastewater.
(v) 288.2(a)(3)(F): Considerations for landscape water management regulations.
(vi) 288.2(a)(3)(G): Monitoring method.
(vii) 288.2(a)(3)(H): Additional conservation ordinance provisions.
Sec. 13.07.003 Water utility profile
Appendix B to this water conservation plan attached to Ordinance 2013-5-7B is based on the format
recommended by the TCEQ for a water utility profile. In adopting this plan, the town will provide a draft utility
profile to NTMWD for review and comment. A final water utility profile will be provided to NTMWD upon
adoption of and any updates to this plan.
Sec. 13.07.004 Specification of water conservation goals
TCEQ rules require the adoption of specific water conservation goals for a water conservation plan. The goals
for this water conservation plan include the following:
(1) Maintain the per capita municipal water use below the specified amount in gallons per capita
per day in a dry year, as shown in the completed table 4.1.
(2) Maintain the level of unaccounted water in the system below twelve percent annually in 2013
and subsequent years.
(3) Implement and maintain a program of universal metering and meter replacement and repair.
(4) Increase efficient water usage through a water conservation ordinance, order or resolution.
(This ordinance is required by the NTMWD.)
(5) Decrease waste in lawn irrigation by implementation and enforcement of landscape water
management regulations.
(6) Raise public awareness of water conservation and encourage responsible public behavior by a
public education and information program.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 447/665
(7) Develop a system specific strategy to conserve water during peak demands, thereby reducing
the peak use.
Table 4.1
Five-Year and Ten-Year Municipal Per Capita Water Use Goals (gpcd)
Description
Current
Average
(gpcd)
5-Year
Goal
(gcpd)
10-Year
Goal
(gpcd)
Current 5-year average per capita municipal
use with credit for reuse 268 262 255
Expected reduction due to low-flow plumbing
fixtures
Projected reduction due to elements in this
plan
Water conservation goals (with credit for
reuse)
Sec. 13.07.005 Metering, water use records, control of unaccounted water, and leak detection and repair
One of the key elements of water conservation is tracking water use and controlling losses caused by illegal
diversions and leaks. It is important to carefully meter water use, detect and repair leaks in the distribution
system and provide regular monitoring of unaccounted water.
(1) Accurate metering of treated water deliveries from NTMWD. Water deliveries from NTMWD
are metered by NTMWD using meters with accuracy of ±2%. These meters are calibrated on a
monthly basis by NTMWD to maintain the required accuracy.
(2) Metering of customer and public uses and meter testing, repair, and replacement.
(A) The provision of water to all customers, including public and governmental users, should
be metered. The town already meters all residential, retail, wholesale water users all internal
water uses, parks, town facilities, special uses, firefighting and training, (where practical), etc.
(B) Prior to 2008 the town replaced a large percentage of its meters. Going forward, all
customer meters should be replaced at least every fifteen years, and the town shall maintain all
records necessary to ensure said replacements are completed in a timely manner.
(3) Record management system. As required by TAC title 30, part 1, chapter 288, subchapter A,
rule 288.2(a)(2)(B), the town's record management system allows for the separation of water sales
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 448/665
and uses into residential, commercial, public/institutional, and industrial categories. This information
shall be included in an annual water conservation report.
(4) Determination and control of unaccounted water.
(A) Unaccounted water is the difference between water delivered to the town from NTMWD
(and other supplies, if applicable) and metered water sales to customers plus authorized but
unmetered uses. (Authorized but unmetered uses include use for firefighting, releases for
flushing of lines, uses associated with new construction, etc.) Unaccounted water can include
several categories:
(i) Inaccuracies in customer meters.
(ii) Accounts that are being used but have not yet been added to the billing system.
(iii) Losses due to water main breaks and leaks in the water distribution system.
(iv) Losses due to illegal connections and theft.
(v) Other.
(B) Measures to control unaccounted water shall be a part of the routine operations of the
town's utility department. Maintenance crews and personnel shall look for and report evidence
of leaks in the water distribution system. Meter readers shall watch for and report signs of
illegal connections, so they can be quickly addressed.
(C) Unaccounted water should be calculated in accordance with the provisions of appendix
B, to Ordinance 2013-5-7B. With the measures described in this plan, the town hopes to
maintain unaccounted water below twelve percent. If unaccounted water exceeds this goal, the
town shall consider implementing a more intensive audit to determine the source(s) of and
reduce the unaccounted water. The annual conservation report is the primary tool that shall be
used to monitor unaccounted water.
(5) Leak detection and repair. As described above, town crews and personnel shall look for and
report evidence of leaks in the water distribution system. Areas of the water distribution system in
which numerous leaks and line breaks occur shall be targeted for replacement as funds are available.
(6) Monitoring of effectiveness and efficiency; annual water conservation report. Appendix C, to
Ordinance 2013-5-7B, shall be used in the development of an annual water conservation report by the
town. This form shall be completed by March 31st of each year and used to monitor the effectiveness
and efficiency of the water conservation program and to plan conservation-related activities for the
next year. The form records the water use by category, per capita municipal use, and unaccounted
water for the current year, and compares them to historical values. The annual water conservation
report shall be sent to NTMWD, which will monitor water conservation trends.
(7) Water conservation implementation report. Appendix A, to Ordinance 2013-5-7B, includes the
TCEQ-required water conservation implementation report. The report is due to the TCEQ by May 1st
of each year. This report lists the various water conservation strategies that have been implemented,
including the date the strategy was implemented. The report also updates the status of the five-year
and ten-year per capita water use goals from the previous water conservation plan.
Sec. 13.07.006 Continuing public education and information campaign
The town's continuing public education and information campaign on water conservation includes the following
elements:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 449/665
(1) Utilize the “Water IQ: Know Your Water” and other public education materials produced by the
NTMWD.
(2) Insert water conservation information with water bills. Inserts will include material developed
by town staff and material obtained from the TWDB, the TCEQ, and other sources.
(3) Encourage local media coverage of water conservation issues and the importance of water
conservation.
(4) Notify local organizations, schools, and civic groups that town staff and staff of the NTMWD
are available to make presentations on the importance of water conservation and ways to save water.
(5) Promote the Texas Smartscape website (www.txsmartscape.com) and provide water
conservation brochures and other water conservation materials available to the public at town hall
and other public places.
(6) Make information on water conservation available on the town website and include links to the
“Water IQ: Know Your Water” website, Texas Smartscape website, and to information on water
conservation on the TWDB and TCEQ websites and other resources.
Sec. 13.07.007 Water rate structure
The town utilizes, an increasing block rate water structure intended to encourage water conservation and
discourage excessive use and waste of water. Current rates are as follows:
(1) Residential.
(A) First 2,000 gallons: $12.24 per 1,000 gallons.
(B) 2,001–10,000 gallons: $2.67 per 1,000 gallons.
(C) 10,001–20,000 gallons: $3.12 per 1,000 gallons.
(D) 20,001–30,000 gallons: $3.39 per 1,000 gallons.
(E) Over 30,000 gallons: $4.24 per 1,000 gallons.
(F) 40,001 and up gallons: $6.00 per 1,000 gallons.
(2) Commercial/industrial.
(A) First 1,000 gallons: $14.69 per 1,000 gallons.
(B) 1,001–30,000 gallons: $3.34 per 1,000 gallons.
(C) Over 30,000 gallons: $4.24 per 1,000 gallons.
(3) Hydro mulch (or other portable water meters). $53.00 minimum per job plus commercial rates
per gallon.
(4) High use water conservation surcharge. Water connections that use more than 40,000 gallons of
water in any one month shall be assessed a surcharge of $2.45 for every 1,000 gallons over 40,000.
Sec. 13.07.008 Other water conservation measures
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 450/665
(a) NTMWD system operation plan. The town purchases treated water from NTMWD and does not have
surface water supplies for which to implement a system operation plan. NTMWD's permits do allow some
coordinated operation of its water supply sources, and NTMWD is seeking additional water rights for
coordinated operation to optimize its available water supplies.
(b) Reuse and recycling of wastewater. The town neither owns nor operates a wastewater treatment plant.
Wastewater is treated by NTMWD, which has the largest wastewater reuse program in the state. NTMWD has
water rights allowing reuse of up to 71,882 acre-feet per year of this treated wastewater through Lake Lavon for
municipal purposes. In addition, NTMWD has also developed the East Fork Raw Water Supply Project which
can divert up to 157,393 acre-feet per year based on treated wastewater discharges by the NTMWD. When fully
developed, these two reuse projects will provide up to 44 percent of the NTMWD's currently permitted water
supplies. NTMWD also provides treated effluent from its wastewater treatment plants available for direct reuse
for landscape irrigation and industrial use.
(c) Ordinances, plumbing codes, or rules on water-conserving fixtures. The state has required waterconserving
fixtures in new construction and renovations since 1992. The state standards call for flows of no
more than 2.5 gallons per minute (gpm) for faucets, 3.0 gpm for showerheads, and 1.6 gallons per flush for
toilets. Similar standards are now required nationally under federal law. These state and federal standards assure
that all new construction and renovations will use water-conserving fixtures.
(d) Landscape water management measures. The following landscape water management measures are
required by the NTMWD. These minimal measures are hereby adopted as part of the town's plan in order to
appropriately irrigate landscaping:
(1) Time of day restrictions prohibiting lawn irrigation watering from 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. from
April 1st to October 31st of each year.
(2) Prohibition of watering of impervious surfaces.
(3) Prohibition of outdoor watering during precipitation or freeze events.
(4) Lawn and landscape irrigation limited to twice per week.
(5) Prohibiting the use of treated water to fill or refill residential, amenity, and any other natural or
manmade ponds. A pond is considered to be a still body of water with a surface area of 500 square
feet or more.
(6) Rain and freeze sensors and/or ET or Smart controllers required on all new irrigation systems.
Rain and freeze sensors and/or ET or Smart controllers must be maintained to function properly.
(7) “At home” carwashing can be done only when using a water hose with a shut-off nozzle.
(8) The town is responsible for developing regulations, ordinances, policies, or procedures for
enforcement of water conservation guidelines.
(9) Prohibition of watering areas that have been overseeded with cool season grasses (such as rye
grass or other similar grasses), except for golf courses and public athletic fields.
(e) Additional water conservation measures. The following water conservation measures shall also be used by
the town to encourage water conservation:
(1) Use of xeriscaping in all municipal landscape projects.
(2) Rebates for use of rain barrels.
(3) Rebates for the installation of pressure reducing valves for irrigation systems.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 451/665
(4) Rebates for retrofitting irrigation systems with rain and freeze sensors and/or ET or Smart
controllers capable of multiple programming.
(5) Require all new irrigation systems to be in compliance with state design and installation
regulations (TAC title 30, part 1, chapter 344).
(6) Native, drought tolerant, or adaptive plants shall be encouraged.
(7) Drip irrigation systems shall be promoted.
(8) Evapotranspiration (ET)/Smart controllers that only allow sprinkler systems to irrigate when
necessary shall be promoted.
(9) Rebates for water efficient clothes washers.
(10) Other water conservation incentive programs.
(f) Requirement for water conservation plans by wholesale customers. Every contract for the wholesale sale of
water by member cities and/or customers that is entered into, renewed, or extended after the adoption of this
water conservation plan will include a requirement that the wholesale customer and any wholesale customers of
that wholesale customer develop and implement a water conservation plan meeting the requirements of title 30,
part 1, chapter 288, subchapter A, rule 288.2 of the Texas Administrative Code. The requirement will also
extend to each successive wholesale customer in the resale of the water.
Sec. 13.07.009 Means of implementation and enforcement
The town shall enact all ordinances necessary to enforce and execute this plan. The town manager, public works
manager, town engineer, and their designees shall be authorized to take all measures necessary to ensure
compliance.
Sec. 13.07.010 Review and update of water conservation plan
Following adoption, this water conservation plan shall be updated every five years as required by TCEQ or as
appropriate based on new and/or updated information.
(Ordinance 2013-5-7B, ex. A, adopted 5/7/13)
ARTICLE 13.08 DROUGHT CONTINGENCY AND WATER EMERGENCY RESPONSE PLAN*
Sec. 13.08.001 Introduction and objectives
(a) The purpose of this drought contingency and water emergency plan is as follows:
(1) To conserve the available water supply in times of drought and emergency.
(2) To maintain supplies for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection.
(3) To protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety.
(4) To minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortages.
(5) To minimize the adverse impacts of emergency water supply conditions.
(b) A drought is defined as an extended period of time when an area receives insufficient amounts of rainfall
to replenish the water supply, causing water supply sources, in this case reservoirs, to be depleted. In the absence
of drought response measures, water demands tend to increase during a drought due to the need for additional
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 452/665
outdoor irrigation. The severity of a drought depends on the depletion of supplies and on the relationship of
demand to available supplies. The NTMWD considers a drought to end when all of its supply reservoirs refill to
the conservation storage pool.
Sec. 13.08.002 Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Rules
The TCEQ rules governing development of drought contingency plans for public water towns are contained in
title 30, part 1, chapter 288, subchapter B, rule 288.20 of the Texas Administrative Code. For the purpose of
these rules, a drought contingency plan is defined as “a strategy or combination of strategies for temporary
supply and demand management responses to temporary and potentially recurring water supply shortages and
other water supply emergencies.”
Sec. 13.08.003 Provisions to inform the public and opportunity for public input
Citizens and customers will be given the opportunity for public input into the development of this drought
contingency plan by the following means:
(1) Providing written notice of the proposed plan and the opportunity to comment on the plan by
posted notice, use of the town's website, and inclusion in the town's newsletter.
(2) Making the draft plan available on the town's website.
(3) Providing the draft plan to any customer requesting a copy.
(4) Holding a public meeting.
Sec. 13.08.004 Provisions for continuing public education and information
(a) The town will inform and educate the public about the drought contingency and water emergency response
plan by the following means:
(1) Preparing a bulletin describing the plan and making it available at town hall and other
appropriate locations.
(2) Making the plan available to the public through the town's website.
(3) Including information about the drought contingency and water emergency response plan on
the town's website.
(4) Notifying local organizations, schools, and civic groups that staff are available to make
presentations on the drought contingency and water emergency response plan (usually in conjunction
with presentations on water conservation programs).
(b) At any time that the drought contingency and water emergency response plan is activated or the drought
stage or water emergency response changes, the town will notify local media of the issues, the drought response
stage or water emergency response stage, and the specific actions required of the public. The information will
also be publicized on the town's website. Billing inserts will also be used as appropriate.
Sec. 13.08.005 Initiation and termination of response stages
(a) Initiation of a drought or water emergency response stage.
(1) The town manager or mayor may order the implementation of a drought or water emergency
response stage when one or more of the trigger conditions for that stage are met. The following
actions will be taken when a drought stage is initiated:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 453/665
(A) The public will be notified through local media and the town's website as described in
section 13.08.004.
(B) Wholesale customers (if any) and the NTMWD will be notified by e-mail with a followup
letter or fax that provides details of the reasons for initiation of the drought/water emergency
response stage.
(C) If any mandatory provisions of the drought contingency and water emergency response
plan are activated, the town will notify the executive director of the TCEQ and the executive
director of the NTMWD within five business days.
(2) Drought contingency and water emergency response stages imposed by NTMWD action must
be initiated by member cities and customers. For other trigger conditions, the town manager or mayor
may decide not to order the implementation of a drought response stage or water emergency even
though one or more of the trigger criteria for the stage are met. Factors that could influence such a
decision include, but are not limited to, the time of the year, weather conditions, the anticipation of
replenished water supplies, or the anticipation that additional facilities will become available to meet
needs. The reason for this decision should be documented.
(b) Termination of a drought or water emergency response stage.
(1) The town manager or mayor may order the termination of a drought or water emergency
response stage or water emergency when the conditions for termination are met or at their discretion.
The following actions will be taken when a drought or emergency response stage is terminated:
(A) The public will be notified through local media and the town's website as described in
section 13.08.004.
(B) Wholesale customers (if any) and the NTMWD will be notified by e-mail with a followup
letter or fax.
(C) If any mandatory provisions of the drought contingency and water emergency response
plan that have been activated are terminated, the town will notify the executive director of the
TCEQ and the executive director of the NTMWD within five business days.
(2) The town manager or mayor may decide not to order the termination of a drought or water
emergency response stage or water emergency even though the conditions for termination of the
stage are met. Factors that could influence such a decision include, but are not limited to, the time of
the year, weather conditions, or the anticipation of potential changed conditions that warrant the
continuation of the drought stage. The reason for this decision should be documented.
Sec. 13.08.006 Stages and measures
(a) Stage 1.
(1) Initiation and termination conditions for stage 1.
(A) The NTMWD has initiated stage 1, which may be initiated due to one or more of the
following:
(i) The NTMWD executive director, with the concurrence of the NTMWD board of
directors, finds that conditions warrant the declaration of stage 1.
(ii) Water demand is projected to approach the limit of the permitted supply.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 454/665
(iii) The storage in Lake Lavon is less than sixty-five percent of the total conservation
pool capacity.
(iv) NTMWD's storage in Jim Chapman Lake is less than sixty-five percent of
NTMWD's total conservation pool capacity.
(v) The Sabine River Authority has indicated that its upper basin water supplies used by
NTMWD (Lake Tawakoni and/or Lake Fork) are in a mild drought.
(vi) NTMWD has concern that Lake Texoma, the East Fork Raw Water Supply Project,
or some other NTMWD source may be limited in availability in the next six months.
(vi) NTMWD demand exceeds 90% of the amount that can be delivered to customers
for seven consecutive days.
(vii) Water demand for all or part of NTMWD's delivery system approaches delivery
capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate.
(vii) NTMWD's supply source becomes contaminated.
(viii) NTMWD's water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or
damage of major water system components.
(B) Town's demand exceeds 90% of the amount that can be delivered to customers for three
consecutive days.
(C) Town's water demand for all or part of the delivery system approaches delivery capacity
because delivery capacity is inadequate.
(D) Supply source becomes contaminated.
(E) Town's water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of
major water system components.
(F) Town's individual plan maybe implemented if other criteria dictate.
(G) Stage 1 may terminate when NTMWD terminates its stage 1 condition or when the
circumstances that caused the initiation of stage 1 no longer prevail.
(2) Goal for use reduction and actions available under stage 1. Stage 1 is intended to raise public
awareness of potential drought or water emergency problems. The goal for water use reduction is a
2% reduction in the amount of water produced by NTMWD. The town manager or mayor may order
the implementation of any of the actions listed below, as deemed necessary:
(A) Request voluntary reductions in water use by the public and by wholesale customers.
(B) Increase public education efforts on ways to reduce water use.
(C) Review the problems that caused the initiation of stage 1.
(D) Notify major water users and work with them to achieve voluntary water use reductions.
(E) Intensify efforts on leak detection and repair.
(F) Reduce nonessential town government water use, such as landscape irrigation and vehicle
washing.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 455/665
(G) Ask the public to follow voluntary landscape watering schedules.
(H) Notify wholesale customers (if any) of actions being taken and request implementation
of similar procedures.
(b) Stage 2.
(1) Initiation and termination conditions for stage 2.
(A) The NTMWD has initiated stage 2 which may be initiated by one or more of the
following:
(i) The NTMWD executive director, with the concurrence of the NTMWD board of
directors, finds that conditions warrant the declaration of stage 2.
(ii) The storage in Lake Lavon is less than fifty-five percent of the total conservation
pool capacity.
(iii) NTMWD's storage in Jim Chapman Lake is less than fifty-five percent of
NTMWD's total conservation pool capacity.
(iv) The Sabine River Authority has indicated that its upper basin water supplies used
by NTMWD (Lake Tawakoni and/or Lake Fork) are in a mild drought.
(v) NTMWD has concern that Lake Texoma, the East Fork Raw Water Supply Project,
or some other NTMWD source may be limited in availability in the next six months.
(vi) NTMWD demand for all or part of the delivery system equals delivery capacity
because delivery capacity is inadequate.
(vii) NTMWD's supply source becomes contaminated.
(viii) NTMWD's water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or
damage of major water system components.
(ix) NTMWD demand exceeds 95% of the amount that can be delivered to customers
for three consecutive days.
(x) Water use is projected to approach the limit of the permitted supply.
(B) Town's demand exceeds 95% of the amount that can be delivered to customers for three
consecutive days.
(C) Town's demand for all or part of the delivery system equals delivery capacity because
delivery capacity is inadequate.
(D) Supply source becomes contaminated.
(E) Town's water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of
major water system components.
(F) Town's individual plan maybe implemented if other criteria dictate.
(G) Stage 2 may terminate when NTMWD terminates its stage 2 condition or when the
circumstances that caused the initiation of stage 2 no longer prevail.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 456/665
(2) Goal for use reduction and actions available under stage 2. The goal for water use reduction
under stage 2 is a five percent reduction in the amount of water produced by NTMWD. The town
manager or mayor may order the implementation of any of the actions listed below, as deemed
necessary. Measures described as “requires notification to TCEQ” impose mandatory requirements
on customers. The town must notify TCEQ and NTMWD within five business days if these measures
are implemented:
(A) Continue or initiate any actions available under stage 1.
(B) Initiate engineering studies to evaluate alternatives should conditions worsen.
(C) Further accelerate public education efforts on ways to reduce water use.
(D) Halt nonessential town government water use.
(E) Encourage the public to wait until the current drought or emergency situation has passed
before establishing any new landscaping.
(F) Notify wholesale customers (if any) of actions being taken and request them to
implement similar procedures.
(G) Requires notification to TCEQ:
(i) Limit landscape watering with sprinklers or irrigation systems to no more than two
days per week. An exception is allowed for landscape associated with new construction
that may be watered as necessary for up to thirty days from the date of the certificate of
occupancy. An exemption is also allowed for registered and properly functioning
ET/Smart irrigation systems and drip irrigation systems, which do not have restrictions to
the number of days per week of operation.
(ii) Restrict landscape and lawn irrigation from 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. April 1st
through October 31st.
(iii) Prohibit planting of cool season grasses (such as rye or similar) that intensify cool
season water requirements.
(c) Stage 3.
(1) Initiation and termination conditions for stage 3.
(A) The NTMWD has initiated stage 3, which may be initiated by one or more of the
following:
(i) The NTMWD executive director, with the concurrence of the NTMWD board of
directors, finds that conditions warrant the declaration of stage 3.
(ii) The storage in Lake Lavon is less than forty-five percent of the total conservation
pool capacity.
(iii) NTMWD's storage in Jim Chapman Lake is less than forty-five percent of
NTMWD's total conservation pool capacity.
(iv) The Sabine River Authority has indicated that its upper basin water supplies used
by NTMWD (Lake Tawakoni and/or Lake Fork) are in a moderate drought.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 457/665
(v) The water supply from Lake Texoma, the East Fork Raw Water Supply Project, or
some other NTMWD source has become limited in availability.
(vi) NTMWD demand exceeds 98% of the amount that can be delivered to customers
for three consecutive days.
(vii) NTMWD demand for all or part of the delivery system exceeds delivery capacity
because delivery capacity is inadequate.
(viii) NTMWD's supply source becomes contaminated.
(ix) NTMWD's water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or
damage of major water system components.
(x) Water demand is projected to approach or exceed the limit of the permitted supply.
(B) Town's demand exceeds 98% of the amount that can be delivered to customers for three
consecutive days.
(C) Town's demand for all or part of the delivery system exceeds delivery capacity because
delivery capacity is inadequate.
(D) Supply source becomes contaminated.
(E) Town's water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of
major water system components.
(F) Town's individual plan maybe implemented if other criteria dictate.
(G) Stage 3 may terminate when NTMWD terminates its stage 3 condition or when the
circumstances that caused the initiation of stage 3 no longer prevail.
(2) Goals for use reduction and actions available under stage 3.
(A) The goal for water use reduction under stage 3 is a reduction of ten percent in the amount
of water obtained from NTMWD. If circumstances warrant or if required by NTMWD, the
town manager or mayor may set a goal for a greater water use reduction.
(B) The town manager or mayor must implement any action(s) required by North Texas
Municipal Water District. In addition, the manager or mayor may order the implementation of
any of the actions listed below, as deemed necessary. Measures described as “requires
notification to TCEQ” impose mandatory requirements on customers. The town must notify
TCEQ and NTMWD within five business days if these measures are implemented:
(i) Continue or initiate any actions available under stages 1 and 2.
(ii) Notify wholesale customers of actions being taken and request them to implement
similar procedures.
(iii) Implement viable alternative water supply strategies.
(iv) Requires notification to TCEQ:
a. Initiate mandatory water use restrictions as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 458/665
1. Prohibit hosing of paved areas, buildings, or windows (pressure washing of
impervious surfaces is allowed).
2. Prohibit operation of ornamental fountains or other amenity impoundments to
the extent they use treated water.
3. Prohibit washing or rinsing of vehicles by hose except with a hose end cutoff
nozzle.
4. Prohibit using water in such a manner as to allow runoff or other waste.
b. Limit landscape watering with sprinklers or irrigation systems at each service
address to once every seven days. Exceptions are as follows:
1. Foundations, azaleas, new plantings (first year) of trees and shrubs may be
watered for up to 2 hours on any day by a hand-held hose, a dedicated zone using
a drip irrigation system, or a soaker hose.
2. Golf courses may water greens and tee boxes without restrictions.
3. Public athletic fields used for competition may be watered twice per week.
4. Locations using other sources of water supply for irrigation may irrigate
without restriction.
5. Registered and properly functioning ET/Smart irrigation systems and drip
irrigation systems may irrigate without restrictions.
c. Existing swimming pools may not be drained and refilled (except to replace
normal water loss).
d. Prohibit hydroseeding, hydromulching, and sprigging.
e. Limit landscape watering with sprinklers or irrigation systems between
November 1st and March 31st to once every two weeks. An exception is allowed for
landscape associated with new construction, which may be watered as necessary for
thirty days from the date of the certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate of
occupancy, or certificate of completion at the discretion of the town.
f. Initiate a rate surcharge as requested by NTMWD.
g. Initiate an additional rate surcharge(s) for all water use over a certain level.
h. Prohibit watering of golf courses using treated water, except as needed to keep
greens and tee boxes alive.
i. If NTMWD has imposed a reduction in water available to the town, impose the
same percent reduction on wholesale customers.
(d) Stage 4.
(1) Initiation and termination conditions for stage 4.
(A) The NTMWD has initiated stage 4, which may be initiated due to one or more of the
following:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 459/665
(i) The NTMWD executive director, with the concurrence of the NTMWD board of
directors, finds that conditions warrant the declaration of stage 4.
(ii) The storage in Lake Lavon is less than thirty-five percent of the total conservation
pool capacity.
(iii) NTMWD's storage in Jim Chapman Lake is less than thirty-five percent of
NTMWD's total conservation pool capacity.
(iv) The Sabine River Authority has indicated that its upper basin water supplies used
by NTMWD (Lake Tawakoni and/or Lake Fork) are in a severe drought or emergency.
(v) The water supply from Lake Texoma, the East Fork Raw Water Supply Project, or
some other NTMWD source has become severely limited in availability.
(vi) NTMWD demand exceeds the amount that can be delivered to customers.
(vii) NTMWD demand for all or part of the delivery system seriously exceeds delivery
capacity because the delivery capacity is inadequate.
(viii) NTMWD's supply source becomes contaminated.
(ix) NTMWD's water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or
damage of major water system components.
(x) Water demand is projected to approach or exceed the limit of the permitted supply.
(B) Town's demand exceeds the amount that can be delivered to customers.
(C) Town's demand for all or part of the delivery system seriously exceeds delivery capacity
because the delivery capacity is inadequate.
(D) Supply source becomes contaminated.
(E) Town's water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of
major water system components.
(F) Town's individual plan maybe implemented if other criteria dictate.
(G) Stage 4 can terminate when NTMWD terminates its stage 4 condition or when the
circumstances that caused the initiation of stage 4 no longer prevail.
(2) Goals for use reduction and actions available under stage 4.
(A) The goal for water use reduction under stage 4 is a reduction of whatever amount is
necessary in the amount of water obtained from NTMWD. If circumstances warrant or are
required by NTMWD, the town manager or mayor may set a goal for a greater water use
reduction.
(B) The town manager or mayor must implement any action(s) required by North Texas
Municipal Water District. In addition, the town manager or mayor may order the
implementation of any of the actions listed below, as deemed necessary. Measures described as
“requires notification to TCEQ” impose mandatory requirements on member cities and
customers. The town must notify TCEQ and NTMWD within five business days if these
measures are implemented.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 460/665
(i) Continue or initiate any actions available under stages 1, 2, and 3.
(ii) Notify wholesale customers of actions being taken and request them to implement
similar procedures.
(iii) Implement viable alternative water supply strategies.
(iv) Requires notification to TCEQ:
a. Prohibit washing of vehicles except as necessary for health, sanitation, or safety
reasons.
b. Prohibit commercial and residential landscape watering, except that
foundations may be watered for 2 hours each day with a hand-held hose, a soaker
hose, or a dedicated zone using a drip irrigation system. ET/Smart controllers and
drip irrigation systems are not exempt from this requirement.
c. Prohibit golf course watering except for greens and tee boxes.
d. Require all commercial water users to reduce water use by a percentage
established by the town manager or his/her designee.
e. Prohibit the irrigation of new landscaping using treated water.
f. Prohibit the permitting of private pools. Pools already permitted may be
completed and filled with water. Existing private and public pools may add water to
maintain pool levels, but may not be drained and refilled.
g. Initiate an additional rate surcharge(s) for all water use over a certain level.
h. If NTMWD has imposed a reduction in water available to town, impose the
same percent reduction on wholesale customers.
Sec. 13.08.007 Procedures for granting variances to the plan
(a) The town manager or mayor may grant temporary variances for existing water uses otherwise prohibited
under this drought contingency and water emergency plan if one or more of the following conditions are met:
(1) Failure to grant such a variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting
health, sanitation, or fire safety for the public or the person requesting the variance.
(2) Compliance with this plan cannot be accomplished due to technical or other limitations.
(3) Alternative methods that achieve the same level of reduction in water use can be and are
implemented.
(b) Variances shall be granted or denied at the discretion of the town manager or mayor. All petitions for
variances must be in writing and shall include the following information:
(1) Name and address of the petitioner(s).
(2) Purpose of water use.
(3) Specific provisions from which relief is requested.
(4) Detailed statement of the adverse effect of the provision from which relief is requested.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 461/665
(5) Description of the relief requested.
(6) Period of time for which the variance is sought.
(7) Alternative measures that will be taken to reduce water use.
(8) Other pertinent information.
Sec. 13.08.008 Procedures for enforcing mandatory water use restrictions
Mandatory water use restrictions may be imposed in stage 2, 3, and 4 drought contingency and water emergency
response stages. These mandatory water use restrictions will be enforced by warnings and penalties as follows:
(1) On the first violation, customers will be given a written warning that they have violated the
mandatory water use restriction.
(2) On the second and subsequent violations, citations may be issued to customers, with minimum
and maximum fines established by ordinance.
(3) After two violations have occurred, the town may install a flow restrictor in the line to limit the
amount of water that may pass through the meter in a 24-hour period.
(4) After three violations have occurred, the town may cut off water service to the customer.
Sec. 13.08.009 Coordination with the regional water planning group and NTMWD
The town will send a draft of its ordinance(s) or other regulation(s) implementing this plan to NTMWD for their
review and comment. The town will also send the final ordinance(s) or other regulation(s) to NTMWD.
Sec. 13.08.010 Review and update of response plan
As required by TCEQ rules, the town will review this drought contingency plan every five years. The plan will
be updated as appropriate based on new or updated information.
(Ordinance 2013-5-7B, ex. B, adopted 5/7/13)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 14.02 ZONING ORDINANCE†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 14.02.001 Purpose and intent
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 462/665
This article is adopted for the purpose of promoting the general welfare, health, and safety for the protection and
preservation of the property values and unique character of the town as a semirural community. (1998 Code, sec.
154.001)
Sec. 14.02.002 Zoning changes and amendments
(a) Amendments made by ordinance. The town council may by ordinance amend, supplement, or change the
boundaries of the use districts; the use designation of any property; or the regulations, standards or requirements
of this article. Any such proposed change shall be first submitted to the planning and zoning commission for
public hearing and its recommendation and report.
(b) Petitions for amendments. Any person, corporation, or group of persons having a proprietary interest in
any property, may petition the town council for a zoning change or amendment to the provisions of this article.
The planning and zoning commission may, on its own motion, institute proposals for changes and amendments.
All petitions for a zoning change shall bear the signature of the owners of the property that is the subject of the
request.
(c) Public hearings. The zoning process is conducted as a public hearing that should be opened and closed.
Within the public hearing there is public input portion of the hearing which should be opened and closed.
(1) Public hearing before the planning and zoning commission.
(A) After public notice has been given pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, a public
hearing shall be held by the planning and zoning commission on any proposed change in zoning
classification as well as any proposed amendment to the zoning regulations of any zoning
district.
(B) The planning and zoning commission shall first make a preliminary report and then hold
its public hearings on that report before submitting a final report to the town council.
(C) When the zoning change request is by petition, the preliminary report shall be the request
as stated in the notice of public hearing. When the planning and zoning commission makes a
study and initiates a change or amendment on its own motion, or at the request of the town
council, the preliminary report shall be that stated in the notice of public hearing.
(D) Upon completion of the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall submit
its final report and recommendation to the town council.
(E) When all public input has been received, the public input portion of the hearing shall be
closed. Thereafter, the commission shall consider the matter and make its recommendation to
the town council in the form of a final report. After the public input portion of the public
hearing has been closed, the public may not thereafter be recognized for the purpose of adding
additional argument or input; however, the commission may ask questions of any person and
receive additional information in response to questions. After public input has been closed and
the commission has no further questions, a motion should be made to close the public hearing.
Thereafter, the commission may deliberate and vote on its final report to the town council,
which shall be in the form of a recommendation.
(2) Public hearing before the town council.
(A) The town council, except in the case of a joint public hearing, may not hold its public
hearing until it receives a final report from the planning and zoning commission and even in the
case of a joint public hearing may not take action on the matter until it receives the final report
of the planning and zoning commission.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 463/665
(B) After proper notice by publication pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, the council
opens the public hearing and usually calls upon staff to summarize the proposed zoning change
or amendment. This is usually followed by the applicant's presentation. The council then opens
the public input portion of the public hearing. When all public input has been received, the
public input portion of the public hearing shall be closed. After the public input portion of the
public hearing has been closed, the public may not thereafter be recognized for the purpose of
adding additional argument or input; however, the council may ask questions of any person and
receive additional information in response to questions. When the council has no further
questions, a motion should be made to close the public hearing. Thereafter, the council may
deliberate and take appropriate action.
(C) The town council, after public hearing and receipt of the recommendation of the planning
and zoning commission, may approve a zoning amendment. Any zoning change shall be by
adoption of an ordinance. A simple majority of those present will suffice to approve such an
ordinance, except as required by subsection (e) of this section.
(3) The joint public hearing.
(A) The planning and zoning commission is hereby authorized to hold joint public hearings.
If a joint public hearing is called, the planning and zoning commission and the town council
shall hear all matters jointly. When all public input has been received, the public input portion
of the hearing shall be closed. Thereafter, the commission shall consider the matter and make its
recommendation to the town council in the form of a final report. After receiving the final
report, the town council shall consider the matter and take any appropriate action. Although the
public input portion of the hearing is closed, the public hearing continues until closed by the
town council. The town council may not continue with the public hearing or take action on the
matter until it receives the final report of the planning and zoning commission.
(B) If the commission makes its report/recommendation at the same meeting, the council
may then proceed, keeping in mind that the public input portion of the hearing has been closed.
If either the commission or the council fails to conclude the matter at the first meeting, the
public hearing portion of the meeting shall be recessed and continued to a certain date and time
that shall be announced to all those attending the meeting.
(d) Notice of public hearings.
(1) Notice of public hearing before the planning and zoning commission. Before the tenth day
before the hearing date, written notice of each public hearing before the zoning commission on a
proposed change in a zoning classification shall be sent to each owner, as indicated by the most
recently approved municipal tax roll, of real property within 500 feet of the property on which the
change in classification is proposed. The notice may be served by its deposit, properly addressed with
postage paid, in the United States mail. If the property within 200 feet of the property on which the
change is proposed is located in the territory annexed to the municipality and is not included on the
most recently approved municipal tax toll, the notice shall be given by publication published in the
official newspaper at least 15 days before the date of the hearing.
(2) Notice of public hearing before the town council. Notice of the public hearing to be held by the
town council, before adopting any proposed amendment, supplement or change, shall be published
once in the official newspaper of the town at least 15 days before the date of the hearing.
(3) Notice of public hearing for joint public hearing. Where the public hearing is to be a joint
public hearing before the planning and zoning commission and the town council, the joint notice
shall be mailed in time to give each owner, as indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax
roll, of real property within 500 feet of the property on which the change in classification is proposed,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 464/665
ten days' notice, and the joint notice shall be published at least 15 days before the date of the hearing
in the official newspaper of the town.
(e) Three-fourths vote of town council (when required). If such proposed amendment, supplement, or change
has been denied by the planning and zoning commission, or if a written protest against such proposed
amendment, supplement or change has been filed with the town secretary, duly signed and acknowledged by the
owners of 20% or more, either of the area of the lots or land included in such proposed change, or those
immediately adjacent to and extending 200 feet therefrom, such amendment shall not become effective except
by a three-fourths vote of all the members of the town council of the town, to wit:
(1) Three-fourths of five (full council consisting of members eligible to vote) = 3+ or 4 required
votes.
(2) Three-fourths of four (one vacancy on the five-member council, not a mere absence) = 3
required votes.
(f) Zoning change request sign required.
(1) No less than ten days prior to the first public hearing as required by law, a sign shall be erected
by the town on the property which is the subject of the zoning change request. Such sign shall be a
minimum of six square feet in area and shall be within 30 feet of the closest, adjacent, most heavily
traveled public street. This sign shall state in bold letters of at least three inches in height that a
zoning change request has been made and directing interested persons to contact the town for
additional information. The quality, design, and structure of the sign must be approved by the
planning director.
(2) Only one notification sign is required for tracts of five acres or less. An additional notification
sign may be required for each additional five acres or less at the discretion of the town, except that no
more than five notification signs are required regardless of the size of the property.
(3) No permit is required for a zoning request sign, but such sign or signs must abide by all rules
governing signage as outlined in article 3.13.
(4) If the commission or council determines that the applicant has failed to comply with the
provisions of this section, it shall take no action on the zoning change application other than to
postpone the public hearing or deny the applicant's request, with or without prejudice.
(g) Zoning change requests, resubmittal after denial. All zoning change requests denied without prejudice by
the town council may be resubmitted so long as the request has been substantially changed or incorporates the
suggestions of the planning and zoning commission or the town council. All zoning change requests denied with
prejudice by the town council may not be resubmitted to the planning and zoning commission for a period of one
year from the date that the town council denied the request with prejudice.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.002)
Sec. 14.02.003 Application for zoning change
(a) Any person, firm or corporation requesting a change of zoning from one district classification to another
district classification shall make an application in writing to the planning and zoning commission, and shall
submit the following information with such request:
(1) A clearly typed legal description of the land on which a zoning change is requested, together
with the local street address, if any.
(2) Name and address of the owner or owners of the property, the name and address of the person
making the application. If the application is made by anyone other than the owner or owners, the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 465/665
application must contain a statement that the applicant is authorized to act for the owner pursuant to
an attached statement in writing signed by the owner or owners of the property authorizing the
applicant to make such application on their behalf.
(3) The specific district use requested and the specific district use under which the property is
regulated at the time of making the application.
(4) A scale drawing showing the property and any proposed public or private streets and alleys;
building sites or building lots; any areas proposed for dedication or reserved as parks, parkways,
playgrounds, utility and garbage easements, school sites, street widening, street changes; the points of
ingress and egress from existing public streets; an accurate survey of the boundary of tract and
topography with a contour interval of not less than five feet, or spot grades where the relief is limited.
(5) Where multiple types of land use are proposed, a land use plan delineating the specific areas to
be devoted to various uses shall be required.
(6) Where building complexes are proposed, a site plan showing the location of each building and
the minimum distance between buildings, and between buildings and the property line, street line
and/or alley line shall be submitted. For buildings more than one story in height, except single-family
and two-family residences, elevations and/or perspective drawings may be required in order that the
relationship of the buildings to adjacent property, open spaces and to other features of the
development plan may be determined. Such drawings need only indicate the height, number of floors
and exposures for access, light and air.
(7) A plan indicating the arrangement and provision of off-street parking and off-street loading
where required. Such a plan may be presented as a ratio of off-street parking and off-street loading
area to building area when accompanied by a typical example indicating the feasibility of the
arrangement proposed and when the areas where the example would be applied are shown on the
drawing of the entire site. Any special traffic regulation facilities proposed or required to assure the
safe function of the circulation plan shall also be shown.
(8) A designation of the maximum building coverage of the site shall be indicated upon the site
plan.
(9) Screening and landscaping plan shall be required and such plan shall include screening walls,
ornamental planting, playgrounds, wooded areas to be retained, lawns and gardens if such are
determined as necessary by the town council.
(10) Any other information concerning the property as may be required by the planning and zoning
commission or the town council.
(b) Upon the filing of an application for a change in zoning with the planning and zoning commission, the
applicant shall pay to the town the basic filing fee established by the town council in an amount to cover all of
the town's costs including the cost of publication and mailing of notices and any outside engineering costs. An
additional filing fee may be required if the applicant requests or causes a hearing to be rescheduled thereby
causing additional costs for publication or otherwise.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.003)
Sec. 14.02.004 Future annexations
All territory hereafter annexed into the town shall be zoned, and said zoning classification shall be instituted
simultaneously with the town council's approval of the annexation of said territory. Immediately upon said
annexation, all properties that are between 1.0 and 1.99 acres in size shall be zoned RE-1; all properties that are
between 2.0 and 2.99 acres in size shall be zoned RE-2; and all properties that are 3.0 acres in size and larger
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 466/665
shall be zoned RE-3. The procedure of establishing zoning on annexed territory shall conform to the procedure
for zoning in accordance with the statues of the state and the ordinances of the town. Said zoning shall be
consistent with the Town of Fairview Comprehensive Plan. (Ordinance 2008-7-8A adopted 7/8/08)
Sec. 14.02.005 Official zoning map
(a) The boundaries of the zoning districts set out herein are delineated upon the zoning district map of the
town; said map being hereby adopted as a part of this article as fully as if the same were set forth herein in
detail.
(b) Two original and identical copies of the zoning district map are hereby adopted bearing the signature of
the mayor and attestation of the town secretary.
(c) One such copy shall be titled “Town of Fairview, Texas Zoning District Map As Adopted Ordinance No.
95-265 on the 12th day of September, 1995.” This copy shall be retained as the original map and shall not be
changed in any manner.
(d) The second such copy shall be titled “Town of Fairview, Texas Zoning District Map As Adopted
Ordinance No. 95-265 on the 12th day of September, 1995, With Zoning District Amendments.” This copy shall
be kept up-to-date posting thereon all changes and subsequent amendments as individual zoning requests or
changes are approved. Each change should be marked with the zoning district classification, amending
ordinance number, and date.
(e) The boundaries of zones should follow as close as practical the boundary lines of platted subdivisions,
present land boundaries, and centerlines of roadways and streams. The boundaries of zones shall move with the
roads or streams if movement is brought about by nature of usage.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.005)
Sec. 14.02.006 Nonconforming use
(a) The use of any land, structure or building, lawfully existing on the date of the adoption of this article that
does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the zoning district in which such use or structure is located
shall be considered a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may be continued except as herein provided.
(b) No nonconforming use or structure may be expanded or increased beyond the lot or tract upon which such
nonconforming use is located as of the effective date of this article except to provide off-street loading or offstreet
parking space upon approval of the board of adjustment.
(c) Repairs and normal maintenance may be made to a nonconforming building, provided that no structural
alterations or extensions shall be made except those required by law or ordinance, unless the building is changed
to a conforming structure.
(d) Any nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use and once such change is made, the use shall
not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use.
(e) Where a conforming use is located in a nonconforming structure, the use may be changed to another
conforming use by securing a certificate of occupancy from the building official.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.006)
(f) When a nonconforming use involving a permanent type structure is discontinued for a period of one year,
or the structure vacated for a period of one year, the nonconforming use shall be deemed abandoned and such
facts shall be construed as conclusive proof of intent to abandon the nonconforming use. When a nonconforming
use, not involving a permanent type structure, is discontinued for a period of six months, or the structure vacated
or moved from the premises for a period of six months, the nonconforming use shall be deemed abandoned and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 467/665
such facts shall be construed as conclusive proof of intent to abandon the nonconforming use. (Ordinance 2010-
3-1B adopted 3/1/11)
(g) If a nonconforming structure or a structure occupied by a nonconforming use is destroyed by fire, the
elements or other cause, it may not be rebuilt except to conform to the provisions of this article. In the case of
partial reconstruction of a nonconforming use, not exceeding 50% of its replacement value, reconstruction may
be permitted after a building permit has been granted.
(h) The board of adjustment is authorized to provide a termination date for a nonconforming use under a plan
whereby the owner's actual investment in the structure(s) prior to the time that the use became nonconforming
can be amortized within a definite time period. The following factors must be considered by the board in
determining a reasonable amortization period:
(1) The owner's capital investment in the structures on the property at the time the use became
nonconforming.
(2) The amount of the investment realized to date and the amount remaining, if any, to be
recovered during the amortization.
(3) The life expectancy of the investment.
(4) The existence or nonexistence of lease obligations, as well as any contingency clauses therein
permitting termination of such leases.
(5) Removal costs that are directly attributable to the establishment of a termination date.
(6) Other costs and expenses that are directly attributable to the establishment of a termination
date.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.006)
Sec. 14.02.007 Machinery wrecking
The collecting, dismantling or wrecking of one or more motor vehicles, trailers, boats, or any other vehicle of
labor or conveyance, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked
motor vehicles or equipment of labor shall be defined as machinery wrecking. Machinery wrecking is not
permitted in any zones. All automobiles stored open to public view must have a current state motor vehicle
registration plate attached. (1998 Code, sec. 154.007)
Sec. 14.02.008 Prohibition of hazardous uses
(a) Any use in any zone of the town which is noxious, offensive or which creates a hazard to the health, safety
or welfare of the citizens of said town, by reason of emission of odors, soot, dust, noise, fumes of any nature, or
vibrations, is hereby prohibited.
(b) Any use in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town which is noxious, offensive or which creates a
hazard to the health and safety of the citizens of said town by reason of emission of odors, soot, dust, noise,
fumes of any nature, or vibrations, is hereby prohibited.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.008)
Sec. 14.02.009 Swimming pools
(a) All swimming pools, whether public, semipublic or private, must have protective fences at least four feet
in height with a self-closing and self-latching gate under all ranges of motion to prevent children and animals
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 468/665
from freely entering the pool. No openings of greater than four inches in width in the fence are allowed.
(Ordinance 2008-10-14Q adopted 10/14/08)
(b) At all times when use of the swimming pool is allowed, the entire bottom of the pool must be clearly
visible.
(c) At all times during the construction of a swimming pool within the town, the construction site shall be
enclosed with a good and sufficient temporary fence, approved by the building official, so as to prevent access to
the area of excavation by small children, except that from time to time portions of the fence may be opened for
the movement of equipment so long as adequate supervision is provided during all times that any portion of the
fence is open.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.009)
(d) Private swimming pools shall be a non-accessory use, and shall not be included toward the maximum
allowable square footage of accessory buildings. (Ordinance 2009-3-3C, sec. 2, adopted 3/3/09)
State law references–Swimming pool enclosures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.101 et seq.; pool yard enclosure for
multiunit rental complex, property owners' association, etc., V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 757.
Sec. 14.02.010 Churches, schools and fraternal lodges
(a) Churches and schools, including schools that are public, private or denominational, can locate in any zone
except a flood hazard zone upon an application for a conditional use permit. A fraternal lodge can locate in any
nonresidential zone except a flood hazard zone.
(b) The church sanctuary, auditorium, school or fraternal lodge shall be located on a minimum two-acre tract.
Rectories, educational buildings, other related buildings of the church, and all school buildings shall not be
considered part of the sanctuary or auditorium. These additional buildings must be constructed on a tract or a
portion of said tract in excess of the minimum two-acre requirement set out above and only upon approval of a
site plan.
(c) All buildings constructed, including a fraternal lodge, a church containing the sanctuary and/or auditorium
or a school which shall be used for religious or educational purposes, shall be set back a minimum distance of 35
feet from the front and/or, if applicable, side easement lines (setbacks from side easement lines apply to corner
lots). Said buildings and structures shall be set back a minimum distance of 35 feet from the rear lot easement
line. If parking areas are designated on said tract wherein the church or its associated building shall be located,
there shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of not less than 35 feet not including parking spaces. The
entrance and exit to the parking area are to be at right angle to any street or thoroughfare. Parking shall be
provided off-street in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 14.02.015(b). All off-street parking
shall be paved and be a minimum size of eight feet wide and 20 feet deep.
(d) At least one heat and one smoke detector shall be installed in each building constructed on the tract used
for church or for fraternal lodge purposes. The type and specifications for the heat and smoke detectors shall be
approved by the town fire marshal and must be installed according to the most current Uniform Fire Code.
(e) The permanent parking or placing of mobile homes, trailer houses, campers or other related temporary
buildings is strictly prohibited. Permanent parking for this section is defined to be any time in excess of 72
hours. This section shall apply to schools and churches only.
(f) If a church, school, or lodge building or the land upon which it sets abuts a residential property, a
landscape buffer as referenced in sections 14.02.012 and 14.02.013 shall be installed.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.010)
Sec. 14.02.011 Maximum building height and minimum setback for accessory buildings
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 469/665
(a) Maximum accessory building height in all zones will be limited to thirty (30) feet. Accessory buildings
may not exceed thirty (30) feet in total height or a maximum wall height of fourteen (14) feet, measured from
the finished first floor. Accessory buildings must provide for a minimum roof pitch of 4:12, except when the
roof pitch of the primary structure is less than 4:12. In such instances, the roof pitch of the accessory building
shall match the roof pitch of the primary structure. Flat roofs shall only be permitted on patio structures and
other structures that maintain open facades. Accessory buildings and outbuildings in all zones except MH zones
must be set back ten feet as a minimum from any property line. The setback in the MH zone shall be three feet.
Additionally, more restrictive requirements based on building size and/or use apply as follows:
Setback Restrictions Accessory Building Category
Fifteen (15) feet from any line Any building more than 120 sq. ft. in area but less than
480 sq. ft. in area
Thirty (30) feet from any line Any building more than 480 sq. ft. in area but less than
900 sq. ft. in area
Forty (40) feet from any line Any private stable, paddock, corral or dog run
Fifty (50) feet from any line Any barn or outbuilding in the FH zone
Fifty (50) feet from any other
building on same property
Any barn or outbuilding in the FH zone
One hundred (100) feet from any
property line
Any barn or outbuilding in any FH zone which abuts
an RE-1, RE-2, GB, or PC zone
One hundred (100) feet from a
recognized stream
Any barn or outbuilding in the FH zone
(Ordinance 2013-6-4E, sec. 1, adopted 6/4/13)
(b) A permit application is required for all placement and construction for all accessory buildings and
outbuildings. (1998 Code, sec. 154.011)
(c) General requirements for accessory buildings.
(1) The maximum number of accessory buildings allowed per lot shall be two (2) buildings. In
addition, the combined square footage of all accessory buildings shall not exceed the maximum
square footage allowed per specified zoning district unless approved through a conditional use permit
(C.U.P) (discussed below). For example, a resident would like to build two accessory buildings on
his/her RE-1 zoned property (900 sq. ft. allowed). The resident would be allowed to build two 450 sq.
ft accessory buildings, or one 300 sq. ft. building and one 600 sq. ft. building, etc.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 470/665
Maximum Combined Square Footage of All Accessory Buildings
Residential Zone RE-1 RE-1.5 RE-2 RE-3
Total Sq. Ft. 900 sq. ft* 1,200 sq. ft* 1,800 sq. ft* 2,100 sq. ft*
C.U.P. Requires approval in all zoning districts beyond each
districts max. sq. footage
*Maximum square footage refers to footprint of the pad site of the accessory building.
(2) An application to exceed the total square footage shown in the above table may be approved as
a C.U.P. Any request for a building permit for an accessory building which does not meet the criteria
in these sections shall only be authorized by approval of a C.U.P by the planning and zoning
commission with final approval by town council using the procedures contained in section 14.02.511
Conditional Use Permit District (C.U.P.) in this code.
(3) Through approval of a C.U.P, a property owner can request an increase in the number of
allowable accessory buildings based on the property owned, not on a minimum size of a zoning lot.
For example, if a property owner in the RE-1 zone has a lot size that is one acre in size, he/she will
be required to have a maximum 900 sq. foot accessory building (unless larger is approved through a
C.U.P.). In addition, if this same owner has a lot or adjacent property ownership that is more than one
acre in size, he/she can request more than two accessory buildings, through the C.U.P. process.
(4) The requirements for accessory buildings based on size of property owned shall also apply to
the residential uses approved within the planned development (PD) and planned center (PC) zoning
districts.
(5) Accessory uses shall include Future Farmers of America (FFA) animal programs based on the
number of current animals allowed per zoning district. FFA animals beyond this number may be
approved through a C.U.P.
(6) No accessory building(s) shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the primary
use/main building has been actually commenced, and no accessory building shall be used unless the
main building on the lot is occupied by its residents.
(Ordinance 2008-4-1F adopted 4/1/08; Ordinance 2013-6-4E, sec. 2, adopted 6/4/13)
(7) Tennis courts as [are] a nonaccessory use and private green houses [are added] as a permitted
accessory use through an approval of a conditional use permit (CUP), except, however, greenhouses
shall remain as an allowed principal accessory use in the agricultural zone (AG). (Ordinance 2009-3-
3C, sec. 3, adopted 3/3/09)
(8) Private detached three car garages shall have a maximum square footage of 900 square feet and
shall not be counted toward the allowable maximum accessory building square footage provided that
it is the primary garage. (Ordinance 2009-3-3C, sec. 5, adopted 3/3/09)
(d) Definitions.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 471/665
Barn. A building intended to house agricultural products, agricultural equipment and/or livestock.
Stable. A structure that is used for the shelter or care of horses and cattle.
(e) Accessory building setback requirements.
(1) There shall be no physical connection between accessory buildings and the required minimum
separation between the primary structures depending upon the zoning district.
(2) An accessory building shall comply with the required setback line established for each
residential zoning district, and the accessory building shall be located totally behind the rear of the
principal building. No accessory building shall be erected in any front yard.
Required Accessory Building Minimum Setbacks per Zoning District
from Any Property Line and Primary Structure
Residential
Zone
RE-1 RE-1.5 RE-2 RE-3
Setback 30 feet 35 feet 40 feet 40 feet
(3) For situations as stated in subsection (a), above subsection (a) shall take precedence over this
subsection.
(f) Exterior walls of accessory buildings. Accessory buildings or structures, regardless of approved size, built
of metal, wood, vinyl siding or equivalent material shall meet the following design standards:
(1) The building or structure shall be sealed or painted with a color or colors compatible with the
surrounding area. Some color recommendations are white, beige, natural shades of greens and
browns, and reds for barns, stables, corrals;
(2) All metal accessory buildings shall be painted with a factory applied non-metallic matte-finish;
(3) The property owner may use masonry material (e.g., brick or stone material), but is not
required to paint these materials if so selected;
(4) If selected by the property owner, accessory buildings or structures using a masonry exterior
material shall match or be similar to the masonry material of the principal structure on the lot;
(5) Wood material for accessory buildings shall be permitted, and shall be sealed or painted.
(Ordinance 2008-4-1F adopted 4/1/08)
Sec. 14.02.012 Fences and walls
(a) Height restrictions. The maximum height of any fence or wall on a residential property or in any
residential zoning district shall be as follows:
Side or back yard Six feet
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 472/665
Front yard Four feet
Screening walls Eight feet
Walls for soil stabilization only Discretion of the chief building official
(b) Design and materials.
(1) Except where screening walls and fences, soil stabilization walls, designed subdivision
entryways, and live plant screens are otherwise allowed in this section, all fences and walls shall be
of an “open” design that allows vision through the fence. The front surface area of the materials used
in constructing a fence or wall may not exceed 50% of the total area of the front plane of the fence.
(2) Fences may be constructed of common fencing materials such as vinyl, wood, wire, iron,
metal, stone, brick, and block. However, chain-link fences are not allowed for general fencing use
along residential property or lots lines.
(3) Chain-link fencing may only be used in the interior of a property, and only for dog runs, animal
pens, and gardens.
(4) Any chain-link fencing of 50 feet or greater in length must be obscured from view in
accordance with subsection (d) of this section.
(5) Solid wood, privacy-type fences that do not allow vision through the fence are prohibited
except where otherwise authorized by this section, or within the CPDD zoning district.
(c) Maintenance. All fences and walls must be maintained in good repair and appearance so as not to become
a nuisance or hazard.
(d) Screening walls.
(1) Screening walls and fences are defined as those that significantly obscure or totally block lineof-
sight vision.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.012)
(2) Screening walls and fences of unlimited length may be constructed along a common property
boundary between a residence in a residential zone and a nonresidential use in a commercial or other
nonresidential zoning district, or between residential lots if specifically allowed by an enacting
ordinance creating a PD or PC zone. Screening walls and fences may also be constructed on the
interior of a residential property to shield the view of pool equipment and other necessary equipment
and storage from adjoining properties or from any public property or easement. Said internal fences
and walls shall not be of a larger perimeter or height than minimally necessary to accomplish the
actual screening. Fences and walls less than eight feet in length shall not be required to be obscured
from view as described in subsection (d)(3). (Ordinance 2008-2-5G adopted 2/5/08)
(3) Screening walls and fences must be landscaped with evergreen plantings along its outside so
that the entire length of the surface of the wall or fence is at least 50% obscured to view from
adjoining properties or from any public property.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 473/665
(4) Construction of any self-supporting wall built of wood, stone, or masonry that is used for
landscaping or soil stabilization purposes, and is built at a height of four feet or greater, including any
unseen or underground portion (footing), must be approved in writing by the public works director or
his or her designee, and stamped by a registered professional engineer.
(5) Living plant screens are plants or trees either specifically located in a designated landscape
setting or allowed to grow naturally in a manner that creates a visual barrier obscuring or totally
blocking line of sight.
(6) Living plant screens may generally be used as desired if they do not create a safety hazard or
public nuisance, and if they do not contain openings constituting more than 25% of the total surface
once the screen reaches maturity, or after two years from installation, whichever shall occur first.
(e) Designed subdivision entryways. Fences, walls and living plant screens used at the entryways to
subdivisions are not specifically governed by the requirements of this section. Instead, those walls, fences, and
living plant screens designed as a part of a landscaping plan at a subdivision entryway or in and along its
boundaries, parks, and/or common areas are subject to the overall subdivision plan and plat approval process by
the planning and zoning commission and the town council.
(f) Safety restrictions.
(1) No fence, wall, screen, or other visual barrier shall be located or placed in such a manner as to
obstruct the vision of a motor vehicle or bicycle operator, and/or create a safety hazard for either
traffic or pedestrians.
(2) No fence, wall, screen, or other visual barrier shall be located or placed in such a manner as to
prevent access to or use of a fire hydrant or water utility meter.
(3) No fence, wall, screen, or other visual barrier shall be located or placed on a town right-of-way
or road easement, or within ten feet of the pavement edge of any public street or roadway.
(4) No fence, wall, screen, or other visual barrier shall be located or placed in a drainage easement
in such a manner as to restrict the proper function of a drainage facility.
(g) Permitting.
(1) It shall be unlawful to install or construct any fence or wall, or to repair or replace more than
40% of any existing fence or wall in a single calendar year, without first obtaining a permit from the
chief building official of the town or his or her designee. If more than 40% but less than 60% of a
fence or wall should be repaired or replaced in a single calendar year, the fence must be replaced with
like materials. If 60% or more of a fence or wall should be replaced in a single calendar year, the
entire fence or wall must be replaced.
(2) The required fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a permit, said fee amount to be contained
on the town's master fee schedule.
(3) The chief building official may refuse to issue a fence or wall permit to any person previously
convicted or cited for violation of any provision of this section.
(4) A plot plan shall be submitted with a permit application showing the lot dimensions, structures,
improvements, and location of the proposed fence or wall.
(5) Upon completion of a fence or wall, structures must be inspected and approved by the chief
building official or his or her designee.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.012)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 474/665
Sec. 14.02.013 Landscaping and irrigation requirements
(a) Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide minimum requirements for landscaping and
landscape maintenance in newly developed and redeveloped properties. The intent of these requirements is to
accomplish the following:
(1) Provide for site design where landscaping is well-integrated into both public and private
properties serving to harmonize the appearance of streetscape, parking areas, buildings, and open
space.
(2) Provide for shade in order to reduce the ambient air temperature and to provide a more inviting
environment for pedestrians and outdoor recreation in the summer months.
(3) Provide buffering between adjacent properties and from adjacent roadways, particularly in
scenarios where low-density residential development is adjacent to nonresidential development, or
where any development or open space is adjacent to a thoroughfare or heavily trafficked perimeter
street.
(4) Provide for landscaping that is drought-tolerant and native to the region, in order to reduce the
water demand of new development.
(5) Provide for erosion protection in built areas and encourage best management practices for the
use of stormwater in landscape irrigation.
(b) Applicability.
(1) The provisions of this subsection shall apply to:
(A) All new development; and
(B) All redevelopment that results in the redevelopment, replacement, or expansion of more
than 40% of the gross area of the property or principle permitted use or structure.
(2) Section 3.15.075(a), providing an exemption for “homestead property,” is not applicable to
landscaping required by this section. Landscaping required by this section shall be considered
protected trees and shall be subject to the tree replacement requirements of article 3.15 regardless of
the homestead property exemption. Exemptions may be granted by the town engineer for dead or
diseased trees, trees negatively impacting structures, public or private utilities, or trees that have a
detrimental impact on public safety.
(c) General requirements.
(1) Landscape plans shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect and shall be required for
all nonresidential development and applicable redevelopment, and all residential development and
applicable redevelopment that provides for dedicated common areas, open space, parkland, required
landscape buffers, or landscape entryway features and monument signs. With the exception of those
features listed above and in subsection (f) below, landscape plans shall not be required for individual
lots within single-family residential developments.
(2) Irrigation plans shall be prepared by a licensed irrigation design professional and shall be
required for all nonresidential development and for dedicated common areas, open space, parkland,
required landscape buffers, and landscape entryway features and monument signs in residential
developments. With the exception of those features listed above, irrigation plans shall not be required
for individual lots within single-family residential developments.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 475/665
(3) For the purposes of this section, multifamily residential development shall conform to the
nonresidential landscape and irrigation requirements of this section.
(4) Landscaping and irrigation requirements for development within the commercial planned
development district (CPDD) shall be established by the CPDD zoning ordinance, and shall not be
subject to the requirements of this section.
(5) The American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1-2004, shall be the nursery standard
adopted by the town.
(6) Except where otherwise provided in a town approved landscape plan, all yard, setback,
parking, service, and recreational areas shall be landscaped with lawns, trees, shrubs, or other live
plant materials and shall be permanently maintained in a neat and orderly manner as a condition for
use. Failure to maintain landscaping required as part of an approved landscape plan may result in the
issuance of a citation for violation of this code.
(7) Property owners shall be required to maintain all landscape materials placed within the street
right-of-way immediately adjacent to their lot, with the exception of those segments of perimeter
street right-of-way that any such property owner may prove to the satisfaction of the planning
manager that another person or entity is legally responsible for all or a portion of such maintenance,
in which case such property owner shall not be required to maintain the portion of the landscaping
materials that the other person or entity is legally responsible to maintain. The planning manager's
determination in this regard shall be memorialized in a letter of determination, a copy of which the
planning manager shall endeavor to provide to the property owner upon request.
(8) There shall be permitted fountains, ponds, sculptures, planters, walkways, flagpoles, light
standards and decorative screen-type walls as elements of landscaping in areas designated for
landscaping. Decorative-type walls, planters and sculptures shall be 30 inches or less in height. The
town may permit heights in excess of 30 inches where such is in the best interest of landscaping and
will not create a problem relative to public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general
welfare.
(9) It is encouraged that drought-tolerant and native plants be incorporated into landscape design.
Techniques such as the reuse of stormwater for irrigation purposes, drip irrigation, and selfadjusting/
smart irrigation controllers are encouraged in order to minimize water usage for landscape
irrigation.
(10) A layer of mulch shall be provided around the perimeter of any tree required under this code.
The area encompassing the tree's root ball shall not be covered, and instead shall remain exposed to
the elements.
(d) Landscape and irrigation plan requirements.
(1) Landscape plans shall be submitted with applicable development applications, shall depict
existing improvements that are to remain and proposed improvements, and shall be comprised of the
following:
(A) A plan to scale prepared by a landscape architect licensed by the State of Texas, that
depicts the species, size, quantity, location, and spacing of all proposed landscape planting
materials. Existing tree clusters that are to remain following development shall also be depicted.
Plans shall include a summary table that identifies the quantity and type of plants required by
this code and the quantity and type of plants proposed by the applicant.
(B) A plan and profile of all proposed landscape buffers and landscape screening.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 476/665
(C) A plan to scale for all proposed hardscape features such as trails, pedestrian bridges,
common area fencing, screening walls, monument signs, streetscape furnishings and any other
proposed hardscape features.
(2) Preliminary irrigation plans shall be submitted with required construction plans and shall be
comprised of a plan to scale that identifies areas that are to be irrigated, the type of irrigation system
that is to be utilized and the location of the irrigation water meter and double check valve assembly.
A complete irrigation plan that depicts the layout, design, and specifications of the proposed
irrigation system shall be submitted during the building permit process.
(e) Nonresidential landscape and irrigation requirements.
(1) Landscaping and irrigation requirements for nonresidential development within the CPDD shall
be established by the CPDD zoning ordinance, and shall not be subject to the requirements of this
section.
(2) For nonresidential development outside of the CPDD, the proposed development shall adhere
to the prescribed landscape standards for equivalent building type, streetscape, buffering, and open
space requirements under the CPDD zoning ordinance.
(f) Residential landscape and irrigation requirements.
(1) Landscaping and irrigation requirements for residential development within the CPDD shall be
established by the CPDD zoning ordinance, and shall not be subject to the requirements of this
section.
(2) For building permit review for residential development outside of the CPDD, the location,
species, and size of required shade or ornamental trees shall be required to be depicted on a plot plan
of the individual lot.
(3) For applicable new residential development and redevelopment outside of the CPDD, the
following requirements shall apply:
(A) A minimum of six (6) shade trees shall be installed on each residential lot prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupation. Up to two shade trees may be substituted for ornamental
trees at a ratio of two (2) ornamental trees for one (1) tree.
(B) Shade trees shall be a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter at breast height (DBH) at
planting and shall be a species included on the town's quality tree list, as depicted in this code,
chapter 3, article 3.15, appendix C. Easter Red Cedar trees shall not satisfy the requirements of
this subsection.
(C) Up to four 3" DBH shade trees may be replaced at a ratio of two 3" DBH shade trees to
one 6" DBH shade tree planted within the front setback area of the lot.
(D) Ornamental trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height at planting and shall be a
species included on the town's understory tree list, as depicted in this code, chapter 3, article
3.15, appendix C.
(E) A minimum of two (2) shade trees must be planted in the front yard of the lot between the
front right-of-way or road easement boundary and the front build line of the house.
(4) In circumstances where the purpose and intent of this section may be accomplished through the
preservation of existing shade trees, an applicant may request exemptions from the residential
landscape and irrigation requirements specified in this subsection. Exemptions may be granted by the
planning manager under the following conditions:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 477/665
(A) For every five (5) percent increment of tree canopy coverage that exists and is preserved
following the construction of all site improvements, the applicant shall be permitted to reduce
the required installed shade trees by one (1) shade tree.
(B) Tree canopy coverage shall be measured as a percentage of the net area of the lot that is
covered by tree canopy. Lot area that falls within public right-of-way, projected public right-ofway,
or road easements shall not be considered when calculating canopy coverage.
(C) Existing shade trees located within street right-of-way, road easements, or the projected
street right-of-way of perimeter street shall not be permitted to satisfy the requirements of this
subsection.
(D) The provisions of shade trees in the front yard may only be reduced if the existing tree
canopy coverage in the front yard is of an amount that would satisfy the requirements of this
subsection.
(5) All required landscaping shall be served by a drip irrigation system at the time of planting.
(g) Landscape and irrigation plan implementation requirements.
(1) All required landscaping must be installed and the town shall inspect same for compliance with
this code prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(2) Applicants may request to postpone installation of landscaping for a maximum duration of six
months in order to prevent landscape installation during summer months.
(3) During water restriction periods where drip irrigation is not permitted, required landscape
installation shall be postponed until drip irrigation is permitted to occur.
(4) When a request for postponement of landscaping has been granted by the town, the applicant
shall be required to escrow finds to the town in an amount that would satisfy the costs of landscaping
installation. The planning manager shall maintain landscaping escrow cost estimates for the town.
The town shall reimburse the escrowed funds to the applicant upon completion of the requirements of
this section, or, in the event that the requirements are not timely and properly completed, the town
may expend the funds to complete the requirements.
(5) Failure to comply with the requirements of this section or failure to maintain required
landscaping may result in a notice of violation from the town's code enforcement officer. Failure to
correct said violation within thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the notice of violation may
result in a citation being issued for the violation of this code.
(Ordinance 2014-6-3-9A adopted 6/3/14)
Sec. 14.02.014 Tree protection
All rules governing the protection of trees and natural areas should be followed as outlined in article 3.15 of this
code. (1998 Code, sec. 154.014)
Sec. 14.02.015 Off-street parking
(a) All zones require paved off-street parking facilities except FH, AG, RE-1, and RE-2. The required number
of spaces per land use is indicated by subsection (b) of this section. No permanent or repetitive on-street parking
is permitted at any time in any zone.
(b) Off-street parking requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 478/665
Land Use Classification Number of Off-Street Paved Parking Spaces
Required
Accessory recreation, community building 1 per each 100 sf
Amusement establishments 1 per each 100 sf
Church, temple, assembly hall (with seats),
theater, auditorium, arena, sports stadium
1 per each 3 seats
College, technical college, junior college 1 per each 25 sf of seating area
Commercial, professional, office buildings 3 for first 300 sf plus 1 per each additional 300 sf
Dance, exhibition, assembly halls (no fixed
seating)
1 per each 100 sf
Day care center, day nursery, kindergarten
(with more than 4 children)
1 per each 300 sf plus 4 spaces for passenger
loading/unloading
Elementary, junior high school 1-1/2 per classroom
Funeral home, mortuary 1 per each 300 sf plus 1 per each 100 sf of chapel area
High school 1 per 3 students
Hospital 1 per bed or 1 per each 300 sf, whichever is greater
Hotel/motel
Up to 250 rooms 1 per room
250 rooms and above 0.75 per room plus 1 per each 100 sf of commercial area
Lumberyard, other wholesale businesses 1 per each 150 sf plus 1 per warehouse employee
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 479/665
Manufacturing plant, research laboratory 1 per each 500 sf
Medical and dental clinics 1 per each 150 sf
Multiple-family housing (PC zone) 1 space per 500 square feet of dwelling unit floor area
within building site
Nursing homes and sanitariums 1 per each 6 beds plus 1 per each employee
Restaurants, cafes 1 per each 100 sf or 1 per each 4 seats, whichever is
greater
Single-family, townhouse, mobile home, and
garden home residences (PC zone)
2 per residence
Warehouse, truck terminal, terminal facility 1 per each 1,000 sf
Exceptions: Groups of uses such as churches and professional office buildings may join in establishing group
paved parking areas with the capacity totaling that required for each particular use. Where it can be established
before the building official that paved parking for two specific uses occurs at alternating periods, the paved
parking space requirements of the use requiring the greater number of spaces may be applied to both uses in a
combined paved parking area; however, such parking shall be within 100 feet from lot to lot of all uses to be
served by such parking.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.015)
Sec. 14.02.016 Board of adjustment
There shall be established by separate ordinance a board of adjustment for the town in accordance with the
provisions of Tex. Local Gov't Code art. 211.008 that shall have the powers and duties as may be established by
ordinance. (1998 Code, sec. 154.016)
State law reference–Establishment and authority of zoning board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.008 et
seq.
Sec. 14.02.017 Planning and zoning commission
There shall be established by separate ordinance a planning and zoning commission for the town in accordance
with the provisions of Tex. Local Gov't Code art. 211.007 that shall have the powers and duties as may be
established by ordinance. (1998 Code, sec. 154.017)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish planning and zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
211.007.
Sec. 14.02.018 Site plan review
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 480/665
Where a site plan review has been made a condition of any zoning change, the applicant, prior to development,
shall submit the proposed development to the planning and zoning commission and town council for site plan
review pursuant to the town's site plan regulations set forth in article 14.03 of this Code of Ordinances. (1998
Code, sec. 154.018)
Sec. 14.02.019 Completion of existing buildings
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building
actually under construction at the time of the passage of this article and which entire building shall be complete
within one year from the passage of this article. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans,
construction or designated use of building for which a building permit has been heretofore issued and which
entire building shall be complete within six months from the date of the passage of this article with regard to
districts, the provisions of this article with regard to buildings, or premises existing or buildings under
construction or building permits issued at the time of the passage of this article, shall apply to building permits
issued in the area affected by such amendment at the time of the passage of such amendment [sic]. (1998 Code,
sec. 154.019)
Sec. 14.02.020 Definitions
Accessory building. A detached building on the same lot with the primary building, the use of which is clearly
incidental to that of the primary building or use of the land. A building housing an accessory use is considered
an integral part of the main building when it has any part of a wall in common with the main building, or is
under an extension of the main roof and designed as an integral part of the main building.
Accessory use. A use customarily incidental or subordinate to the principal use of the primary building located
on the same property.
Administrative officers. Every officer referred to by title, i.e., town manager, town attorney, town secretary, town
engineer, director of public works, etc., and the person so retained in this position by the town or his duly
authorized representative.
Alley. A minor way used primarily for vehicular service to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
Approach main. An off-site main which brings water or sewer service to a site of development.
Billboard. Any signboard of 25 square feet or more carrying a message of advertising. This definition does not
include official notices issued by a court or public entity in the performance of a legal function.
Border main. A water or sewer main located in a roadway, alley, or utility easement abutting the perimeter of a
development site.
Building line. A line beyond which buildings must be set back from the street or road right-of-way line or
property line.
Collector street. A street which is continuous through several residential or other districts and is intended as a
connecting street between districts.
Commercial street. Any street situated so that 50% or more of the property abutting it is zoned for other than
low-density residential development.
Commercial tract. Any tract containing any type of land use except for single-family (detached) residential and
two-family (duplex) residential uses. (Requirements and standards for religious and educational land uses shall
be the same as the character of the predominant surrounding land use.) Nothing contained in this definition shall
be considered as limitations to or repeal of the definitions set forth in the town's fire prevention code.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 481/665
Commission or planning and zoning commission. The official town planning and zoning commission as
appointed by the town council.
Comprehensive plan. The general plan for the growth and development of the town and its environs, including
any elements of such plan, such as a land use plan, thoroughfare plan, utilities plan, schools and parks plan, and
others.
County or the county. Collin County, Texas.
Cul-de-sac. A short residential street having but one vehicular access to another street and terminated by a
vehicular turnaround.
Dead-end street. A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet.
Easement. An area designated for restricted use on private property or an interest in land granted to the town or
to the public. This general definition does not intend to replace the legal definition of the term.
Emergency access easement. A private street, alley or paved place dedicated to the public for the purpose of
providing access to adjacent structures by emergency vehicles such as fire equipment, police or ambulances, the
boundaries of which are continuously and permanently marked.
Engineer. Whenever used without a prefix, shall refer to registered professional engineer retained by a
developer.
Final plat. A map or drawing prepared according to the provisions of article 10.02 of this code and containing
all surveying and legal data, dedications and certificates necessary to the recording of same in the plat records of
the county.
Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. (See Fairview flood
protection ordinance.)
Fraternal lodge. Any lodge built and owned by a nonprofit association or corporation which is exempt from
federal income taxation under section 5-1C(8) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Home occupation. An occupation performed at the residence provided that:
(1) No person, other than members of the family residing on the premises, shall be engaged in such
occupation.
(2) Such use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the premises for residential purposes.
(3) The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate
to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 25% of the floor area of the
dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
(4) There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible
evidence of the conduct of such home occupation.
(5) No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally
be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such
home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard.
(6) No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration,
glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the
occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in
other than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 482/665
shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the
premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
(7) Home occupation uses shall not include beauty culture schools, barber and beauty shops,
commercial or quasi-commercial repairs to automobiles or other motorized vehicles including parts
thereof, medical or chiropractic offices, or other uses of a similar nature and character.
(8) There shall be no display in any yard area of goods for sale.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.020)
Impervious surface. Any material that prevents or impedes the absorption or retention of stormwater. Impervious
surfaces shall include all surfaces constructed of asphalt, concrete, brick, paving block, plastic, metal, wood, or
other similar material which prevents or impedes the absorption or retention of stormwater. Granular materials
such as sand, gravel, and decomposed granite shall only be considered to be an impervious surface if the
material is chemically stabilized through the use of a binding agent. Structures, such as pools, that are capable of
retaining, but not absorbing stormwater, and semi-pervious materials such as pervious paving blocks or pervious
concrete shall be considered to be impervious surfaces. (Ordinance 2013-6-4B, sec. 1, adopted 6/4/13)
Land use map. See “planned zoning map.”
Lot. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and accessory building, including such open spaces as are
required by ordinances of the town, and having its principal frontage on a public street or officially approved
place.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.020)
Lot coverage. The portion of a lot that is covered by impervious surfaces. (Ordinance 2013-6-4B, sec. 1, adopted
6/4/13)
Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded with the county clerk,
Collin County; or a parcel of land, the deed for which has been recorded with the county clerk, Collin County.
Manufactured housing. Any residential structure which is fabricated off-site (in whole or in part) and is
assembled on the lot to a permanent foundation. Structures of this type include modular homes, prefabricated
homes, or any other structure commonly classified as manufactured housing.
May. Whenever used in this article, will be interpreted as “optional.”
Minor plat. Pursuant to the subdivision ordinance of the Town of Fairview.
Mobile home. Moveable structures used primarily for residential purposes. Mobile homes shall be defined as any
structures driven or towed to a site by the same conveyance. These shall include conventional mobile homes,
recreational vehicles, trailer coaches, trailer homes, travel trailers, campers, and all similar vehicles.
Mobile home parks or trailer courts. A tract of land used for renting or selling [or] leasing sites for mobile
homes or trailer coaches.
Off-premises sign or billboard. A sign or billboard displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business,
person, organization, activity, event, place, service or product not principally located or primarily manufactured
or sold on the premises on which the sign is located.
On-site main. A water or sewer main located in a roadway, alley, or easement within the perimeter of a
development tract and which provides service only to the lots, sites, or tracts within the development.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 483/665
Open space. That part of any lot or tract that is used for recreational purposes, both passive and active, but not
including areas used for parking or maneuvering of automobiles, or drives or approaches to and from parking
areas.
Oversize main. A water or sewer main which the system's master plan requires or which the town elects to
construct or have constructed of larger diameter than that required to provide service to the property of a
subdivider.
Planned zoning map. That certain map and amendments thereto adopted as a part of the Town of Fairview
comprehensive plan by ordinance.
Planning and zoning commission. The body of members charged with the responsibility of reviewing for
approval all subdivisions, preliminary plats and final plats in the town.
Preliminary plat. A map or drawing on which is shown the subdivider's proposed arrangement of streets, lots,
easements and other public spaces and facilities in the subdivision, prepared in compliance with article 10.02,
intended for review and study by the town, and not intended for recording.
Property line front. The boundary line between a lot and the street right-of-way on which it fronts. On corner
lots, the front of the lot is that area so designated on the approved development plat.
Property line rear. Any remaining boundary line, after consideration of front and side property lines.
Property line side. Any boundary lines connecting to the front boundary lines.
Residential street. A street which is intended primarily to serve traffic within a neighborhood or limited
residential district which is used primarily for access to abutting properties and which is geometrically designed
to discourage high speeds and through traffic.
Residential tract. Any tract of land developed for the purpose of single-family detached or two-family domestic
living (religious and educational institutions may also be included). Requirements and standards for religious
and educational institutions may also be the same as the character of the predominant surrounding land use and
subject to a conditional use permit.
Sanitary sewer. A pipe or conduit for water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and
industrial establishments to which storm, surface and ground water are not normally admitted and which is a part
of the public sewage collection system.
Senior housing.
(1) Congregate-care housing. Congregate living allows elderly people in relatively good health to
maintain their social and functional independence while having access to common support services
such as meals and housekeeping that provide private living units but offer opportunities for social
interaction with mutually supportive neighbors.
(2) Assisted-living facilities. This type of housing is designed and staffed to provide for residents
who require some type of support for daily living, such as assistance for bathing, dressing,
medication, meal preparation, or other functions.
(3) Continuing care retirement communities (CCRCs). CCRCs usually are campus-like complexes
of multifamily buildings housing several hundred to 2,000 or more residents, although they may be
smaller and may also incorporate single-family residences for independent living.
Service line. A water or sewer pipe running from the water or sewer main to the property to which water or
sewer service is given.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 484/665
Setback. The shortest distance between any point on the building, excluding steps and unenclosed porch, and the
property line.
Sewer or sewer main. Used without any prefix, shall refer to a sanitary sewer (excluding service lines).
Shall. Whenever used in this article, will be interpreted in its mandatory sense.
Sign. Any device that brings a visual message to the public, but not including any flag, pennant or other visual
insignia specifically associated with governmental, civic, religious, charitable, patriotic, or fraternal
organizations. The sign may consist of one or more sections, in which case the sum of the square feet of all
sections shall be considered in meeting the requirements of this article.
Sign, flat. Any sign erected on the outside of a building or parallel to its surface and which is supported by that
face.
Site plan. A development plan, drawn to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for a parcel of land (see
site plan review regulations).
Standard specifications. The document published by the North Central Texas Council of Governments entitled
“Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction” and all subsequent revisions thereto.
Standard specifications and codes. Applied to all improvements constructed within the town and shall be in
accordance with all revisions as may be adopted by the town.
Storm sewer or storm drain. A pipe, conduit, or channel which carries storm and surface water and drainage, but
excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
Street. A way for vehicular traffic whether designated a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however otherwise designated.
Structure. Anything constructed that is of necessity attached directly or indirectly to the ground, including but
not limited to: all above-grade structures, being buildings, towers, signs (except for those flat against other
structures), service station islands, and the like; and all below-grade structures such as septic systems and
leaching fields, swimming pools constructed above or below grade including decks and constructed aprons, and
tennis courts and other manufactured or constructed playing surface, inclusive of barriers or other containment
construction.
Subdivider or developer. An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, or other
organization dividing or proposing to divide land or making improvements to such land for himself, or for itself,
or for another.
Subdivision. The division of any lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more parts to lay out a subdivision of the
tract including an addition to a municipality, to lay out suburban, building, or other lots, or to lay out streets,
alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of
purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts.
Surveyor. A licensed land surveyor or a registered public surveyor, as authorized by the state statutes to practice
the profession of surveying.
Thoroughfare. A principal traffic thoroughfare more or less continuous across the town which is intended to
connect remote parts of the town or areas adjacent thereto and which acts as a principal connecting street with
state and interstate highways.
Town council. The duly elected governing body of the Town of Fairview, Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 485/665
Town engineer. The town engineer of the town, the town's consulting engineer, or their duly authorized
representatives.
Town or the town. The Town of Fairview, Texas.
Tree. Any self-supporting woody perennial plant which has a trunk diameter of four and one-half inches or more
when measured by caliper inch at a point of four and one-half feet above ground level and which normally
attains an overall height of at least 15 feet. (See tree ordinance.)
Utility easement. An area for restricted use on private property upon which any public utility shall have the right
to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, or other improvements or growths
which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance, or efficiency of its respective
systems within said area. Any public utility shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to, from and
upon the said easements for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining,
adding to or removing all or part of its respective systems without the necessity, at any time, of procuring the
permission of anyone.
View of the general public. This is defined as what could be observed in a casual manner by anyone on a
roadway adjacent to the parcel of land. Anything forward of the front line of the dwelling shall automatically be
considered as in the view of the general public.
Water main. A pipe or conduit which is a part of a public water distribution system (excluding service lines).
(1998 Code, sec. 154.020)
Sec. 14.02.021 Penalty
(a) Whenever in this article or any ordinance of the town an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in the article or ordinance the doing of any act is required
or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation
of such provision of this article or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500; provided,
however, that a final penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety,
zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, may not exceed $2,000.
(b) Notwithstanding the above provision, no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the
same or a similar offense of the laws of the state.
(c) Each day a violation of this article or of any ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.999)
Sec. 14.02.022 Temporary uses
The following temporary uses may be allowed in the applicable zoning districts, and under the conditions and
for the time specified upon proper application and review by the director of planning and community
development:
(1) A temporary building may be used as an office incidental to construction work if such building
is located upon the same property as the site under construction, contains no living quarters, and
provides for no uses not incidental to construction on the premises. Such buildings shall be removed
within 30 days following final completion of the construction. “Final completion” shall mean the
final acceptance of all public improvements (drainage, lighting, pavement, water, and sewer), as
approved by the director of public works. The term “living quarters” shall mean an area where
individuals reside.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 486/665
(2) A temporary facility or a permanent residential structure (such as a model home) located on
any platted lot in an approved residential subdivision may be used as a construction office, or as a
sales office, sales trailer, or for display purposes. No more than one office and no more than four
display facilities per builder shall be allowed for any purposes for any subdivision. Such temporary
use shall be allowed for a period of one year, with extensions upon application and approval of six
months. However, in no case shall more than four such extensions be granted.
(3) In certain instances, it may be appropriate for temporary use buildings to be used for longer
than three years. In the case of model homes, sales offices and construction trailers, additional
renewals would require that the applicant demonstrate that construction and/or sales activity is still
ongoing and that the buildings are being used as permitted. This would allow temporary buildings
only as long as their intended function is being actively employed. The granting of an extension of a
temporary use permit, based on the above considerations, shall be based upon the proper application,
review and approval of the director of planning and community development.
(4) Temporary uses of a religious building or site or of a philanthropic nature (such as medical
vaccinations) by those organizations not normally conducting business for profit may be allowed for
the period of their actual duration up to a maximum of 30 days, except that two extensions of up to
30 days may be possible upon application and approval.
(5) Temporary sales of seasonal products such as firewood, cut trees, plants, fruits and vegetables,
and similar products may be allowed during their normal and generally accepted season for a period
of up to 120 days.
(6) Any uses and/or structures not listed above, but requested as a temporary use(s), shall be
reviewed by town staff, with recommendation to and final approval by the planning and zoning
commission.
(7) The director of planning and community development, in approving or denying such
application shall consider the nature of the use; existing uses in surrounding areas; noise, dust, and
other performance standards; traffic generated; health and sanitary conditions; and compliance with
other regulations of this section. The director of planning and community development shall have the
right to revoke any temporary use at any time or to deny any extension upon finding that a hazard or
nuisance shall exist by continuing such use. Upon the revocation or denial of such temporary use, the
nuisance or hazard shall immediately cease and shall be removed within ten days of notification of
such finding.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.021)
Sec. 14.02.023 Public art
(a) All nonresidential development projects must include public art.
(b) Public art must be located in a public place. A public place shall mean any area, either indoors or outdoors,
on public property or private, that is easily accessible and clearly visible to the public. If located on private
property, the area must be open to the general public and readily visible from a public right-of-way or other
public property.
(c) Public art must be have a monetary value equal to or greater than 1% of the total cost of construction of
the development.
(d) Public art shall include but not necessarily be limited to:
(1) Sculpture, such as in the round, bas-relief, mobile, fountain, kinetic, electronic, or other, in any
material or combination of materials;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 487/665
(2) Painting, including all media;
(3) Graphics and multimedia, including printmaking, drawing, and photography;
(4) Mosaics;
(5) Crafts in clay, fiber and textiles, wood, metal, plastics, and other materials;
(6) Mixed media, including any combination of forms; and
(7) On-site art spaces or cultural facilities that include gallery/exhibition spaces, resource libraries,
visual arts slide registries, performances, artist studio spaces, and/or art education facilities that are
open and accessible to the public.
(e) Any existing building that is remodeled with a construction value equal to or greater than 50% of the
replacement cost of the building shall also be subject to the requirements of this section.
(f) In lieu of acquisition, construction and/or installation of public art on the development site, an owner or
developer, at its sole discretion, may construct or install the art on public property and donate ownership thereof
to the town.
(g) In lieu of acquisition, construction and/or installation of public art, an owner or developer, at its sole
discretion, may pay a fee in lieu contribution to the town. Said fee shall be equal to or greater than 1% of the
total construction cost of the development. Any funds so paid shall be kept separate from other municipal funds
and may only be used for the acquisition, construction, or display of public art as defined in this section. If the
owner or developer opts to pay this fee, full payment must be made in advance of issuance of a building permit.
(h) An arts review committee is established, which shall have the responsibility to review proposals for public
art on public property and to advise the staff, council, and planning and zoning commission as to appropriateness
and suitability. The committee shall issue a recommendation on each project within 60 days of receiving a
proposal. Members of the committee shall not be required to be of any specific vocation, but they must be
knowledgeable about visual public art and be residents of the community.
(i) A proposal for installation of public art shall include the following:
(1) Landscape and site plans indicating the location and orientation of the public art and/or the
landscaping and architectural treatments integrating the art into the overall project design;
(2) A sample, model, photograph, or drawings of the proposed art;
(3) Material samples and finishes, if appropriate;
(4) A resume of the artist if appropriate;
(5) Photographs of previous work by artist;
(6) A maintenance plan for the art; and
(7) Any additional information required to ensure an appropriate review.
(j) The public art, except that which may be installed on public property, shall remain the property of the
holder of the certificate of occupancy. If the building in or on which the art is displayed is sold, ownership of the
public art shall transfer as a part of the sale of the building.
(k) The property owner shall continuously maintain, or cause to be maintained, the public art in good
condition after its installation and shall perform necessary repairs and maintenance thereof.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 488/665
(1998 Code, sec. 154.022)
Sec. 14.02.024 Sports courts
(a) Definitions.
Property owner or owner. For the purposes of this section means any person, firm or corporation having a legal
ownership interest in the property, and also includes any person that resides in, leases, manages, or otherwise
controls the property.
Sport court. A rectangular outdoor surface pad that: (1) incorporates impervious materials such as concrete,
asphalt, or tile; (2) is separate from the primary structure; (3) may or may not be partially or fully enclosed by
fencing and may or may not be partially or fully painted; and (4) is used or intended for tennis, volleyball,
basketball, badminton, and other such activities that traditionally occur on a permanent court surface. A surface
pad designed and permitted for vehicular access purposes (such as a driveway) is not a sport court merely
because a sporting apparatus, such as, but not limited to, a basketball goal, is present; provided that the dominant
use of the surface pad is vehicular transport or storage.
(b) Permit required. A property owner must obtain a permit from the town before installing or constructing a
sports court. Applications for a permit for a sports court shall be processed in the same manner as conditional
use permits or special use permits in accordance with chapter 14, division 11, section 14.02.511, et seq. of this
code.
(c) Application fee. Application fees shall be the same as those fees required for a conditional or special use
permit as listed in appendix A, article A3.000 miscellaneous fees of this code.
(Ordinance 2012-2-7C adopted 2/7/12)
Sec. 14.02.025 Exterior facade requirements for institutional buildings
(a) Purpose and intent. The purpose of this subsection is to provide minimum requirements for exterior
building facades for institutional buildings. The intent of these requirements is to ensure that institutional
buildings are designed and constructed in a manner that is consistent with existing development in the town.
(b) Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to:
(1) New development and redevelopment of permanent institutional buildings that are primary or
accessory to an institutional use.
(2) For the purposes of this section, redevelopment shall be defined as redevelopment,
replacement, or expansion of more than 50% of the gross area of the property, principle permitted
use, or structure.
(3) For the purposes of this section institutional buildings shall be defined as facilities that are
established to serve a social, educational, public service, or religious purpose and are operated by a
federal, state, or local government, public or private utility, public or private school or college,
religious organization, public agency, or nonprofit organization.
(c) Material requirements.
(1) Primary exterior facade materials for permanent institutional buildings shall be comprised of
brick, stone, manufactured stone, or stucco utilizing a three-step process. Each facade shall
incorporate a minimum of two of the aforementioned materials in its design.
(2) Metal, glass block, and tile may be utilized as accent materials for permanent institutional
buildings and shall not exceed 30% of the exterior area of the building. Manufactured stone veneer
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 489/665
and EFIS shall not be permitted exterior facade materials for permanent institutional buildings.
(Ordinance 2014-6-3-9B adopted 6/3/14)
Secs. 14.02.026–14.02.070 Reserved
Division 2. Zoning Districts
Sec. 14.02.071 Zoning districts established
(a) The following are the zoning districts of the town:
Open Space and Flood Hazard (FH)
Agricultural (AG)
Three-Acre Ranch Estate (RE-3)
Two-Acre Ranch Estate (RE-2)
One-and One Half Acre Ranch Estate Zone (RE-1.5)
One-Acre Ranch Estate (RE-1)
General Business (GB)
Planned Center (PC)
Mobile Home (MH)
Conditional Use Permit (CU)
Planned Development Zone (PD)
Commercial Planned Development District Zone (CPDD)
(b) All zoning classifications or districts provided for in this article shall be noncumulative.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.030)
Secs. 14.02.072–14.02.100 Reserved
Division 3. Open Space and Flood Hazard Zone (FH)
Sec. 14.02.101 Purpose
This zone is designated to protect individuals building in areas subject to flooding, to insure a minimum of flood
damage in the event of such a catastrophe, and to promote and maintain open areas in the town. The flood
insurance rate map, the latest revision issued, for the town on which the Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and risk premium zones applicable to the town is hereby
adopted and incorporated herein for all purposes and made a part of this article, and is also modified pursuant to
the flood protection provisions found in article 3.12, division 2. The zone designated herein is hereby limited to
all that area lying within the flood insurance rate map's 100-year flood boundary. (1998 Code, sec. 154.040)
Sec. 14.02.102 Permitted accessory uses
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 490/665
The following are permitted accessory uses:
(1) Crop and tree farming, but not including the raising of animals or fowl for commercial
purposes, or the sale of any products on or adjacent to the premises.
(2) Barns or other outbuildings necessary for crop and tree farming, but not including stables,
corrals, paddocks or other enclosures or buildings for the keeping of animals or fowl, and providing
the permitted building is located no closer than 50 feet from any property line. No barns or
outbuildings shall be located closer than 50 feet from any other building on the same property, and no
closer than 100 feet from a recognized stream bank unless it abuts an area zoned FH or AG, in which
case they may be 50 feet from any property line.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.041)
Sec. 14.02.103 Specific zone requirements
(a) No residential dwelling or dwelling used for living purposes shall be permitted within this zone.
(b) No slaughter pens, rendering works or associated businesses shall be located within this zone.
(c) No stables, corrals, paddocks, nonresidential buildings, enclosures, or structures for the keeping of animals
or fowl shall be allowed in this zone.
(d) Any construction or improvements in this zone are to follow those guidelines outlined in the flood
protection ordinance set out in article 3.12, division 2.
(e) The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. Larger
floods can and may occur on rare occasions within the area so designated. Flood heights may be increased by
artificial or natural causes. This article shall not create liability on the part of the town, the mayor, any
councilmember, officer or employee thereof of [or] the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.042)
Secs. 14.02.104–14.02.150 Reserved
Division 4. Agricultural Zone (AG)
Sec. 14.02.151 Purpose
This zone is designated to provide for general ranching and farming under minimum restrictions. (1998 Code,
sec. 154.055)
Sec. 14.02.152 Principal permitted uses
The following are principal permitted uses: the raising of crops, fruits, and vegetables, horses, cattle, poultry, or
any other animals on a commercial or business basis. (1998 Code, sec. 154.056)
Sec. 14.02.153 Principal accessory uses
The following are principal accessory uses:
(1) Living quarters for the owners, renters, or persons regularly employed on the premises, but not
including accommodations for transient labor.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 491/665
(2) Houses, barns, stables, corrals, and any other buildings necessary to perform the principal
permitted use.
(3) Recreational facilities exclusively for the use of residents and employees of the premises and
their nonpaying guests.
(4) Riding academies.
(5) Greenhouses.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.057)
Sec. 14.02.154 Specific zone requirements
(a) No feedlots shall be established for commercial purposes except as would be required to perform the
principal use.
(b) No slaughter pens or rendering works or associated businesses shall be permitted, except as would be
required to perform the principal permitted use.
(c) Minimum land area is ten acres and at no time shall the residential density exceed one primary residence
for living purposes per ten acres.
(d) (1) Maximum height of building: 35 feet or two stories, whichever is less.
(2) Minimum setback from front and rear property lines: 35 feet from property line except in case
of road easement at which time it will be 35 feet from road easement.
(3) Minimum setback from side property line: 25 feet from road or property line easements.
(4) Minimum gross floor area: No less than 2,000 square feet living space excluding garage,
porches, and breezeways.
(e) Specifically prohibited are commercial ventures not related to agriculture including parceling of land or
lease or sublease to a commercial venture such as advertising media (outdoor advertising, and the like),
fireworks stands, or auto graveyards.
(f) No mobile homes shall be permitted.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.058)
Secs. 14.02.155–14.02.200 Reserved
Division 5. Three-Acre Ranch Estate Zone (RE-3)
Sec. 14.02.201 Purpose
This zone is designed to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life on land parcels of not less
than three acres. This classification is to be used only for suburban single-family homes and the community
services and facilities appurtenant thereto. (1998 Code, sec. 154.060)
Sec. 14.02.202 Principal permitted uses
The following are principal permitted uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 492/665
(1998 Code, sec. 154.061)
Sec. 14.02.203 Permitted accessory uses and restrictions
The following are permitted accessory uses and restrictions:
(1) Crop and tree farming.
(2) To allow raising of animals or fowl for commercial purposes but only on those land parcels of
ten acres in size or on land parcels of five acres in size if not part of an established subdivision.
(3) Living quarters for persons regularly employed on the premises, but not including
accommodations for transient labor, shall follow the required setback restrictions for this zone.
(4) Guest houses will not be rented or otherwise conducted as a business, shall not exceed 900
square feet in aggregate area, and shall follow the required setback restrictions of this zone.
(5) Private swimming pools exclusively for the use of residents of the premises and their guests.
(6) Private stables, corrals, paddocks, and dog runs are not permitted to be closer than 40 feet from
any property line and not permitted to be closer than 40 feet from any dwelling on the same or
adjoining property. One grazing animal such as a goat, horse, cow, and the like, may be kept per acre
net of all impervious surfaces.
(7) The keeping of dogs, cats, and other household pets is limited to four animals over six months
old per residence.
(8) Rental of sleeping rooms to two individuals not members of the family of occupants. No
advertising [of] the availability of such rooms shall be displayed.
(9) The parking of one unoccupied travel trailer or RV, designed for recreational use and not to
exceed 45 feet in length shall be permitted behind the front building line of a residence for an
unlimited period of time; or for temporary occupancy for up to 14 days; or for temporary loading or
unloading for up to 24 hours; provided that no such trailer or RV may be parked on a public street or
roadway; and provided that said trailer or RV must be parked on a paved surface. All property owners
in violation of this section upon the date of its adoption shall have one year from the date of said
adoption to come into compliance herewith.
(10) The storage of pleasure boats and boat trailers not to exceed 45 feet in length shall be
permitted behind the front building line of a residence for an unlimited period of time; or for
temporary loading or unloading for up to 24 hours; provided that no such boat or trailer may be
parked on a public street or roadway; and provided that said boat or trailer must be parked on a paved
surface. All property owners in violation of this section upon the date of its adoption shall have one
year from the date of said adoption to come into compliance herewith.
(11) Home occupations which shall be limited to personal service and home craft type operations.
(12) Special uses may be allowed in this zone subject to the conditional use regulations in section
14.02.511 et seq. of this code.
(13) Detached garages for normal storage and protection of occupants' vehicles. Such garages may
not be used for commercial purposes such as the repair or storage of vehicles.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.062)
Sec. 14.02.204 Specific zone requirements
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 493/665
(a) Only one building for living purposes shall be permitted on the zoning lot, except as otherwise provided
herein.
(b) A septic tank system shall be provided to meet the specified requirements of article 13.05 of this code.
(c) (1) Minimum lot area: Three acres excluding rights-of-way for roads and streets dedicated
for public use.
(2) Minimum lot width at front building line shall be 200 feet; except that any lot with 50% or
more of its front property line contiguous to a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum lot width of 100 feet
at a point 35 feet behind said front property line.
(3) Maximum height of building: 35 feet or two stories, whichever is less.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.063)
(4) Reserved. (Ordinance 2013-6-4B, sec. 2, adopted 6/4/13)
(5) Minimum setback from front and rear property lines: 35 feet from property line except in case
of road easement at which time it will be 35 feet from road easement.
(6) Minimum setback from side property line: 50 feet from road, property line, or easements.
(7) Minimum gross floor area: No less than 2,000 square feet living space excluding garage,
porches, and breezeways.
(8) Maximum ground coverage of all buildings and impervious surfaces: 25%.
(d) No mobile homes shall be permitted.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.063)
(e) Reserved. (Ordinance 2013-6-4B, sec. 2, adopted 6/4/13)
(f) Each RE-3 development will have direct access from a public street or road. Internal streets shall be
dedicated to the public as emergency access easements to allow for the rapid and safe movement of vehicles
used for purposes of providing emergency health or public safety services. Any emergency access easement
shall have a clear, unobstructed width in compliance with town ordinances on street and road design, shall
connect at each end to a public street, or shall have a turnaround cul-de-sac as described herein; corners or
intersecting streets shall have sufficient turning area to permit free movement of emergency vehicles. All streets
will be named with approval of names by the planning and zoning commission. Street signs will be installed at
each intersection and will be of standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles.
(g) In RE-3 developments, standard town fire hydrants will be provided by the developer, located within 300
feet of every residential structure, measured along driveways or streets.
(h) RE-3 developments shall have wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances of every electrical wiring
system installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations for such systems. All
distribution and service lines of electrical, telephone, television, and other wire carrier type utilities shall be
underground, except that the system of supply lines for multiple subdivision service by utilities may be
overhead. Transformers, amplifiers, or similar devices associated with the underground lines shall be located
upon the ground or below the ground level. Where the underground installation of such facilities is not a
standard practice of the utilities involved, the subdivider or developer shall make all arrangements for payments
associated with the nonstandard installation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 494/665
(i) All homes in an RE-3 development shall have smoke and heat detection equipment installed. Such
equipment shall be approved by the town fire marshal.
(j) Internal streets for RE-3 developments shall intersect adjoining public streets at approximately 90° angles
and at locations which will eliminate or minimize traffic interference.
(k) All cul-de-sacs in RE-3 developments shall be at least 50 feet in radius with a minimum of 40 feet in
radius of paving.
(l) For examples of minimum lot widths contiguous to cul-de-sacs, please see illustrative samples labeled
exhibits A, B, C, D, E and F as attached to Ordinance No. 2004-004, passed February 3, 2004. Copies of these
illustrations, along with any amendments thereto, are available for review during normal business hours in the
office of the town secretary.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.063)
Secs. 14.02.205–14.02.250 Reserved
Division 6. Two-Acre Ranch Estate Zone (RE-2)
Sec. 14.02.251 Purpose
This zone is designed to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life on land parcels of not less
than two acres. This classification is to be used only for suburban single-family homes and the community
services and facilities appurtenant thereto. (1998 Code, sec. 154.070)
Sec. 14.02.252 Principal permitted uses
The following are principal permitted uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.071)
Sec. 14.02.253 Permitted accessory uses and restrictions
The following are permitted accessory uses and restrictions:
(1) Crop and tree farming.
(2) To allow raising of animals or fowl for commercial purposes but only on those land parcels of
ten acres in size or on land parcels of five acres in size if not part of an established subdivision.
(3) Living quarters for persons regularly employed on the premises, but not including
accommodations for transient labor, shall follow the required setback restrictions for this zone.
(4) Guest houses will not be rented or otherwise conducted as a business, shall not exceed 900
square feet in aggregate area, and shall follow the required setback restrictions of this zone.
(5) Private swimming pools exclusively for the use of residents of the premises and their guests.
(6) Private stables, corrals, paddocks, and dog runs are not permitted to be closer than 40 feet from
any property line and not permitted to be closer than 40 feet from any dwelling on the same or
adjoining property. One grazing animal such as a goat, horse, cow, and the like, may be kept per acre
net of all impervious surfaces.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 495/665
(7) The keeping of dogs, cats, and other household pets is limited to four animals over six months
old per residence.
(8) Rental of sleeping rooms to two individuals not members of the family of occupants. No
advertising [of] the availability of such rooms shall be displayed.
(9) The parking of one unoccupied travel trailer or RV, designed for recreational use and not to
exceed 45 feet in length shall be permitted behind the front building line of a residence for an
unlimited period of time; or for temporary occupancy for up to 14 days; or for temporary loading or
unloading for up to 24 hours; provided that no such trailer or RV may be parked on a public street or
roadway; and provided that said trailer or RV must be parked on a paved surface. All property owners
in violation of this section upon the date of its adoption shall have one year from the date of said
adoption to come into compliance herewith.
(10) The storage of pleasure boats and boat trailers not to exceed 45 feet in length shall be
permitted behind the front building line of a residence for an unlimited period of time; or for
temporary loading or unloading for up to 24 hours; provided that no such boat or trailer may be
parked on a public street or roadway; and provided that said boat or trailer must be parked on a paved
surface. All property owners in violation of this section upon the date of its adoption shall have one
year from the date of said adoption to come into compliance herewith.
(11) Home occupations which shall be limited to personal service and home craft type operations.
(12) Special uses may be allowed in this zone subject to the conditional use regulations in section
14.02.511 et seq.
(13) Detached garages for normal storage and protection of occupants' vehicles. Such garages may
not be used for commercial purposes such as the repair or storage of vehicles.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.072)
Sec. 14.02.254 Specific zone requirements
(a) Only one building for living purposes shall be permitted on the zoning lot, except as otherwise provided
herein.
(b) A septic tank system shall be provided to meet the specified requirements of article 13.05 of this code.
(c) (1) Minimum lot area: Two acres excluding rights-of-way for roads and streets dedicated for
public use.
(2) Minimum lot width at front building line shall be 200 feet; except that any lot with 50% or
more of its front property line contiguous to a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum lot width of 90 feet at
a point 35 feet behind said front property line.
(3) Maximum height of building: 35 feet or two stories, whichever is less.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.073)
(4) Reserved. (Ordinance 2013-6-4B, sec. 3, adopted 6/4/13)
(5) Minimum setback from front and rear property lines: 35 feet from property line except in case
of road easement at which time it will be 35 feet from road easement.
(6) Minimum setback from side property line: 50 feet from road, property line, or easements.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 496/665
(7) Minimum gross floor area: No less than 2,000 square feet living space excluding garage,
porches, and breezeways.
(8) Maximum ground coverage of all buildings and impervious surfaces: 25%.
(d) No mobile homes shall be permitted.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.073)
(e) Reserved. (Ordinance 2013-6-4B, sec. 3, adopted 6/4/13)
(f) Each RE-2 development will have direct access from a public street or road. Internal streets shall be
dedicated to the public as emergency access easements to allow for the rapid and safe movement of vehicles
used for purposes of providing emergency health or public safety services. Any emergency access easement
shall have a clear, unobstructed width in compliance with town ordinances on street and road design, shall
connect at each end to a public street, or shall have a turnaround cul-de-sac as described herein; corners or
intersecting streets shall have sufficient turning area to permit free movement of emergency vehicles. All streets
will be named with approval of names by the planning and zoning commission. Street signs will be installed at
each intersection and will be of standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles.
(g) In RE-2 developments, standard town fire hydrants will be provided by the developer, located within 300
feet of every residential structure, measured along driveways or streets.
(h) RE-2 developments shall have wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances of every electrical wiring
system installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations for such systems. All
distribution and service lines of electrical, telephone, television, and other wire-carrier type utilities shall be
underground, except that the system of supply lines for multiple subdivision service by utilities may be
overhead. Transformers, amplifiers, or similar devices associated with the underground lines shall be located
upon the ground or below the ground level. Where the underground installation of such facilities is not a
standard practice of the utilities involved, the subdivider or developer shall make all arrangements for payments
associated with the nonstandard installation.
(i) All homes in an RE-2 development shall have smoke and heat detection equipment installed. Such
equipment shall be approved by the town fire marshal.
(j) Internal streets for RE-2 developments shall intersect adjoining public streets at approximately 90° angles
and at locations which will eliminate or minimize traffic interference.
(k) All cul-de-sacs in RE-2 developments shall be at least 50 feet in radius with a minimum of 40 feet in
radius of paving.
(l) For examples of minimum lot widths contiguous to cul-de-sacs, please see illustrative samples labeled
exhibits A, B, C, D, E and F as attached to Ordinance No. 2004-004, passed February 3, 2004. Copies of these
illustrations, along with any amendments thereto, are available for review during normal business hours in the
office of the town secretary.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.073)
Secs. 14.02.255–14.02.300 Reserved
Division 7. One-and-One-Half-Acre Ranch Estate Zone (RE-1.5)
Sec. 14.02.301 Purpose
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 497/665
This zone is designed to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life through construction on
land parcels of not less than one and one-half acres. This zoning classification shall be used only for suburban
single-family homes and the community services and facilities appurtenant thereto. (1998 Code, sec. 154.080)
Sec. 14.02.302 Principal permitted uses
Single-family detached dwellings are the only principal permitted uses within this zoning classification. (1998
Code, sec. 154.081)
Sec. 14.02.303 Permitted accessory uses and restrictions
The following are permitted accessory uses and restrictions applicable within this zoning classification:
(1) Crop and tree farming, but not including the raising of animals or fowl for commercial
purposes.
(2) Living quarters for persons regularly employed on the premises (but not including
accommodations for transient labor). Such living quarters shall comply with the required building
setback restrictions for this zone.
(3) Guest houses used by temporary guests or family members. Guest houses may not be rented or
otherwise used as a business venture. Guest houses shall not exceed 900 square feet in living area and
must comply with the required building setback restrictions for this zone.
(4) Private swimming pools exclusively used by the residents of the premises and their invited
guests.
(5) Private stables, corrals, paddocks and dog runs. Such facilities shall not be closer than 40 feet
from any property line nor closer than 40 feet from any dwelling on the same or adjoining property.
(6) Keeping of either household pets or grazing animals subject to stipulated restrictions. The
number of household pets such as dogs and cats is limited to four animals per residence (excluding
fish and temporary larger numbers of animal offspring for less than four months). Grazing animals
are limited in number to one such animal per acre of pervious surface.
(7) Rental of sleeping rooms to not more than two individuals who are not members of the family
occupying the residence. No advertising about the availability of such rooms shall be displayed.
(8) The parking of one unoccupied travel trailer or RV, designed for recreational use and not to
exceed 45 feet in length shall be permitted behind the front building line of a residence for an
unlimited period of time; or for temporary occupancy for up to 14 days; or for temporary loading or
unloading for up to 24 hours; provided that no such trailer or RV may be parked on a public street or
roadway; and provided that said trailer or RV must be parked on a paved surface. All property owners
in violation of this section upon the date of its adoption shall have one year from the date of said
adoption to come into compliance herewith.
(9) The storage of pleasure boats and boat trailers not to exceed 45 feet in length shall be permitted
behind the front building line of a residence for an unlimited period of time; or for temporary loading
or unloading for up to 24 hours; provided that no such boat or trailer may be parked on a public street
or roadway; and provided that said boat or trailer must be parked on a paved surface. All property
owners in violation of this section upon the date of its adoption shall have one year from the date of
said adoption to come into compliance herewith.
(10) Home occupations as defined in section 14.02.020.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 498/665
(11) Special uses may be allowed in this zone subject to the conditional use regulations in section
14.02.511 et seq.
(12) Detached garages for normal household storage and protection of residents' vehicles. Such
garages may not be used for commercial purposes such as the repair or storage of vehicles for a fee.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.082)
Sec. 14.02.304 Specific zone requirements
(a) Only one residential building shall be permitted on a lot, except as otherwise provided herein.
(b) A septic tank system shall be provided to meet the specified requirements of article 13.05 of this Code of
Ordinances.
(c) Specific requirements for individual lots in this zoning classification:
(1) Minimum lot area: One and one-half acres excluding rights-of-way for roads and streets
dedicated for public access or public use.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.083)
(2) Minimum lot width at front building line: 150 feet; except that any lot with 50% or more of its
front property line contiguous to a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum lot width of 70 feet at a point 35
feet behind said front property line. (Ordinance 2013-6-4B, sec. 4, adopted 6/4/13)
(3) Maximum height of building: 35 feet or two stories, whichever is less. (1998 Code, sec.
154.083)
(4) Reserved. (Ordinance 2013-6-4B, sec. 4, adopted 6/4/13)
(5) Minimum setback from front and rear property lines: 35 feet from property line except in the
case of a public access road easement in which case the setback will be 35 feet from the road
easement.
(6) Minimum setback from side property line (or public access road easement on the side of the
lot): 50 feet.
(7) Minimum gross floor area of the residence: 2,000 square feet of living area (excluding garage,
porches, and breezeways).
(1998 Code, sec. 154.083)
(8) Maximum lot coverage of all buildings and impervious surfaces: 30%. (Ordinance 2013-6-4B,
sec. 4, adopted 6/4/13)
(9) Orientation of primary residence: The front elevation of the constructed primary residence shall
be located to face the site's front lot line. An exception may be permitted in the case of a corner lot
(90° intersection) in which case the front elevation may face the corner.
(d) No mobile homes shall be permitted.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.083)
(e) Reserved. (Ordinance 2013-6-4B, sec. 4, adopted 6/4/13)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 499/665
(f) Each RE-1.5 development shall have direct access from a public street or road. Internal streets shall be
dedicated to the public as public roads or emergency access easements to allow for the rapid and safe movement
of vehicles used for purposes of providing emergency health or public safety services. Any public street or
emergency access easement shall provide a clear, unobstructed width in compliance with town ordinances
pertaining to street and road design; shall connect at each end to a public street; or shall have a turn around culde-
sac as described herein. Corners at intersecting streets shall have sufficient turning area to permit free
movement of emergency vehicles. All streets shall be named with names approved by the town and the United
States Postal Service. Street signs will be installed at each intersection and will be of standard size and
placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles.
(g) In developments within this zoning classification, standard town fire hydrants will be provided by the
developer and located within 300 feet of every residential structure measured along public roads or public
accessways.
(h) Developments within this zoning classification shall have wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances
of every electrical wiring system installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations
of such systems. All distribution and service lines of electrical, telephone, television and other wire-carried type
utility shall be located and constructed underground, except that the system of supply lines for multiple
subdivision service by utilities may be overhead. Transformers, amplifiers or similar devices associated with the
underground lines shall be located upon the ground or below ground level. Where the underground installation
of such facilities is not a standard practice of the utilities involved, the subdivider or developer shall make all
arrangements for payments associated with the nonstandard installation.
(i) All homes built in developments within this zoning classification shall have smoke and heat detection
equipment installed. Such equipment shall be approved by the public works director or his or her designee.
(j) Internal streets within developments in this zoning classification shall intersect adjoining public streets at
approximately 90° angles and at locations which will help eliminate or minimize traffic interference.
(k) All cul-de-sacs constructed as part of the public streets within this zone shall be at least 55 feet in radius
with a minimum of 45 feet in radius of paving.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.083)
Secs. 14.02.305–14.02.350 Reserved
Division 8. One-Acre Ranch Estate Zone (RE-1)
Sec. 14.02.351 Purpose
This zone is designed to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life on land parcels of not less
than one acre. This classification is to be used only for suburban single-family homes and the community
services and facilities appurtenant thereto. (1998 Code, sec. 154.085)
Sec. 14.02.352 Principal permitted uses
The following is the principal permitted use:
Single-family detached dwelling.
(Ordinance 2013-6-4B, sec. 5, adopted 6/4/13)
Sec. 14.02.353 Permitted accessory uses
The following are permitted accessory uses:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 500/665
(1) Private swimming pools exclusively for the use of residents of the premises and their guests.
(2) Private stables, corrals, paddocks, and dog runs are not permitted to be closer than 40 feet from
any property line and not permitted to be closer than 40 feet from any dwelling on the same or
adjoining property. One grazing animal such as a goat, horse, cow, and the like, may be kept per acre
net of all impervious surfaces.
(3) The keeping of dogs, cats, and other household pets is limited to four animals over six months
old per residence.
(4) Rental of sleeping rooms to two individuals not members of the family of occupants. No
advertising [of] the availability of such rooms shall be displayed.
(5) Living quarters for persons regularly employed on the premises, but not including transient
labor. Guest houses (not to be rented or otherwise conducted as a business) shall not exceed 900
square feet in aggregate area and shall follow the required setbacks of this zone.
(6) The parking of one unoccupied travel trailer or RV, designed for recreational use and not to
exceed 45 feet in length shall be permitted behind the front building line of a residence for an
unlimited period of time; or for temporary occupancy for up to 14 days; or for temporary loading or
unloading for up to 24 hours; provided that no such trailer or RV may be parked on a public street or
roadway; and provided that said trailer or RV must be parked on a paved surface. All property owners
in violation of this section upon the date of its adoption shall have one year from the date of said
adoption to come into compliance herewith.
(7) The storage of pleasure boats and boat trailers not to exceed 45 feet in length shall be permitted
behind the front building line of a residence for an unlimited period of time; or for temporary loading
or unloading for up to 24 hours; provided that no such boat or trailer may be parked on a public street
or roadway; and provided that said boat or trailer must be parked on a paved surface. All property
owners in violation of this section upon the date of its adoption shall have one year from the date of
said adoption to come into compliance herewith.
(8) Home occupation which shall be limited to personal services and home craft type operations.
(9) Special uses may be allowed in this zone subject to the conditional use regulations in this
article.
(10) Detached garages for normal storage and protection of occupants' vehicles. Such garages may
not be used for commercial purposes such as the repair or storage of vehicles.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.087)
(11) Crop and tree farming, but not including the raising of animals or fowl for commercial
purposes, or the sale of any products at retail on or adjacent to the premises. (Ordinance 2013-6-4B,
sec. 6, adopted 6/4/13)
Sec. 14.02.354 Specific zone requirements
(a) Only one building for living purposes shall be permitted on the zoning lot, except as otherwise provided
herein.
(b) A septic tank system shall be provided to meet the specified requirements of article 13.05 of this code.
(c) (1) Minimum lot area: One acre excluding rights-of-way for roads and streets dedicated for
public use.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 501/665
(2) Minimum lot width at front building line shall be 150 feet; except that any lot with 50% or
more of its front property line contiguous to a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum lot width of 70 feet at
a point 35 feet behind said front property line.
(3) Maximum height of building: 35 feet or two stories, whichever is less.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.088)
(4) Reserved. (Ordinance 2013-6-4B, sec. 7, adopted 6/4/13)
(5) Minimum setbacks from front and rear property lines: 35 feet from property line except in case
of road easement at which time it will be 35 feet from road easement.
(6) Minimum setback from side property line: 25 feet from road or property line easements.
(7) Minimum gross floor area: No less than 2,000 square feet living space excluding garage,
porches, and breezeways.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.088)
(8) Maximum lot coverage of all buildings and impervious surfaces: 35%. (Ordinance 2013-6-4B,
sec. 7, adopted 6/4/13)
(d) No mobile homes shall be permitted. (1998 Code, sec. 154.088)
(e) Reserved. (Ordinance 2013-6-4B, sec. 7, adopted 6/4/13)
(f) Each RE-1 development will have direct access from a public street or road. Internal streets shall be
dedicated to the public as emergency access easements to allow for the rapid and safe movement of vehicles
used for purposes of providing emergency health or public safety services. Any emergency access easement
shall have a clear, unobstructed width in compliance with town ordinances on street and road design, shall
connect at each end to a public street, or shall have a turnaround cul-de-sac as described herein; corners or
intersecting streets shall have sufficient turning area to permit free movement of emergency vehicles. All streets
will be named with approval of names by the planning and zoning commission. Street signs will be installed at
each intersection and will be of standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles.
(g) In RE-1 developments, standard town fire hydrants will be provided by the developer, located within 300
feet of every residential structure, measured along driveways or streets.
(h) RE-1 developments shall have wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances of every electrical wiring
system installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations for such systems. All
distribution and service lines of electrical, telephone, television, and other wire-carrier type utilities shall be
underground, except that the system of supply lines for multiple subdivisions service by utilities may be
overhead. Transformers, amplifiers, or similar devices associated with the underground lines shall be located
upon the ground or below the ground level. Where the underground installation of such facilities is not a
standard practice of the utilities involved, the subdivider or developer shall make all arrangements for payments
associated with the nonstandard installation.
(i) All homes in an RE-1 development shall have smoke and heat detection equipment installed. Such
equipment shall be approved by the town fire marshal.
(j) Internal streets for RE-1 developments shall intersect adjoining public streets at approximately 90° angles
and at locations which will eliminate or minimize traffic interference.
(k) All cul-de-sacs in RE-1 developments shall be at least 50 feet in radius with a minimum of 40 feet in
radius of paving.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 502/665
(l) For examples of minimum lot widths contiguous to cul-de-sacs, please see illustrative samples labeled
exhibits A, B, C, D, E and F as attached to Ordinance No. 2004-004, passed February 3, 2004. Copies of these
illustrations, along with any amendments thereto, are available for review during normal business hours in the
office of the town secretary.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.088)
Secs. 14.02.355–14.02.400 Reserved
Division 9. General Business Zone (GB)
Sec. 14.02.401 Purpose
(a) This zone is established principally to provide limited retail, convenience goods and service for persons
residing in the surrounding residential areas. The uses in this district include most types of retail activity, and
should be located on major thoroughfares, intersections, and in existing and new shopping centers. Warehousing,
large shopping centers, strip commercial, lumberyards, and contractor's yards, and similar large commercial
businesses that create heavy volumes of truck traffic and low volumes of retail traffic are not included in this
district.
(b) The GB zone should not be a major retail district, nor have intense commercial use or heavy volumes of
traffic. Traffic, noise, litter, late night hours of operations and other influences that may be harmful to nearby
residential areas require adequate buffering from residential areas. Traffic from GB zone uses must not pass
through residential areas, with the exception of being located on arterials and collector streets, and there will be
restrictions on access to prevent congestion of traffic or adverse effect on major thoroughfares.
(c) Areas zoned for this usage should be located on or near arterials and collector streets to carry the additional
traffic this zone will generate, and in areas where there is increased water, fire protection, wastewater and
drainage capacity.
(d) This is a light retail zone and only light retail uses fall in this district. Due to being located near residential
areas, higher requirements are necessary for these uses.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.100)
Sec. 14.02.402 Permitted uses
The following are permitted uses:
(1) Retail businesses, including groceries, supermarkets, meat markets (if sales are in permanent
structures only), pharmacies, drugstores, variety and apparel stores, and similar uses, personal
services, professional services or business services and similar uses.
(2) Planned shopping centers of less than ten acres in area, and neighborhood service/convenience
centers.
(3) Municipally owned or controlled facilities, utilities and uses.
(4) Paved parking lots, not including commercial parking lots.
(5) Dance studios, for the instruction of methods, and techniques of the dance.
(6) Temporary on-site construction offices, limited to the period of construction.
(7) An accessory use customarily related to a principal use authorized in this district.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 503/665
(8) Special uses may be allowed in this zone subject to the conditional use regulations in section
14.02.511 et seq. of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.101)
Sec. 14.02.403 Conditional uses
The following are conditional uses: Such uses as may be permitted by grant of a conditional use permit zoning
change pursuant to the provisions of the conditional use permit district as provided for in this article. (1998
Code, sec. 154.102)
Sec. 14.02.404 Required conditions
(a) All businesses, other than those selling a service, must be of a retail nature selling directly to the public.
All goods produced on the premises must be sold at retail prices on premises where produced or through home
delivery at the request of the customers.
(b) The storage, sale, lease or rental of more than one boat or more than five hauling trailers is prohibited.
(c) The owner, builder or developer shall submit, prior to the issuance of a building permit, a site and building
plan of the proposed development or building to the planning and zoning commission and the town council, or
their designated representative, for review and approval. The contents of the site and building plan shall comply
with the requirements of the subdivision and site plan review regulations of the town. Upon approval, such
development shall comply with approved site and building plan.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.103)
Sec. 14.02.405 Specific zone requirements
(a) Minimum site size: One acre excluding road or street rights-of-way easements or dedications.
(b) Minimum site frontage on a public street: 120 feet.
(c) Minimum site depth: 150 feet.
(d) Minimum setback from front property line: 35 feet exclusive of parking spaces from the future right-ofway
as shown on the adopted thoroughfare plan or comprehensive plan, or as actually exists, whichever is
greater.
(e) Minimum setback from side property lines: 35 feet not including parking or loading spaces.
(f) Minimum setback from rear property line:
(1) Abutting nonresidentially zoned property: 35 feet.
(2) Abutting residential property: 75 feet not including parking or loading spaces, but including a
landscape barrier.
(g) Minimum distance between detached buildings on the same lot or parcel of land: 25 feet.
(h) Minimum requirement for construction materials:
(1) Structures. All structural materials shall consist of 100% noncombustible materials.
(2) Exterior building facing. All building exteriors shall be constructed of materials which shall be
approved through the site plan review process and shall exclude concrete block and metal.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 504/665
(i) Standard fire hydrants will be provided by the developer, located within 150 feet of every structure,
measured along driveways or streets.
(j) Maximum building coverage as a percentage of lot area: 40%.
(k) Maximum amount of impervious coverage as a percentage of lot area: 75%.
(l) Minimum amount of landscaped areas: 10% of the total parking area. All landscaped areas shall be
permanently maintained by the landowner and shall have an irrigation system installed meeting all applicable
town codes and the landscape plan is to be approved in writing by the building official. Due to the proximity of
this district to residentially zoned districts, the defined permanent landscape and irrigation system requirements
shall be strictly enforced by the building official.
(m) Maximum height of structure: 35 feet.
(n) Minimum number of paved off-street parking spaces required: All zones require off-street parking
facilities as indicated by section 14.02.015(b). No on-street parking shall be permitted at any time.
(o) Maximum number of entrances and/or exits:
(1) Arterial streets. One per each 200 feet of street frontage.
(2) Collector and local streets. One per each 100 feet of street frontage.
(p) Screening: GB zone uses having a side or rear contiguous to or separated only by an alley, easement or
street from any residential district, must be separated from said residential district by a screening wall at least
eight feet in height of a substantial nature and a landscape buffer as referenced in sections 14.02.012 and
14.02.013. Chain-link fencing will not be considered adequate screening. All such screening must be
permanently maintained in good condition (please refer to site plan review regulations set forth in article 14.03
of this Code of Ordinances).
(q) Sidewalks: A concrete sidewalk, with a minimum width of four feet, shall be provided along the building
site frontage and around the perimeter of any building site with side and rear setbacks that are on a public street.
Sidewalk specifications are provided in the applicable ordinance.
(r) Litter and trash: Due to the proximity of a GB zone to residentially zoned property, said area shall be
strictly maintained at all times in regard to litter and trash and its disposal. Trash receptacles and/or dumpster
locations should be out of view from public street, but if the location can be viewed from a public street, a
screening fence of masonry or wood construction of a substantial nature shall be provided. Loading pad for a
dumpster shall be concrete construction (refer to site plan review regulations set forth in article 14.03 of this
Code of Ordinances, and the solid waste ordinance set forth in article 13.02, division 2, of this Code of
Ordinances).
(s) Signs: All signs shall be in conformity with the sign regulations as outlined in article 3.13.
(t) No public address, broadcast, or playing of music shall be permitted through any speaker system external
to the establishment except for two-way speaker systems that are commonly used in “drive-up tellers” at
financial institutions and “drive-thru” service windows at retail prepared-food businesses.
(u) The town building code may impose more restrictive area requirements, depending on the size, use and
construction of the structures.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.104)
Sec. 14.02.406 Prohibited uses
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 505/665
The following are prohibited uses:
(1) Any building erected on land used for any other uses than those shown on the site development
plan as approved by the town council.
(2) Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot size; front, side and rear yard
dimensions and/or lot width; or exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross
acreage as shown in the development's recorded development plan as approved by the town council.
(3) Any use deemed by the town council as being detrimental to the health, safety or general
welfare of the citizens of the town.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.105)
Secs. 14.02.407–14.02.450 Reserved
Division 10. Planned Center Zone (PC)
Sec. 14.02.451 Purpose
(a) The PC zone is established to provide flexibility in development planning, which in some instances may
not conform with land use patterns designated in the zoning map or district regulations prescribed by this article
or the subdivision ordinance. A development in a PC zone may include a variety of land uses which creatively
complement each other and harmonize with the existing and proposed land uses in the nearby area. Creative
development of land use which allows the flexibility to develop a well-planned comprehensive unit is
encouraged in a PC zone. Patterns of city growth coinciding with the comprehensive plan may be complemented
by a PC development with its variety which conform with the goals of the general plan. The town council is
empowered to grant permits for PC developments only after review and recommendation by the planning and
zoning commission under procedures established herein.
(b) The zoning for land zoned planned center zone (PC) shall be that shown on the development and site plan
that shall be approved and made a part of the adoptive ordinance and any written special conditions within or
attached to the adoptive ordinance or development plan.
Sec. 14.02.452 Permitted uses
The following uses are permitted as part of an approved PC development:
(1) Shopping centers;
(2) Office parks;
(3) Civic centers or community centers;
(4) Average density single-family residential development (AD) (see section 14.02.459 of this
article).
(5) High-density residential areas (HD), including multifamily and single-family residences (see
section 14.02.460 of this article).
(6) Uses permitted in all previous districts, including but not limited to the above. The town
council, after review and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, shall have the
sole discretion on which cumulative zoning uses may be included in a PC development presented for
approval by a developer; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 506/665
(7) For purposes of this article, land use designation in a PC development shall reflect a specific
zone classification in determining allowed uses. At the time this article is approved, other uses may
be considered by the planning and zoning commission and the town council if additional uses are
shown to be harmonious with other development uses and adjoining land uses.
(8) Special uses may be allowed in this zone subject to the conditional use regulations in this
article set forth in section 14.02.511 et seq.
Sec. 14.02.453 Prohibited uses
The following are prohibited uses:
(1) Any building erected on land used for any other uses than those shown on the PC development
plan, as approved by the town council.
(2) Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot size; front, side and rear yard
dimensions and/or lot width; or exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross
acreage as shown in the development's recorded development plan, as approved by the town council.
(3) Any use deemed by the town council as being detrimental to the health, safety or general
welfare of the citizens of the town.
Sec. 14.02.454 Area requirements
(a) Area requirements for each use shall satisfy the standards applicable to such uses as if those uses were
situated in the least restrictive district in which such uses are permitted, or demonstrate that the intent of the
standards has been met in accordance with good planning practices.
(b) Modification of the area requirements contained in this article:
(1) The proposed modifications substantially meet the intent of the zoning and subdivision
ordinances and the comprehensive plan.
(2) The proposed modification provides for better project design.
(3) The combination of different dwelling types and/or the variety of land uses in the development
will complement each other and will harmonize with existing and proposed land uses in the vicinity.
(4) The development will not generate more traffic than the streets in the vicinity can carry without
congestion and the development will not overload municipal services.
(5) Financial reasons shall not be the sole reason for modification of standards.
(c) All tracts approved for PC zones shall have a sewage treatment plant or waste disposal system installed
and maintained by the owner or agent. Such treatment plant will meet the minimum state requirements. All
requirements of the state as to sanitation, water quality preservation and pollution will be met.
(d) An adequate and safe sewage system shall be provided for conveying sewage to the treatment plant. The
sewer system shall be constructed in accordance with applicable local and state health regulations, and the
design of the proposed sewage disposal facilities shall be approved by the town prior to construction. Effluent
from sewage treatment facilities shall not be discharged into any waters of the state except with prior approval of
the town and the state commission on environmental quality.
(e) Wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances of every electrical wiring system shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations for such systems. All distribution and service
lines of electrical, telephone, television, and other wire-carrier type utilities shall be underground, except that the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 507/665
system of supply lines for multiple subdivision service by utilities may be overhead. Transformers, amplifiers, or
similar devices associated with the underground lines shall be located upon the ground or below the ground
level. Where the underground installation of such facilities is not a standard practice of the utilities involved, the
subdivider or developer shall make all arrangements for payments associated with the nonstandard installation.
(f) A system for the storage, collection and disposal of refuse will be conducted so as to create no health
hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards, or air pollution.
(g) Natural gas piping systems shall be installed underground and maintained in accordance with applicable
codes and regulations governing such systems. Piped gas shall have a cap on the outlet when not in use to
prevent accidental discharge of gas, and shall be in accordance with applicable town codes. Liquefied petroleum
gas systems shall not be installed in PC zones.
(h) An adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided by the owner or agent. Connection shall
be made to the town water system. Each PC development shall have one single commercial water meter from the
town, regardless of distribution among the business tenants, unless separate meters are deemed necessary by the
public works commission.
(i) All water mains shall be 12 inches or larger to the point of takeoff for any buildings.
(j) Fire hydrants shall be provided by the owner or agent and shall be located so that no structure or portion of
structure will be more than 150 feet from the hydrant measured along streets or driveways.
(k) All walls separating business entities shall have a minimum fire resistance rating in accordance with the
Southern Building Code.
(l) Each tenant space shall have installed and maintained, by the owner or agent of the planned center, both
smoke and heat detection equipment approved by the town fire marshal.
(m) All streets and parking lots must be paved, as a minimum, according to town specification, or according to
any additional specifications as may be set forth by the public works commission and/or the planning and zoning
commission in the interest of public safety and convenience.
(n) Each PC development shall have direct access from a public street.
(o) All telephone service lines shall be installed underground.
(p) Each tenant space, whether by original design or by subsequent alteration, division or partitioning, that
will be open to the public for sales or service, shall have installed separate toilet facilities for men and women in
accordance with the laws of the state.
(q) In approving the PC zone and preliminary and/or development plan, the town council shall, after
recommendations by the planning and zoning commission, specify such land uses, maximum height, floor area
ratios, density, minimum off-street parking and loading standards, setbacks, site coverage, building spacing,
access, screening walls or landscaping, building area, open space, pedestrian ways, public or private streets,
alleys, and other development and protective requirements considered necessary to protect the health, safety and
general welfare, and to create a reasonable transition to a protection from property adjacent to a PC zone. Such
standards shall be specified in the ordinance establishing the zone, and in the preliminary plan and the
development plan. The town council shall require that any PC development, prior to presentation to the council,
shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for their recommendations to the council.
Sec. 14.02.455 Application requirements
(a) An application for a PC zone shall be made to the planning and zoning commission in the same manner
that an application for a zoning change is made. An application shall include and be accompanied by a
preliminary plan as required in this section. A complete development plan as set forth in this section may be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 508/665
substituted for a preliminary plan, and will constitute both the preliminary and the development plan. An
approved development and site plan shall become a part of the adoptive ordinance. The zoning for land zoned
planned center zone (PC) shall be that shown on the development and site plan that shall be approved and made
a part of the adoptive ordinance and any written special conditions within or attached to the adoptive ordinance
of development plan.
(b) In addition to the requirements outlined in this section, the planning and zoning commission and town
council may require additional information or special plans related to specific elements of the PC development.
Each applicant must also follow the town site plan review regulations set forth in article 14.03 of this code.
Upon receipt of the application and preliminary plan, the town secretary or a designated representative shall
follow notification requirements for a public hearing.
(1) Preliminary plan.
(A) An applicant may submit a preliminary plan with the application for a PC zone if the
applicant is not ready to begin development of part or all of the site. The preliminary plan shall
contain all information necessary to ensure that the development complies with all applicable
regulations and requirements.
(B) The preliminary plan shall be prepared on a site topography base map at a scale of 1"–
100', or at a scale to be specified by the town staff, with no less than five-foot contour intervals
and shall include:
(i) A metes and bounds description of the entire PC development tract.
(ii) A drawing locating floodplain areas, water bodies, creeks, drainage areas, and
significant natural features such as major tree groupings and important view corridors.
(iii) Sufficient evidence to establish that the applicants are in fact all the owners or have
control of all outstanding interest of the land and structures thereon.
(iv) A drawing locating all land use areas, showing proposed gross acreage of each use,
maximum lot coverage, maximum height, minimum setbacks, residential densities,
approximate gross floor area and floor area ratio for all commercial, industrial and office
uses.
(v) Location of all major access points, thoroughfares, and collectors within the
development.
(vi) Identification of all major land use classifications and the approximate acreage
within the development as related to current zoning district designations or the specific
purpose. The designated usage will not be assumed to establish area requirements as
established within the zoning district, but these requirements shall be used as guidelines in
the final determination of area requirements.
(vii) Indication of each phase of development if the proposed PC development is to be
implemented in separate phases.
(viii) Indication by acreage or percentage of total development of all major areas
planned for public and private open space, and notification if any part of the development
lies in floodplain areas.
(ix) Land area included with the site and the land area of all abutting sites with the
zoning classifications thereon, and dimensions and locations of all public and private
rights-of-way and easements bounding and intersecting the site.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 509/665
(x) Estimates of traffic volumes and turning movements shall be required.
(xi) The preliminary plan shall be signed by the applicant's engineer and planner. A
location map shall accompany the concept plan, showing the relationship of the planned
development to adjacent properties and the land uses and thoroughfares shown on the
comprehensive plan and intended for the area.
(C) The application by the owner or owners to the planning and zoning commission for
approval of the preliminary plan shall be handled in the same manner as any zoning change
under the zoning ordinance. The applicant shall submit the appropriate number of copies of the
preliminary plan to the town secretary or a designated representative for presentation to the
planning and zoning commission (see article 10.02). The planning and zoning commission shall
make a recommendation to the town council to either approve or deny the rezoning to PC
development, and to either approve, modify, or deny the preliminary plan and conditions. Upon
appeal and hearing before the town council, the town council may approve or deny the rezoning
request and may approve, deny or modify the preliminary plan.
(Ordinance 2013-3-5B adopted 3/5/13)
(D) (i) If the applicant has not submitted a revised plan, a development plan or
construction plan, or a plat, within a two-year period immediately following approval of a
preliminary plan by the town council, then the preliminary plan shall be deemed to have
expired at the end of said two-year period and the applicant shall thereafter be required to
resubmit the preliminary plan, a revision thereto, or a new preliminary plan for review and
approval by the planning and zoning commission and the town council before any
development project may proceed.
(ii) If an applicant desires to request an extension beyond the two-year expiration
period, then said applicant shall submit - before the expiration of the two-year expiration
period - a written request justifying each reason for that extension to the town staff, which
shall make its recommendation based on the merits of said request. Said extension request
shall require a public hearing before the planning and zoning commission and town
council. An extension shall not exceed one year from the expiration date of the original
preliminary plan. An extension request may be approved or denied by the town council.
(iii) The two-year expiration period shall be instituted upon adoption by the town
council of this ordinance amendment. All preliminary plans that are existing and were
previously approved prior to the adoption of this amendment shall maintain the three-year
expiration period, and those preliminary plans that are existing and were previously
approved when the expiration period was twelve years or five years, shall maintain the
twelve-year or five-year expiration period.
(Ordinance 2013-7-2D, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/13)
(2) Development plan.
(A) An applicant must submit a final development plan which shall be recorded and kept on
file by the town. The development plan must conform to the approved preliminary plan, either
for the total PC zone, or for each phase. The planning and zoning commission shall then review
the final development plan, making its recommendations to the town council, for the town
council's final public hearing.
(B) The appropriate number of copies of the development plan shall be submitted to the town
secretary in such a manner as prescribed procedurally in article 10.02.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 510/665
(C) Major changes in the development plan shall be considered the same as amendments to
the zoning ordinance and preliminary plan approval and shall be processed as required. The
following changes are not considered major changes:
(i) Changes that do not alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to
adjacent property;
(ii) Changes that retain the character of the development;
(iii) Changes that do not significantly alter the uses permitted, or increase the density,
setbacks, height, or coverage of the site; and
(iv) Changes that do not increase the problems of traffic circulation, safety, or utility
requirements.
(D) Changes that meet these criteria may be approved by the planning and zoning
commission and the town council without a formal public hearing.
(E) If the development plan deviates from the approved preliminary plan, the planning and
zoning commission and town council shall reject and disapprove such a plan and conditions and
require a new application, filing fee, and advertised public hearing.
(F) The development plan, in addition to the items included in the preliminary plan, shall
include or show:
(i) The development plan of the entire PC development or the proposed phase at a scale
of 1"–100', or as specified by town staff and showing the proposed finished grade of the
area at two-foot intervals.
(ii) In addition to data and drawings prescribed, the application shall be accompanied
by a tabulation of the area proposed to be devoted to each land use and a tabulation of the
average population density per net acre and per gross acre in the area or areas proposed to
be devoted to residential use.
(iii) A description of the proposed lot or lots and the boundaries thereof, and proposed
setbacks on the lots.
(iv) With the exception of single-family dwellings, the location of each existing and
each proposed structure in the development, the use or uses to be contained therein, the
number of stories, the gross floor area, and the location of entrances and loading points
thereof. If a particular type structure is to be built a number of times, a typical lot layout
may be required.
(v) All public rights-of-way, curb cuts, driving lanes, parking areas, loading areas,
public transportation areas, and illumination facilities for the same, including existing
facilities to be relocated. Design criteria for illumination facilities may be required.
(vi) All pedestrian walks, malls, and open areas for use by tenants or visitors.
(vii) All reservations for public uses, including parks, playgrounds, schools and other
open spaces.
(viii) The location and height of each wall, fence and screen planting used as a buffer
between uses and from adjacent property owners.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 511/665
(ix) All landscaped areas, including any reserved open space to be retained. Detailed
landscaping plans may be required.
(x) The location, size, height, and orientation of each sign. Please refer to the sign
regulations as outlined in article 3.13.
(xi) Facilities for waste disposal on other than single-family uses.
(xii) Proposed street names for all public and private roads.
(xiii) Elevations and/or perspective drawings may be required in order that the
relationship of the buildings to adjacent property, open spaces and to other features of the
development plan may be determined. This subsection does not apply to single-family,
duplex, and townhouse lots.
(xiv) Any or all of the required features may be incorporated on a single drawing if
such drawing is clear and suitable for evaluation by the town staff and town officials.
(xv) A legal instrument establishing a plan for permanent care and maintenance of any
common areas or communally owned facility must be submitted before the development
plan will be approved. All such instruments shall be submitted before the development
plan will be approved. All such instruments shall be approved by the town attorney as to
legal form, and the planning and zoning commission and the town council as to suitability
for the proposed use of the common area.
(xvi) The title page of each application and set of plans shall be signed by the
applicant's architect, planner, landscape architect, engineer and/or land surveyor if these
services are required. In addition to an engineer and a planner, the applicant's submittal
may be required to contain the professional services of at least two of the remaining three
professionals involved in the design and construction of the environment.
(G) Phase developments. The preliminary plan shall be divided into sections of proposed
development so that in any section of an approved final development plan there will be
definitely established lines showing the resulting boundaries of the reduced PC zone.
(i) Should the unused portion of the site area be rezoned to its previous classification;
and
(ii) A minimum of damage to the unused portion of the site from the standpoint of its
usability for use following rezoning.
(H) Effects of recording. All final development plans approved hereunder shall be binding
upon the applicant, their successors and assignees, shall limit and control the issuance and
validity of all permits, and shall restrict and limit construction, locations, use and operation of
all land and structures included within such plans to all conditions and limitations set forth in
such plans.
(I) Issuance of permit.
(i) Upon, but not before, the approval of the development plan as herein set forth, and
completion of platting requirements as set forth in the subdivision ordinance, the
applicant(s) for said plan shall be entitled to apply for such permits and certificates as are
necessary to proceed with the accomplishment of such plan.
(ii) Upon approval of the preliminary plan and rezoning of the land parcel to PC
zoning, and upon the approval of the development plan, the applicant shall proceed with
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 512/665
the accomplishment of said development plan in accordance with other ordinances of the
town.
(J) Compliance with development and site plan. The building official shall ensure compliance
with this article, the preliminary plan and the development/site plan. The building official or a
designated representative shall:
(i) Make inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and the
preliminary plan and development plan, and initiate appropriate action if necessary.
(ii) Investigate thoroughly any complaints of noncompliance concerning the
development plan and keep a record of all complaints indicating any action taken.
(iii) Upon determination of noncompliance with the development plan, the town
secretary or a designated representative shall give written notice to the property owner of
the nature of the violation, the necessary action to remedy the violation, and the time
period, not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the date of notification, within
which to comply; and notify the planning and zoning commission of noncompliance if the
violations have not been corrected with the prescribed time period.
Sec. 14.02.456 Coordination with subdivision regulations
(a) It is the intent of these guidelines that subdivision review under the subdivision regulations set forth in
article 10.02, and site plan review under article 14.03 be carried out simultaneously with the review of a PC
development under this section.
(b) The final development plans required under this section may be submitted in a form which will satisfy the
requirements of the subdivision ordinance for the preliminary and final plans required under those regulations.
Sec. 14.02.457 Continuation of existing planned center districts
All PC districts approved prior to adoption are brought forward and shall remain in full force and effect in
accordance with the district's adoptive ordinance and shall be referenced on the zoning district map by date and
ordinance number.
Sec. 14.02.458 Height restrictions
(a) In general, all buildings in a PC zone should be no taller than 35 feet. However, in order to accommodate
the flexibility of a PC zone, it is recognized that some land uses (such as office towers) will require heights in
excess of this restriction. Allowances for height variances will be made, while attempting to maintain the
integrity of existing and planned residential areas.
(b) In an approved PC zone, adequate space setback must be maintained between buildings in excess of the
maximum height (35 feet) near residential areas. A formal variance from the height restrictions will be required;
however, the following guidelines are to be followed when exceeding the maximum height:
Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
Max. Height FH, AG, RE-1, RE-2 Required Setback GB, PC, MH Adjacent To
70–104 ft. 1:1 200 ft. 100 ft.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 513/665
105–135 ft. 1:1 300 ft. 150 ft.
A special variance shall be required for all structures in excess of either 175 feet or a floor area ratio of 0.5:1,
whichever is more restrictive. All parking garages shall not exceed 35 feet in height.
Sec. 14.02.459 Average density single-family residential development
(a) Purpose. The average density single-family residential development procedures and requirements are
designed to allow for development of single-family homes that may have lot sizes smaller than what would
otherwise be required under the applicable underlying zoning district (“base zoning district”); provided,
however, that the town council finds that the proposed lot sizes and development configuration as a whole would
significantly enhance what would otherwise result from application of the base zoning district.
(b) Specific requirements.
(1) An average density (AD) development shall not be approved “by right,” and any approval is
subject to the requirements set forth in this section and other conditions that may be placed upon any
given AD development. An applicant shall proceed through the zoning public hearing process, and
shall only be granted AD development approval after review and recommendation by the town staff
and planning and zoning commission, and review and approval by the Fairview town council.
Approval of an AD development shall be by ordinance, and shall result in a new zoning district
classification for the subject property.
(2) While an AD development can have varied lot sizes, the overall number of lots proposed for
the subject property may not exceed the maximum number of lots allowed under the base zoning
district. The following methodology for determining the maximum number of lots in an AD
development shall apply:
(A) In determining maximum number of lots for an AD development, the gross acreage of
the subject property, less 20% of the gross acreage, as estimated for the provision of right-ofway,
shall be used to determine the net developable area and the maximum number of lots on
the subject property given its base zoning district.
(B) Alternatively, if an applicant believes that the methodology described in subsection (2)
(A) above would not accurately determine the developable area and maximum number of lots
on the subject property, an applicant may opt to submit a preliminary plan for the subject
property that fully conforms to the subdivision regulations and the existing base zoning district
(or projected density under the future land use plan if the base zoning district is AG) for the
property. If upon staff review, the preliminary plan does in fact fully conform to all applicable
town ordinances and regulations, then the number of lots provided for in that preliminary plan
shall be deemed to be the maximum number of lots permitted for that particular AD
development.
(3) The AD development process shall only be considered for properties with base zoning of AG,
RE-1.5, RE-2, and/or RE-3. For lots that are zoned AG, the projected residential density shall he
based on the recommendations of the future land use plan.
(4) No lot in any AD development shall be less than:
(A) 1.5 acres if the base zoning district is RE-2 and/or RE-3 (or if the property is zoned AG
and has projected density same as RE-2 and/or RE-3); or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 514/665
(B) 1 acre if the base zoning district is RE 1.5 (or if the property is zoned AG and has
projected density same as RE-1).
(5) In AD developments, lot coverage, building setbacks and minimum lot widths shall conform to
the requirements provided for in the RE-1 zoning district.
(6) A preapplication meeting with the town's planning department staff shall be mandatory as part
of the AD development process.
(c) Average density development amenities.
(1) As a condition of AD development approval, the following types of amenities (as well as others
that may be required by the town) must be shown in the applicant's plan, which must also include a
schedule for installing/constructing/establishing/ maintaining such amenities:
(A) Additional open space and/or open space accessible to the public and/or additional active
or passive recreational facilities.
(B) Enhanced landscaping requirements.
(C) Additional linkages/components to a community trail system (hike, bike, pedestrian,
equestrian).
(D) Additional preservation and/or enhancement of Fairview's historic, social and/or cultural
amenities.
(E) Art.
(F) Plazas.
(G) Children's play area(s)/playgrounds.
(H) Enhanced preservation of natural areas and/or environmentally sensitive areas.
(I) Picnic facilities and shelters.
(J) Existing scenic views or vistas being required to remain unobstructed, especially from
public streets.
(K) Other public benefits and/or amenities.
(2) In certain circumstances, AD development applicants may request the establishment of
amenities that are larger and/or require more acreage than typical AD development amenities. Under
such circumstances, the minimum AD lot size otherwise set forth in this section may be considered
for further reduction, based on review and recommendation of town staff and the planning and zoning
commission with final approval of the town council. However, under no circumstances shall the
number of lots exceed the maximum number established under this section.
Sec. 14.02.460 High-density residential (HD)
(a) Purpose. High-density residential (HD) is designed to allow for development of residential facilities
consisting of single-family homes, condominiums, townhouses and apartments within the PC zone.
(b) General provisions. General provisions and permitted accessory uses are separated into two categories:
development of multifamily areas such as duplexes and apartment buildings, and development of areas
exclusively for single-family homes. Multifamily units and single-family units will not be intermixed as a single
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 515/665
development. Minimum acreage for high-density subdivision will be 12 acres. Minimum lot sizes will be
dependent on structure and development type, as specified below.
(1) Multifamily development.
(A) All multifamily buildings shall be 80% masonry-faced except for gables and roofs.
(B) All buildings will be limited to 35 feet in height.
(C) Each development of multifamily structures will have direct access from a public street
or road. Internal streets shall be dedicated to the public as emergency access easements to allow
for rapid and safe movement of vehicles used for purposes of providing emergency health or
public safety service. Each emergency access easement shall have a clear, unobstructed width in
compliance with town ordinances on street and road design, shall connect at each end to a
public street, or shall have a turnaround of 80 feet in diameter; corners of intersecting streets
shall have sufficient turning area to permit free movement of emergency vehicles. Designated
walkways will be paved and provided on both sides of such roadways or streets. All streets will
be named, with approval of names, by the planning and zoning commission. Street signs will be
installed at each intersection and will be of standard size and placement to facilitate location by
emergency vehicles.
(D) A minimum of two paved off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each living unit.
(E) Standard town fire hydrants will be provided by the developer, located within 300 feet of
every multifamily structure, measured along driveways or streets.
(F) Wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances of every electrical wiring system shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations for such systems.
All distribution and service lines of electrical, telephone, television, and other wire-carrier type
utilities shall be underground, except that the system of supply lines for multiple subdivision
service by utilities may be overhead. Transformers, amplifiers, or similar devices associated
with the underground lines shall be located upon the ground or below the ground level. Where
the underground installation of such facilities is not a standard practice of the utilities involved,
the subdivider or developer shall make all arrangements for payments associated with the
nonstandard installation.
(G) An approved sewage treatment plant shall be installed and maintained by the owner or
agent and shall meet the minimum state requirements. No septic tanks will be permitted except
for a duplex home where a separate septic system must be provided for each family unit and
where each duplex structure will be placed on a minimum of two acres. An adequate and safe
system shall be provided for conveying sewage to the treatment plant. This sewage system will
be constructed in the accordance with applicable local and state health regulations, and the
design of the proposed system shall be approved by the town prior to construction. Effluent
from sewage treatment facilities shall not be discharged into any waters of the state except with
prior approval of the town and the appropriate state regulatory agency.
(H) Duplex structures excepted, all other multifamily units shall have a system for the
storage, collection and disposal of refuse which will be conducted so as to create no health
hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards, or air pollution.
Garbage chutes, internal or external, shall be prohibited.
(I) The minimum floor area per apartment living unit shall be 600 square feet. The minimum
allowable density shall be 300 square feet per adult and 150 square feet per child in any living
unit. Children under three years of age will be excluded from this density ratio.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 516/665
(J) Maximum size of each main structure shall not exceed 7,000 square feet in total ground
floor area.
(K) All walls separating living units shall have a minimum fire resistance rating in
accordance with the Southern Building Code.
(L) Minimum lot area for each multifamily structure, excluding duplexes with septic systems,
shall be one acre. Minimum lot dimensions shall be a width of 120 feet and a depth of 150 feet.
Minimum yard, floor areas, and ground coverage are as follows:
(i) Minimum setback from front and rear property line: 30 feet.
(ii) Minimum setback from side property line: 25 feet.
(iii) Maximum gross floor area ratio: 0.10.
(iv) Maximum ground coverage of all buildings: 15%.
(M) Duplexes providing two living units and two separate septic systems will have a
minimum lot area of two acres. Other area regulations specified in subsection (L) above will
apply to duplexes.
(N) All family units shall have both smoke and heat detection equipment installed in each
living unit. Such equipment shall be approved by the town fire marshal.
(O) Recreational and open space areas are a necessity in high-density development areas.
Such sites are of mutual benefit to the developer and to the public. Therefore, the subdivider
shall include his preliminary and final plat plans for such recreational and open space areas.
Where these sites are for the exclusive benefit of the subdivision, they shall be dedicated as a
part of the final plat. Where such sites serve a larger area or need, the areas will be dedicated to
the town, under the condition that the town approves acceptance of the site. No final plat shall
be approved for high-density development without such open space areas (see section
10.02.251 et seq.).
(2) Single-family development.
(A) All buildings will be limited to two stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is less.
(B) Each single-family development in a high-density area will have direct access from a
public street or road. Streets internal to the development shall be dedicated to the public as
emergency access easements to allow for the rapid and safe movement of vehicles used for
purposes of providing emergency health or public safety services. Each emergency access
easement shall have a clear, unobstructed width in compliance with town ordinances on street
and road design, shall connect at each end to a public street, or shall have a turnaround of 80
feet in diameter; corners of intersecting streets shall have sufficient turning area to permit free
movement of emergency vehicles. Designated paved walkways will be provided on both sides
of such roadways or streets. All streets will be named with approval of the planning and zoning
commission. Street signs will be installed at each intersection and will be of standard size and
placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles.
(C) The minimum floor area in each unit shall be 1,250 square feet, exclusive of breezeways,
garages, porches, and servants' quarters.
(D) Buildings shall be 80% masonry-constructed or 80% masonry-faced, except for gables
and roofs.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 517/665
(E) Area specifications:
(i) Front yard: Minimum depth of 30 feet. Open porches, fireplaces, and other
architectural appendages may project into the required front yard for a distance not to
exceed five feet from the main structure, if the main structure is at the minimum depth
allowable. Where lots have double frontage running through from one street to another,
the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.
(ii) Side yard: Minimum width of 20 feet, with roof eaves or cornices extending no
more than two feet into the side yard. Swimming pool equipment, compressors, pumps,
air-conditioning units, or other units that may create undesirable noise to the adjacent
property owner, may not be located in the required side yard.
(iii) Rear yard: Minimum depth of 25 feet from lot boundary to the main structure.
(iv) Minimum area of building lot: 12,000 square feet.
(v) Minimum width of building lot: 90 feet.
(vi) Depth of lot: A minimum of 125 feet. Lots located on a cul-de-sac may be less than
125 feet in depth provided that one side of the lot is at least 125 feet in depth and that the
lot meets width and area requirements.
(F) Two standard, paved, off-street parking spaces shall be provided with each living unit.
(G) Lot coverage of all buildings shall not exceed 30% of the area of the lot.
(H) An approved sewage treatment plant shall be installed and maintained by the owner or
agent and shall meet the minimum state requirements. No septic tanks will be permitted. An
adequate and safe system shall be provided for conveying sewage from each living unit to the
treatment plant. This sewage system will be constructed in accordance with applicable state and
local health regulations, and the design of the proposed system shall be approved by the town,
prior to construction. Effluent from the sewage treatment facilities shall not be discharged into
any waters of the state except with prior approval of the town and the state commission on
environmental quality.
Sec. 14.02.461 Specific zone requirements
(a) The keeping of cats, dogs, or other household pets shall be permitted but limited to two animals per
dwelling unit.
(b) Signs will conform with the general sign provisions set out in article 3.13.
(c) Home occupations shall be allowed as described for RE-1 and RE-2 districts and as per this article.
(d) Special uses may be allowed in this zone subject to the conditional use regulations in this article.
(e) There shall be a ten (10) foot setback from the property line for swimming pools and any construction
and/or use(s) related to swimming pools for the lots within the Cypress Crossing Subdivision area that is zoned
planned center zone (PC). Further shown on exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 2009-3-3D.
(Ordinance 2013-3-5B adopted 3/5/13)
Secs. 14.02.462–14.02.510 Reserved
Division 11. Conditional Use Permit District (CU)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 518/665
Sec. 14.02.511 District a specific zoning classification
(a) The conditional use permit district is a specific zoning classification. The uses that normally fall into the
conditional use category are uses that have unique characteristics that may, depending on the location of the
property, require different conditions and regulations not otherwise listed under the basic zoning districts. For
this reason, when an applicant seeks a change of zoning for a use listed in the conditional use section, the
planning and zoning commission may recommend, and the town council may impose, necessary additional
special zoning conditions.
(b) Because a conditional use permit is a specific zoning classification, it may not be made temporary by
scheduling it to automatically terminate at a specific time. Therefore, in the event the planning and zoning
commission or the town council wishes to make the grant temporary in nature, the applicant shall be placed on
notice that the grant is temporary in nature and the granting ordinance must contain a provision substantially as
follows: “It is the intent of the granting authority to terminate this Conditional Use Permit after the expiration of
one year (or other time period) by initiating a zoning change to remove the Conditional Use Permit herein
granted as a zoning classification for the property.”
(1998 Code, sec. 154.135)
Sec. 14.02.512 Applicability of basic land use district regulations
Property zoned for a conditional use retains or shall be given a basic zoning classification, so that the conditional
use shall be in addition to the authorized use under the basic zoning of the property. The basic land use district
regulations shall be applicable for any permitted use other than the conditional use. Also, the basic land use
district regulations shall apply to the conditional use unless changed at the time of the grant of the conditional
use permit zoning. Therefore, any special condition or regulation established by the grant of the conditional use
shall control the specific use and supersedes any conflicting basic condition or regulation; however, where the
grant of the conditional use is silent as to a condition or regulation that is posed by the basic classification of the
property, the basic condition or regulation shall control. (1998 Code, sec. 154.136)
Sec. 14.02.513 Application process
Any application for a change of zoning to a conditional use permit classification shall be processed in the same
manner as any other request for a zoning change, to wit: a proper application, public hearing before the planning
and zoning commission, public hearing before town council, and final adoption of an ordinance amending the
comprehensive zoning ordinance and the zoning map of the town. (1998 Code, sec. 154.137)
Sec. 14.02.514 Use regulations
(a) A building, structure or premises used for any of the following purposes shall be permitted only upon the
grant of a conditional use permit zoning district classification. The town council may, after public hearing and
proper notice to all parties affected, and, after recommendation from the planning and zoning commission
containing such requirements and safeguards as are necessary to protect adjoining property, authorize by
ordinance the location of any of the following in the following specified districts:
Use Permitted District
Agricultural implement sales/service PC
Amusement centers (including mini-golf, batting cages,
carnivals, archery ranges, similar uses)
PC
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 519/665
Art galleries (commercial) PC, GB
Athletic stadiums, public or private PC
Auditoriums, theaters, cinemas PC
Auto repair, service; oil/lube; mufflers PC, GB
Auto/motorcycle sales and service PC
Banks PC, GB
Bed and breakfast accommodations PC, GB
Boat, camper, RV parking, storage/sales PC
Brick, tile, pottery, terracotta manufacture PC
Bottling plant PC
Builder's supply, storage PC
Cafe or restaurant PC, GB
Campsite (public) or campground PC
Carwash PC
Cemeteries PC, GB
Churches, synagogues, temples PC, GB, RE-1, RE-2
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 520/665
Christmas tree sales PC, GB
Cleaners/laundries (floor area not to exceed 3,000 sq. ft.) PC, GB
Dance halls PC, GB
Day care/child care (more than 4 children) PC, GB, RE-1, RE-2
Department stores PC
Electrical power substations PC, GB
Equestrian stables (on sites of more than 10 acres) PC, GB, AG, RE-2
Farm or heavy equipment sales and service PC
Gasoline stations, with or without convenience store PC, GB
Gas or oil well drilling and production sites All, except for FH
Golf courses, country clubs PC, GB, AG, RE-1, RE-2, FH
Golf driving range PC, GB, AG
Greenhouse (commercial) PC, GB
Gymnasiums, health clubs PC, GB
Hospitals/medical care facilities PC
Hotels/motels PC
Kennels PC
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 521/665
Laboratory, chemical analysis, testing PC
Light manufacturing (i.e. candle, candy production, apparel,
millinery, cosmetics, toiletries, computer, electronic research,
food products and dairy processing, medical equipment and
pharmaceutical)
PC
Lodges, sororities, fraternities PC, GB
Lumberyards PC
Machine shops PC
Mobile home sales, storage, manufacturing PC
Mortuaries, funeral homes PC, GB
Moving, storage, packing PC
Nurseries PC, GB
Outside storage PC, GB
Pest control services PC, GB
Public buildings (city, county, federal) including libraries PC, GB
Public parks including tennis courts PC, GB, RE-1, RE-2, MH
Radio/television studios, offices, antennae PC, GB
Railway passenger station, but not including railroad and storage
yards
PC, GB
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 522/665
Schools PC, GB, RE-1, RE-2
Skating rinks (indoor ice and roller) PC
Telecommunication facilities, antennas, satellite dishes PC, GB
Temporary concrete batching plants, limited to the period of
construction
PC, GB, RE-1
Truck stops PC
Veterinary clinic, large animals PC, GB
Warehousing and mini-storage PC
Water supply tanks (municipal) All
(b) No land shall be used and no building shall be erected or converted to a use named in this section, except
on property zoned for a conditional use permit for such use under the provisions of this section.
(Ordinance 2015-19 adopted 8/4/15)
Sec. 14.02.515 Application for conditional use permit zoning
In addition to any other provision in this article regulating applications for zoning change, an application for
zoning change requesting a conditional use permit district classification shall be accompanied by a site plan
containing the following information:
(1) Date, scale, north point, name of owner, name of person preparing the site plan.
(2) Location of existing boundary lines and dimensions of the tract.
(3) Minimum building setback dimensions adjacent to all property lines.
(4) Drawings and data necessary to show the full scope of the facility.
(5) Designation of the location and size of points if ingress and egress.
(6) The centerline of any existing watercourse, drainage feature or floodway easement.
(7) The location and size of existing and proposed streets and alleys with location of all street
intersections adjacent to the area of request.
(8) In addition to the site plan, an area map shall be required indicating the neighborhood in which
the property is located and showing the existing zoning of adjacent properties.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 523/665
(9) Where screening, landscaping or a drainage study may be essential to the granting of the
conditional use permit, the applicant, to avoid delay or denial in the processing of his request, should
provide an adequate screening plan, landscaping plan or drainage study. The screening plan and
landscaping plan may be separate plans or a part of applicant's site plan.
(10) For conditional use permit requests for gas or oil well drilling and production sites, the
applicant's site plan must also meet the requirements of section 14.04.033 of the town's oil and gas
well drilling and production regulations set forth in chapter 14, article 14.04.
(Ordinance 2011-12-6D, sec. 2.02, adopted 12/6/11)
Sec. 14.02.516 Application for a use not specifically named
Any applicant seeking a land use not otherwise authorized by the comprehensive zoning ordinance, as amended,
or as listed in this section, may make application to amend this section to include the unlisted use and may at the
same time make application for a conditional use zoning change for such use, on a specific property. In such a
case both amendments may be heard at the same time by the planning and zoning commission; may be heard at
the same time by town council; and the adoptive ordinances may be acted upon by the town council on the same
date. (1998 Code, sec. 154.140)
Sec. 14.02.517 Special factors for consideration
In granting or denying an application for conditional use permit zoning district classification, the planning and
zoning commission in its recommendation and the governing body of the town may take into consideration the
following factors:
(1) Safety of motoring public and of pedestrians using the facility and the area immediately
surrounding the site.
(2) Safety from fire hazards and measures of fire control.
(3) Protecting the property, adjacent property, and other properties within the town from flood or
water damage.
(4) Noise-producing elements, glare of vehicular and stationary lights and the effect of such noise
and lights on the established character of neighboring property.
(5) Street size and adequacy of pavement width for traffic reasonably expected to be generated by
the proposed use around the site and in the immediate neighborhood.
(6) Adequacy of on-site and off-site parking facilities, location of ingress and egress points for
parking and off-street loading, and the surfacing of all parking areas to control dust and for the
protection of public health.
(7) Such other measures as will secure and protect public health, safety, morals and general
welfare.
(8) Off-street parking, unless specifically regulated in the ordinance adopting the conditional use
permit zoning classification, shall be governed by other applicable provisions of the comprehensive
zoning ordinance or other applicable ordinances of the town.
(9) The economic and/or environmental impact the use may have on property within the town as a
whole, as well as on adjacent property, and whether an economic and/or environmental impact study
should be submitted as a part of the application for conditional use permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 524/665
(10) The aesthetic appearance of the use, and other sensory effects that the use may have on the
established character of the neighborhood, its property and the property within the town as a whole.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.141)
Sec. 14.02.518 Compliance with site plan
All improvements to the land and all buildings and construction on the land shall be in accordance with the site
plan and/or the development plan which shall be made a part of the adoptive ordinance. After adoption of the
ordinance that grants the conditional use zoning change, the town council, upon finding that a requested site plan
change is a minor change that will not adversely impact adjacent or other properties within the town, may
authorize by written order, the minor alteration to the site plan, without further notice, public hearings, reports
from the planning and zoning commission or amendment to the original ordinance. The council's order shall be
attached to or filed with the original ordinance; provided, however, no such amendment to the site plan should
be made that would conflict with the final plat of such property after the final plat has been approved by the
town and filed of record. (1998 Code, sec. 154.142)
Sec. 14.02.519 Designation of zoning map
(a) On the official zoning map of the town, a conditional use permit district shall bear the prefix designation of
the base zoning and “CU” followed by the ordinance number granting the conditional use permit classification.
(b) For example, a property with a base zoning classification of general business (GB), that is granted a
conditional use permit zoning classification for operation of a golf course, should be designated in the adoptive
ordinance as having a zoning classification of general business (GB) with a conditional use permit to operate a
golf course and on the zoning map designated as
(GB) CU followed by the adoptive ordinance number.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.143)
Sec. 14.02.520 Continuation of existing conditional use permits
All CU permits approved prior to adoption of this article are brought forward and shall remain in full force and
effect in accordance with the adoptive ordinance and shall be referenced on the zoning district map by date and
ordinance number. (1998 Code, sec. 154.144)
Secs. 14.02.521–14.02.570 Reserved
Division 12. Mobile Home Zone (MH)
Sec. 14.02.571 Purpose
This zone is designed to provide an adequate controlled area for the placement of mobile homes and to assure an
environment suitable for family living. A mobile home as used herein is defined as a manufactured building
which has been or was built with a permanent metal chassis. (1998 Code, sec. 154.155)
Sec. 14.02.572 Principal permitted uses
The following are principal permitted uses:
(1) Individually owned mobile homes and lots.
(2) Commercial mobile home parks providing, either on a rental or as an outright sale, lots for
placement of mobile homes with utilities for those mobile homes. Small shops and washaterias will
be permitted within the park.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 525/665
(3) Special uses may be allowed in this zone subject to the conditional use regulations in this
[article] set forth in section 14.02.511 et seq.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.156)
Sec. 14.02.573 Specific zone requirements
(a) Individual mobile home lots. Any individual desiring to place a mobile home on a lot within the area
designated as a mobile home zone may do so without meeting the requirements of a commercial mobile home
park except for structural protection, under the condition that the mobile home be placed on a lot of no less than
one acre and that all the provisions of the one-acre ranch estate zone (RE-1) are met. The conditions set forth for
structural protection of mobile homes in mobile home parks will apply to individual mobile home lots.
(b) Commercial mobile home parks.
(1) Site plan required. All applications for development of a mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision shall be accompanied by a site plan in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual
dimensions and shape of the lot to be build upon. The site plan shall show:
(A) The area and dimensions of the tract of land, with identification of location and
boundaries.
(B) The number, location, and size of all mobile home spaces.
(C) The location, width and specifications of water and sewer lines and riser pipes.
(D) The location and details of lighting, electrical and gas systems.
(E) The location and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed within
the park.
(F) Existing and proposed topography.
(G) The location of fire mains, including the size, the hydrants, and any other equipment
which may be provided.
(H) Such other information as reviewing officials may reasonably require.
(2) Size requirements.
(A) Minimum park size. A site to be developed as a mobile home community shall have a
minimum area of five acres.
(B) Minimum mobile home space. Each mobile home space shall have a minimum area of
3,500 square feet; however, no mobile home space shall have dimensions less than 40 feet on
the narrow dimension nor 80 feet on the long dimension, not including off-street parking
required.
(3) Temporary hookups. No temporary hookups will be permitted. Power, water, and sewage must
be supplied to every lot.
(4) Streets, parking, and traffic.
(A) Design.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 526/665
(i) Streets. An internal street shall provide access to each mobile home space. Such
internal street shall be paved according to town specifications. Off-street parking will be
provided in the ratio of two parking spaces for each mobile home space. Internal streets
shall be continuous and connect with other internal streets or with public streets. If deadended,
internal streets shall be provided with a cul-de-sac having a minimum diameter of
80 feet free of any on-street parking. No internal street ending in a cul-de-sac shall exceed
150 feet in length. Maintenance of internal streets shall be a private responsibility.
(ii) Tenant parking. Each parking space shall be hard surfaced and located to eliminate
interference with access to parking areas provided for either mobile homes and for public
parking in the park.
(iii) Visitor and supplemental parking. In addition to parking spaces required for each
mobile home unit, there shall be provided for the mobile home park one visitor parking
space for every four mobile home spaces, and one supplemental parking or vehicle
storage space for every two mobile home spaces for the parking or storage of boats,
campers and similar vehicles or equipment. These visitor and supplemental spaces may be
located anywhere within the mobile home community provided that no mobile home
space shall be situated further than 150 feet from a visitor space.
(iv) Parking space size. Each parking space will not be less than 20 feet by ten feet
which is not to be included in the lot size.
(B) Signs. Along all sections of emergency access easements, the owner or agent shall erect
metal signs prohibiting parking. The sign type, size, height, and location shall follow those
regulations as outlined in the sign ordinance of the town. “No parking” signs, street name signs,
and other directional and informational signs shall be privately owned, erected, and maintained.
(C) Access. Every mobile home park shall have direct access from a public street and each
mobile home space shall have direct access to a public street or an internal street. Where an
internal street provides access the same shall be dedicated to the public as an emergency access
easement to allow for the rapid and safe movement of vehicles used for purposes of providing
emergency health or public safety services. Each emergency access easement shall have a clear,
unobstructed width in compliance with town ordinances on street and road design, shall connect
to a dedicated public street, or shall have a turnaround of at least 50 feet in radius with a
minimum of 40 feet in radius of paving; corners of intersecting streets shall have sufficient
turning area to permit free movement of emergency vehicles.
(D) Walkways. Designated, paved walkways, four feet in width will be provided on both
sides of roadways or streets.
(E) Street names, numbering, and signs. Within each mobile home park, all streets shall be
named, and mobile homes numbered in a logical and orderly fashion. Street signs shall be of a
color and size contrasting with those on public streets and roadways so that there is no
confusion regarding which are private and which are public streets. These signs and numbers
shall be of standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles.
(F) Intersections. Internal streets shall intersect adjoining public streets at approximately 90°
and at a location which will eliminate or minimize interference with traffic on those public
streets.
(G) Street lighting. Street lighting within the mobile home park shall be provided along all
emergency access easements. Light standards shall have a height and spacing to insure an
average illumination level of not less than 0.2 footcandles.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 527/665
(5) Electric and telephone service. All distribution and service lines of electrical, telephone,
television, and other wire-carrier type utilities shall be underground, except that the system of supply
lines for multiple subdivision service by utilities may be overhead. Transformers, amplifiers, or
similar devices associated with the underground lines shall be located upon the ground or below the
ground level. Where the underground installation of such facilities is not a standard practice of the
utilities involved, the subdivider or developer shall make all arrangements for payments associated
with the nonstandard installation.
(6) Drainage and soil protection. The ground surface in all parts of a mobile home park shall be
graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner. Each mobile home space
shall provide adequate drainage for placement of a mobile home. Exposed ground surfaces in all
parts of every mobile home park shall be paved, covered with stone screening or other solid material,
or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating
dust.
(7) Fire safety. Storage and handling of flammable gases and liquids.
(A) Whenever liquefied petroleum gases are stored and dispensed, their handling and storage
shall comply with requirements of the town codes, as applicable.
(B) Wherever gasoline, fuel, oil, or other flammable liquids are stored and/or dispensed, their
handling and storage shall comply with town codes.
(8) Water supply facilities. Water supply facilities for fire protection service shall meet the
minimum requirements of the key rate schedule for a standard city as last adopted by the state
department of insurance.
(9) Firefighting.
(A) Approaches to all mobile homes shall be kept clear for firefighting.
(B) The owner or agent of a mobile home park shall be responsible for the instruction of his
staff in the use of the park fire protection equipment and in their specific duties in the event of a
fire. The owner shall provide standard town fire hydrants located within 300 feet of all mobile
home spaces, measured along the driveways or streets.
(C) The owner or agent of a mobile home park shall be responsible for maintaining the entire
area of the park free of dry brush, leaves and weeds.
(D) The owner or agent of a mobile home park shall provide an adequate system of collection
and safe disposal of rubbish, approved by the fire marshal.
(10) Mobile home spacing standards. In order to provide adequate separation of mobile homes and
of other building and structures for the purposes of safety against the hazards of fire and explosion,
and to promote structural safety in the placement of mobile homes on their respective sites, the
following spacing standards shall apply.
(A) The minimum front setback shall be three feet from the nearest corner of the mobile
home to the front line of the mobile home space.
(B) No mobile home shall be closer than 25 feet to any property line.
(C) For other structures on each mobile home space, the minimum front setback shall be at
least 25 feet from the front line of the mobile home space.
(D) The minimum distance between mobile homes at any point shall be 20 feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 528/665
(E) The average vertical clearance height of the mobile home frame above the finished
ground elevation shall not exceed three feet.
(11) Landscaping. The park will provide suitable landscaping to assure privacy and suitable
environments for mobile home occupants. A landscaping buffer as referenced in this article, sections
14.02.012 and 14.02.013, must separate the mobile home park from the street.
(12) Community buildings and service facilities.
(A) Structural and other requirements for buildings.
(i) Construction of all buildings shall comply with applicable codes of the town. All
portions of structures shall be properly protected from damage by ordinary uses and by
decay, corrosion, termites, and other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of
such materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent entrance or penetration of
moisture and weather.
(ii) All rooms containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall:
a. Have sound-resistant walls extending to the ceiling between male and female
sanitary facilities. Walls and partitions around showers, bathtubs, lavatories, and
other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense, nonabsorbent, waterproof
materials or covered with moisture-resistant materials.
b. Have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The
minimum aggregate gross area of windows for each required room shall not be less
than 10% of the floor area served by them.
c. Have at least one window which can be opened easily, or mechanical device
which will adequately ventilate the room.
(B) Sanitary facilities.
(i) Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped with self-closing doors.
Shower stalls shall be of the individual type. The rooms shall be screened to prevent direct
view of the interior when the exterior doors are open.
(ii) Hot and cold water shall be furnished in every lavatory, sink, bathtub, shower and
laundry fixture; and cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and urinal.
(C) Heating. Service buildings shall be maintained at a comfortable temperature by heating
equipment permitted by town regulations, between October 1 and May 1.
(D) Lighting. Illumination levels shall be maintained as follows:
(i) General seeing tasks: Five footcandles;
(ii) Laundry room work area: 40 footcandles;
(iii) Toilet room in front of mirrors: 40 footcandles;
(iv) Pedestrian walkways: Five footcandles.
(E) Storage facilities. Storage facilities with a minimum capacity of 200 cubic feet per
mobile home space, shall be provided on the space, or in compounds located within 100 feet of
each space. Wherever provided, storage facilities shall be faced with masonry, porcelainized
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 529/665
enamel, baked enamel, steel, or other material equal in fire resistance, durability and
appearance.
(F) Barbecue pits, fireplaces, stoves. Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces, and woodburning
stoves shall be so located, constructed, maintained, and used as to minimize fire
hazards and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and on neighboring property.
No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and no material burned which emits
dense smoke or objectionable odors.
(G) Incinerators. Incinerators will be specifically prohibited. Incineration of trash and
garbage will be prohibited.
(13) Recreation areas. Every mobile home park shall have at least one visibly identifiable
recreation area for the benefit and use of its residents. Not less than 5% of the gross site area of the
mobile home park shall be protected from traffic, thoroughfares, and parking areas. Such space shall
be maintained in a sanitary condition and free of safety hazards.
(14) Water system.
(A) Supply.
(i) An adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided by the owner or
agent. Connection shall be made to the town water system.
(ii) The mobile home park will have one single commercial water meter from the town,
regardless of the distribution of the water within the mobile home park.
(B) Connections.
(i) The water supply system shall be connected by pipes to all mobile homes, buildings,
and other facilities requiring water. All water piping, fixtures, and other equipment shall
be constructed and maintained in accordance with state and local regulations and
requirements.
(ii) All water line mains servicing fire hydrants will be six inches or larger than the
hydrant itself.
(15) Utilities.
(A) Electrical.
(i) The wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances of every electrical wiring system
shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations for
such systems.
(ii) Power distribution lines shall be located underground. Otherwise, all power
distribution lines, individual electrical connections and grounding of the mobile homes
and equipment shall comply with the town codes, as applicable.
(B) Water. Individual water riser pipes and connections shall be constructed and maintained
in accordance with the town codes, as applicable.
(C) Sewer connections.
(i) All materials used for sewer connections shall be in accordance with the town codes,
as applicable.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 530/665
(ii) Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least four-inch-diameter sewer
riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall extend at least four inches above ground and shall be
so located on each stand that the sewer connection to the mobile home drain outlet will
approximate a vertical position.
(iii) The sewer connection to the mobile home from the sewer riser pipe and any other
sewer connections shall be in accordance with the requirements of the plumbing code, as
applicable.
(iv) Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when no mobile home
occupies the space. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser.
(16) Sewage disposal.
(A) An approved sewage treatment plant shall be provided to meet the minimum state
requirements. No septic tanks will be permitted.
(B) All requirements of the state as to sanitation, water quality preservation and pollution will
be met.
(C) An adequate and safe sewage system shall be provided for conveying sewage to the
treatment plant. The sewer system shall be constructed in accordance with applicable local and
state health regulations, and the design of the proposed sewage disposal facilities shall be
approved by the town prior to construction. Effluent from sewage treatment facilities shall not
be discharged into any waters of the state except with prior approval of the town and the
controlling governmental state agency.
(17) Fuel supply and storage.
(A) Natural gas piping systems shall be installed underground and maintained in accordance
with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems. Each mobile home space
provided with piped gas shall have a cap on the outlet when not in use to prevent accidental
discharge of gas, and shall be in accordance with applicable town codes.
(B) Liquefied petroleum gas systems shall be installed only if an available natural gas system
is more than 1,000 feet from the mobile home park. The liquefied petroleum gas systems shall
be maintained in accordance with applicable codes of the town and regulations of the state
railroad commission pertaining thereto.
(18) Refuse handling and collections. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse shall be so
conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire
hazards, or air pollution.
(A) Storage facilities. One or both of the following systems shall be used:
(i) If refuse is gathered at the individual mobile home spaces, it shall be stored in
flytight, watertight, rodentproof containers, which shall be located at each mobile home
site. Containers for this use shall be provided by the park in sufficient number and
capacity to properly store all refuse.
(ii) In lieu of storage at individual sites, centrally located refuse containers having a
capacity of three cubic yards or larger may be provided. Such containers shall be so
designed as to prevent spillage or container deterioration, and to facilitate cleaning around
them.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 531/665
(B) Frequency of pickup; maintenance of containers. Refuse and garbage shall be removed
from the park at least twice each week. The licensee or agent shall insure that containers in the
park are emptied regularly and are maintained in a usable, sanitary condition.
(19) Animals. A maximum of two animals per dwelling will be permitted.
(20) Noise control. No broadcast or playing of music shall be permitted through any speaker
system external to any building or mobile home.
(21) Insect and rodent control. Grounds, buildings, and structures shall be maintained free of insect
and rodent harborage and infestation. Parks shall be maintained free of accumulation of debris which
may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests. The growth of
brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of noxious insects or other pests.
Parks shall be maintained so as to prevent the growth of noxious weeds detrimental to health. Open
areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth.
(22) Structural protection.
(A) Anchorage of mobile homes. To insure against natural disasters such as tornadoes, high
winds, and electrical storms, anchorage at each mobile home shall be provided according to the
following schedule:
(i) Ties.
a. For each mobile home space designed to accommodate the length of unit
shown, frame ties shall be provided in the number indicated:
Length Number of Ties
Up to 30 feet 2 per side
30 to 50 feet 3 per side
50 to 70 feet 4 per side
Over 70 feet 5 per side
b. In addition, over-the-unit ties shall be provided as close to each end as possible
with straps at stud and rafter locations.
(ii) Anchors. Soil tests shall be made to assure that the following types of anchorage
will withstand 3,750 pounds of pull per ten-foot length of mobile home:
a. Cross-section: Auger or deadman, six inches in diameter, arrowhead eight
inches.
b. Depth: Auger or arrowhead four feet, deadman five feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 532/665
c. Anchor rod shall be at least five-eighths inch in diameter with welded eye at
top, and shall be hooked into concrete when used in deadman anchors.
d. Anchors in slabs shall equal above in pull resistance.
(iii) Connectors. Connectors of the following design minimums shall be used:
a. Galvanized or stainless steel cable: Three-eighths inch (7 x 7, seven strands of
seven wires each).
b. Galvanized aircraft stainless cable: One-quarter inch (7 x 19, seven strands of
nineteen wires each).
c. Steel strap: One and one-quarter inch by thirty-five thousandths of an inch (1-
1/4" x .035"), galvanized with tensioning device.
d. Cable ends: Secured by two U-bolt clamps.
e. Steel rods: Five-eighths inch with ends welded and closed to form an eye.
f. Turnbuckles: Five-eighths inch drop forged with closed eyes, or other
tensioning devices of equivalent strength.
(iv) Piers and footings. The location and design of piers and footings shall satisfy the
following standards:
a. Spaced at ten-foot internals on both frame rails with end ones to [no] further
than five feet from end of mobile home.
b. Footings of solid concrete 16 inches by 16 inches by four inches (16" x 16" x
4").
c. Piers of standard eight inches by eight inches by sixteen inches (8" x 8" x 16")
of solid concrete.
d. Treated trim shingles may be used for leveling.
e. Pier or footing designs equivalent to the above when approved by the town
engineer.
(B) Park buildings, patio awnings, and cabana roofs. All permanent park buildings, patio
awnings, and cabana roofs hereafter constructed and all extensions to existing structures shall
comply with applicable construction codes of the town.
(C) General application. These provisions for structural protection shall also apply to
individual mobile home lots.
(23) Responsibilities of park management. The licensee, or his agent, of every mobile home park
located within the corporate limits of the town shall operate and maintain the park in compliance with
these regulations and with all other applicable ordinances of the town. He shall provide adequate
supervision to maintain the park, its facilities, and equipment in good repair and in a clean and
sanitary condition. The licensee or agent shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of
these regulations and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under these regulations. The
licensee or agent shall bear final responsibility for any violations of the ordinances set forth for
mobile home parks, except as specifically outlined as responsibility or park occupants.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 533/665
(A) Register.
(i) Information required. The licensee or agent shall maintain a register of park
occupancy which shall contain the following information:
a. Name and address of park residents.
b. Mobile home registration data including make, length, width, year of
manufacture, and identification number.
c. Location of each mobile home within the park by space or lot number and street
address.
d. Dates of arrival and departure.
(ii) Register open to public officials. A new register shall be initiated on January 1 of
each year, and the old register be retired but shall be retained on the premises for at least
three years following the retirement. Registers shall be available for inspection at all
reasonable times by a public official whose duties necessitate access to the information
contained therein.
(B) Information to tax assessor-collector. The licensee or agent shall furnish to the tax
assessor-collector for the town, no later than January 10 and July 10 of each year, a list of all
mobile home residents in the park on the last day of the preceding month. The register shall
provide information on the make, length, width, year of manufacture and identification number
of the mobile home; the address or location description of said mobile home within the park;
and information on mobile homes which have moved out of the park since the last report
including the foregoing data plus the departure dates of each mobile home and, if known, its
destination. Said lists shall be prepared using forms provided by the tax assessor-collector for
the town.
(24) Responsibilities of park occupants. Every occupant of a space in a mobile home park located
within the corporate limits of the town shall maintain his mobile home space, its facilities and
equipment in good repair and in a clean sanitary condition. He shall be responsible for proper
placement of his mobile home in its mobile space and proper installation of all utility connections in
accordance with the instructions of the park management.
(A) Skirting and additions. Fire-resistant skirting with the necessary vents, screens and/or
openings shall be required on all mobile homes in mobile home parks and shall be installed
within ten days after emplacement of the mobile home. Skirting, porches, awnings, and other
additions, when installed, shall be maintained in good repair.
(B) Storage. The use of space immediately underneath a mobile home for storage shall be
prohibited.
(25) Inspections.
(A) Inspections by public officials. The mayor or his designate and the fire marshal are
hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine
compliance with these regulations.
(B) Inspection and investigation. The mayor or his designate, the fire marshal, the tax
assessor-collector, and the water superintendent shall have the power to enter at reasonable
times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating
conditions relating to the enforcement of these regulations. They shall have the power and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 534/665
authority in discharging their official duties to inspect the register containing a record of all
residents of the mobile home park.
(C) Access to premises. It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give
the licensee, his agent, or authorized employee access to any part of such park at reasonable
times for the purpose of making repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with
these regulations.
(1998 Code, sec. 154.157)
Secs. 14.02.574–14.02.620 Reserved
Division 13. Planned Development Zone (PD)
Sec. 14.02.621 Purpose
(a) General. The planned development zone (PD) is intended for large or complex developments planned as a
single contiguous project which is developed in a manner guided by the town comprehensive plan that will
preserve usable open spaces and landscape features. The PD is intended to allow single- or multi-use projects
within its boundaries and provides greater design flexibility in the placement of buildings and structures on the
land. Use of this zone is appropriate only when the resulting development is considered more beneficial to the
community as a planned development than that which would occur using conventional zoning and subdivision
regulations. PD zoning is appropriate if the PD enhances preservation of the natural environment; encourages
high-quality development and innovative design; and ensures adequate public facilities and service for
development within the PD.
(b) Uses of planned development. Planned development zoning shall be used to:
(1) Define and condition land uses permitted within each zone, including expanding or restricting
uses permitted by conditional use permit within a zoning district. Planned development zoning shall
specify the location of land uses and define standards for operation and performance of land uses.
(2) Specify development standards and actions required to protect the environment, preserve
natural features and vegetation within the zone, and provide requirements for open space. The natural
topography, soils, critical environment features, waterways and vegetation should be preserved and
used, where possible, through careful location and design. A greenbelt, buffer zone or floodplain
within a development tract may not be used toward the town land conveyance ordinance without
approval through the specific PD ordinance.
(3) Define development requirements pertaining to the size, height, bulk, coverage, placement,
setback, configuration and number of buildings; set residential unit density; regulate the design and
exterior appearance of buildings; define standards for lot size, dimensions and street frontage; and
specify the location, extent and design standards for open space, landscaping, lighting, screening,
noise, buffers, appurtenances, signage and amenities.
(4) Specify the location and design of streets, private drives, parking, streetlights, street signage,
pedestrian walkways and/or bikeways. Planned development zones may be used to modify the
standards of road and subdivision ordinances related to design and private facilities, but only where a
specific finding is made by the planning and zoning commission and the town council that the
alternative standard does not decrease public safety, [or] impair traffic movement for safety and
efficient use within the development. Roadways and pedestrian walkways shall be separated from
public rights-of-way. Where appropriate, a system of walkways and bicycle paths connecting
buildings, common open spaces, recreation areas, community facilities, and parking areas may be
provided and appropriately lighted for night use.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 535/665
(5) Specify the timing, sequencing and phasing of development, including coordinating the type,
location and intensity of development permitted at specific development milestones consistent with
the construction and availability of public facilities and services.
(6) Provide for the construction of public improvements such as sewer, water, drainage facilities
and facilities on site or within public easements and rights-of-way abutting the site as required to
serve and benefit development within the zone or as may be required to mitigate impacts resulting
from the development on other properties and users outside of the zone. Standards within the
subdivision, site plan, or roads ordinance for public improvements may be amended by a specific
planned development zone.
Sec. 14.02.622 Permitted uses
Use of the PD zone will allow the development of unique patterns of residential and/or nonresidential uses. The
PD zone may be used to accommodate average density single-family residential development, as provided for in
section 14.02.625. The PD zone may also be approved for a conditional use or uses, or a class of generic uses
such as office, retail, personal services, or educational facilities. The ordinance creating each specific PD will set
forth permitted uses guided by the town comprehensive plan.
Sec. 14.02.623 Prohibited uses
Any use not consistent with the purposes of PD as described by section 14.02.622 herein or otherwise deemed
by the town council as being detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the residents of the town shall
be prohibited.
Sec. 14.02.624 Application requirements
(a) General. This section establishes an application review process for planned developments. An application
for a PD zone shall be made to the planning and zoning commission in the same manner that an application for a
zoning change is made. The process involves a series of phases, progressing from a preapplication conference
regarding a site and development of a concept plan to approval of a detailed site plan. The first phase in the
process is a preapplication conference with town staff. This meeting should result in a consensus between
developers/builders in keeping with the town vision and goals relating to development and general technical
requirements. The second phase is a concept plan. This plan establishes a general schematic for site
development, primarily focusing on development parcels, vehicular access and circulation. Concept plans may
be used to separate large properties into development parcels, for phasing site planning and development. Final
site plan approval is the last phase in the process. Site plan approval may occur only after the PD ordinance for a
specific tract has been approved. A site plan shall consist of a detailed, scaled drawing of all surface
improvements, structures and utilities proposed for development. Site plan approval is required prior to the
release of building permits. Concept and final site plans require review and vote by planning and zoning and
approval by the town council.
(1) Platting shall apply to any development or subdivision of land within a PD zone. All
requirements of the subdivision regulations shall apply to the PD, except those variances that are
specifically identified within a specific PD ordinance. Specific PD ordinance for each PD zone will
be developed by the planning and zoning commission and must be followed by the developer/builder
to complete the project.
(2) The developer or builder shall provide sketches, diagrams, and calculations necessary to
determine whether the proposed development conforms to the provisions of the specific PD.
(b) Preapplication conference. An applicant for a PD shall request a preapplication conference with the town
manager and public works director. At the preapplication conference, the applicant shall provide a sketch plan
that includes, but is not limited to, the following information: proposed land uses, density, preliminary
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 536/665
water/sewer/street infrastructure, approximate gross square footage of nonresidential uses, access, projected
height, topography, and environmental features.
(c) Concept plan. The concept plan shall consist of a general site assessment and development concept. A
concept plan shall define a basic schematic design for development.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the concept plan is to:
(A) Evaluate the site's natural condition, including vegetation, topography, drainage, surface
and subsurface factors affecting the site's development.
(B) Determine building sites and the use, density, bulk and height of structures to be
constructed.
(C) Locate existing and proposed public streets and rights-of-way, and determine points of
ingress and egress between the development and public streets, including median break and turn
lanes.
(D) Determine primary routes of vehicular circulation and parking areas internal to the
development.
(E) Delineate development phasing.
(F) Other purposes related to the establishment of a planned development.
(2) General application. A concept plan shall be submitted with the PD application and shall be
made part of the ordinance establishing a PD on a specific property. The concept plan shall include
the information listed below on one dimensioned, engineer-scaled drawing on a sheet size 24" x 36"
scale 1" = 100'. The concept plan shall include existing and proposed site conditions and
improvements, including:
(A) Site boundaries and dimensions, lot lines, site acreage and square footage, and
approximate distance to the nearest cross street.
(B) Location map, north arrow, scale, and title block and site data summary table.
(C) Topography at one-foot contours or less referenced to sea level datum.
(D) Natural features including tree masses and anticipated tree loss, floodplains,
drainageways and creeks.
(E) Land use on site and on adjacent properties, including the assignment of use to specific
locations within the plan.
(F) Maximum allowable building coverage density and height, minimum building setbacks
and use. Illustration of the approximate shape and placement of buildings is required.
(G) Existing and proposed public streets, private drives and fire lanes with pavement widths,
rights-of-way, median openings, turn lanes (including storage and transition space), and
driveways (including those on adjacent property) with approximate dimensions, radii and
surface type.
(H) Proposed dedications and reservations of land for public use including but not limited to:
rights-of-way, easements, park land, open space, drainageways, floodplains and facility sites.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 537/665
(I) Phases of development, including delineation of areas, building sites, land use and
improvements to be constructed in independent phases and the scheduled timing and
sequencing of development.
(J) Proposed covenants or site restrictions required.
(K) The applicant may request that the town manager waive any of the above requirements
that are not necessary or are not applicable for the review of a specific development. However,
when a waiver is granted it will be documented via a cover sheet attached to the application and
includes a date at which the items will be provided. The town manager may waive only
application requirements.
(Ordinance 2013-3-5C adopted 3/5/13)
(L) (i) If the applicant has not submitted a revised plan, a site or construction plan, or
a plat, within a two-year period immediately following approval of a concept plan by the
town council, then the concept plan shall be deemed to have expired at the end of said
two-year period and the applicant shall thereafter be required to resubmit the concept
plan, a revision thereto, or a new concept plan for review and approval by the planning
and zoning commission and the town council before any development project may
proceed.
(ii) If an applicant desires to request an extension beyond the two-year expiration
period, then said applicant shall submit - before the expiration of the two-year expiration
period - a written request justifying each reason for that extension to the town staff, which
shall make its recommendation based on the merits of said request. Said extension request
shall require a public hearing before the planning and zoning commission and town
council. An extension shall not exceed one year from the expiration date of the original
concept plan. An extension request may be approved or denied by the town council.
(iii) The two-year expiration period shall be instituted upon adoption by the town
council of this ordinance amendment. All concept plans that are existing and were
previously approved prior to the adoption of this amendment shall maintain the three-year
expiration period, and those concept plans that are existing and were previously approved
when the expiration period was twelve years or five years, shall maintain the twelve-year
or five-year expiration period.
(Ordinance 2013-7-2D, sec. 2, adopted 7/2/13)
(d) Site plan. The site plan is a detailed plan of the public and private improvements to be constructed.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the plan is to:
(A) Ensure compliance with applicable development regulations and previously approved,
valid plans affecting development of the property.
(B) Determine the design of public street improvements and rights-of-way, the design and
location of drives, medians, alleys, and parking.
(C) Determine location and design of open space, landscaping, walls, screens and amenities.
(D) Determine the design of drainage facilities and utilities.
(E) Coordinate and document the design of public and private improvements to be
constructed.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 538/665
(F) Coordinate the subdivision of land, including the granting of easements, development
agreements and provision of surety.
(G) Determine the placement, configuration, coverage, size and height of buildings.
(2) General application. The property owner/developer shall file with the town manager an
application for the approval of a site plan after the PD ordinance for a tract has been approved. The
site plan must be in accordance with the concept plan and the conditions contained in the PD
ordinance. For single-family development, a final plat shall serve as the site plan. This application
shall include the information listed below on one dimensioned, scaled drawing on a sheet size 24" x
36" scale 1" = 100'. The drawing shall include existing and proposed site conditions and
improvements, including:
(A) Building locations including dimensions, size, density and finished floor elevations of
structures referenced to sea level datum.
(B) Parking areas and structures, street names, medians, alleys, and spaces, handicap spaces,
ramps, crosswalks and loading areas with dimensions.
(C) Access easements and off-site parking.
(D) Dumpster and trash compactor locations and screening.
(E) Screening walls/fences, living screens, retaining walls, headlight screens and service area
screens, including height and type of construction and planting specification.
(F) Landscaping and open space areas with dimensions and total square footage (a landscape
plan shall be required).
(G) Water and sanitary sewer mains and service lines with sizes, valves, fire hydrants,
manholes, and other structures on site or immediately adjacent to the site specified. Grading,
drainage, and storm sewer lines shall also be included, if any.
(H) Water and sewer connections, meter locations, size, and meter and/or detector check
valve vaults indicated. Table of the number of water meters by size and noting if they are
existing or proposed.
(1) Inlet, culverts and other drainage structures on site and immediately adjacent to the site.
(J) Engineering plans.
(K) Traffic impact analysis.
(L) Landscape and irrigation plans.
(M) Tree preservation and protection plan.
(N) Facade and signage plans.
(O) Legal instrument establishing a plan for permanent care, replacement, and maintenance
of any living screen buffer, plants on any common areas or commonly owned facility.
(P) Proposed covenants or site restrictions.
(Q) Location map, labeling adjacent property owners.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 539/665
(R) Owners' certificate.
(S) The applicant may request that the town manager waive any of the above requirements
that are not necessary or are not applicable for the review of a specific development. However,
when a waiver is granted it shall be documented via a cover sheet attached to the application
and includes the date(s) at which the items will be provided. The town manager may waive only
application requirements.
Sec. 14.02.625 Average density single-family residential development
(a) Purpose. The average density single-family residential development procedures and requirements are
designed to allow for development of single-family homes that may have lot sizes smaller than what would
otherwise be required under the applicable underlying zoning district (“base zoning district”); provided,
however, that the town council finds that the proposed lot sizes and development configuration as a whole would
significantly enhance what would otherwise result from application of the base zoning district.
(b) Specific requirements.
(1) An average density (AD) development shall not be approved “by right,” and any approval is
subject to the requirements set forth in this section and other conditions that may he placed upon any
given AD development. An applicant shall proceed through the zoning public hearing process, and
shall only be granted AD development approval after review and recommendation by the town staff
and planning and zoning commission, and review and approval by the Fairview town council.
Approval of an AD development shall be by ordinance, and shall result in a new zoning district
classification for the subject property.
(2) While an AD development can have varied lot sizes, the overall number of lots proposed for
the subject property may not exceed the maximum number of lots allowed under the base zoning
district. The following methodology for determining the maximum number of lots in an AD
development shall apply:
(A) In determining maximum number of lots for an AD development, the gross acreage of
the subject property, less 20% of the gross acreage, as estimated for the provision of right-ofway,
shall be used to determine the net developable area and the maximum number of lots on
the subject property given its base zoning district.
(B) Alternatively, if an applicant believes that the methodology described in subsection (2)
(A) above would not accurately determine the developable area and maximum number of lots
on the subject property, an applicant may opt to submit a concept plan for the subject property
that fully conforms to the subdivision regulations and the existing base zoning district (or
projected density under the future land use plan if the base zoning district is AG) for the
property. If upon staff review, the preliminary plan does in fact fully conform to all applicable
town ordinances and regulations, then the number of lots provided for in that concept plan shall
be deemed to be the maximum number of lots permitted for that particular AD development.
(3) The AD development process shall only be considered for properties with base zoning of AG,
RE-1.5, RE-2, and/or RE-3. For lots that are zoned AG, the projected residential density shall be
based on the recommendations of the future land use plan.
(4) No lot in any AD development shall be less than:
(A) 1.5 acres if the base zoning district is RE-2 and/or RE-3 (or if the property is zoned AG
and has projected density same as RE-2 and/or RE-3); or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 540/665
(B) 1 acre if the base zoning district is RE 1.5 (or if the property is zoned AG and has
projected density same as RE-1).
(5) In AD developments, lot coverage, building setbacks and minimum lot widths shall conform to
the requirements provided for in the RE-1 zoning district.
(6) A preapplication meeting with the town's planning department staff shall be mandatory as part
of the AD development process.
(c) Average density development amenities.
(1) As a condition of AD development approval, the following types of amenities (as well as others
that may be required by the town) must be shown in the applicant's plan, which must also include a
schedule for installing/constructing/establishing/ maintaining such amenities:
(A) Additional open space and/or open space accessible to the public and/or additional active
or passive recreational facilities.
(B) Enhanced landscaping requirements.
(C) Additional linkages/components to a community trail system (hike, bike, pedestrian,
equestrian).
(D) Additional preservation and/or enhancement of Fairview's historic, social and/or cultural
amenities.
(E) Art.
(F) Plazas.
(G) Children's play area(s)/playgrounds.
(H) Enhanced preservation of natural areas and/or environmentally sensitive areas.
(I) Picnic facilities and shelters.
(J) Existing scenic views or vistas being required to remain unobstructed, especially from
public streets.
(K) Other public benefits and/or amenities.
(2) In certain circumstances, AD development applicants may request the establishment of
amenities that are larger and/or require more acreage than typical AD development amenities. Under
such circumstances, the minimum AD lot size otherwise set forth in this section may be considered
for further reduction, based on review and recommendation of town staff and the planning and zoning
commission with final approval of the town council. However, under no circumstances shall the
number of lots exceed the maximum number established under this section.
Sec. 14.02.626 Design standards and specifications
(a) The following design standards and specifications are incorporated by reference into this division:
Articles 3.01 through 3.11 (building regulations)
Article 3.12, division 2 (flood damage prevention).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 541/665
Article 3.13 (signs and billboards).
Article 3.15 (trees).
Article 3.16, division 2 (roads).
Articles 5.04 through 5.06 (fire prevention and protection).
Article 10.02 (subdivisions).
Articles 13.03 through 13.05 (water and sewers).
Article 14.02 (zoning).
Article 14.03 (site plan review).
(b) The minimum size for a PD east of S.H. 5 must be 500 acres, except that in areas east of S.H. 5 and north
of Sloan Creek, the minimum size for a PD must be 250 acres. The minimum size for a PD west of S.H. 5 must
be five acres.
Sec. 14.02.627 Amendments to PD adopted by ordinance; concept plans and site plans
At any time following the approval of a concept plan, preliminary site plan or site plan, the property owner(s)
may request an amendment. Amendments are classified as major or minor.
(1) Minor amendments. The town manager or designated representative may approve or
disapprove a minor amendment to plans adopted by ordinance provided the amendment does not:
(A) Change or alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent property.
(B) Increase the density or intensity of development.
(C) Substantially alter the arrangement of buildings, increase the number of buildings or
change the use of building space designated on the original plan.
(D) Substantially alter the configuration of streets or lots.
(E) Increase the height of buildings.
(F) Substantially alter vehicular circulation or placement of parking areas.
(G) Reduce or lessen the effectiveness of open space, landscaped buffers and edges.
(H) Conflict with other regulations specified within the ordinance establishing the district.
(2) Major amendment. All other amendments shall be considered major amendments and shall be
considered by planning and zoning and town council at individual public meetings in accordance
with the same procedures and requirements for the approval of a plan.
Sec. 14.02.628 Review or modification of zoning
The planning and zoning commission or town council may, upon reasonable necessity, call a public meeting to
review, evaluate and/or modify any specific planned development zone. Such review, evaluation or modification
may be initiated as a result of one or more of the following circumstances:
(1) Error or ambiguity. A provision of a specific planned development that is incorrectly recorded
or incorrectly engineered to prevent reasonable or logical administration of the existing development;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 542/665
(2) Nonperformance. A condition in which the property is not developed in accordance with the
specific planned development;
(3) Inaction. No material action toward development of the property is taken for a period of two
years from the date the planned development is granted final approval by town council; or
(4) Violation or noncompliance. Repeated failure of the owner/developer, after written request and
reasonable opportunity to cure, to comply with the requirements and provisions of the planned
development.
Sec. 14.02.629 Revocation of approval
The town council may revoke approval of a concept plan, or site plan if it determines that the conditions of the
approval have not been met after written demand to the owner/developer and failure to cure the same within a
reasonable amount of time (as determined by the town manager).
Sec. 14.02.630 Fees; forms; procedures
(a) The developer or builder is required to pay all fees associated with the planning process and reimburse the
town for additional costs required for legal, engineering, or other consultants' opinions and review of the
development.
(b) Procedures, forms and standards with regard to the content, format and number of copies of information
constituting an application for concept plans, preliminary site plans and site plans shall be established by the
town manager or designated representative.
Sec. 14.02.631 Conclusion and penalty clause
(a) All provisions of the ordinances of the town in conflict with the provisions of this division are hereby
repealed, and all other provisions of the ordinances of the town, not in conflict with the provisions of this
division, shall remain in full force and effect.
(b) The repeal of any ordinance or part of ordinances effectuated by the enactment of this division shall not be
construed as abandoning any action now pending under or by virtue of such ordinance or as discontinuing,
abating, modifying or altering any penalty accruing or to accrue, or as affecting any rights of the municipality
under any section or provisions of any ordinance at the time of passage of this division.
(c) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this division shall be subject to
the same penalty as provided for in section 14.02.021, and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed the sum of $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue shall be
deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 2013-3-5C adopted 3/5/13)
Secs. 14.02.632–14.02.680 Reserved
Division 14. Commercial Planned Development District (CPDD)
Sec. 14.02.681 Adopted by reference
The CPDD and associated standards and guidelines passed under Ordinance 2014-9-11B are incorporated herein
as if set forth in full. Said ordinance is available electronically on the town planning department's webpage and a
copy is kept as an official town record in the custody of the town secretary's office. (Ordinance 2014-9-11B, sec.
1, adopted 9/11/14; Ordinance 2017-28 adopted 12/5/17)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 543/665
Secs. 14.02.682–14.02.715 Reserved
Division 15. Government Zoning District (G)
Sec. 14.02.716 Purpose
The government zoning district (G) is established to provide an area for public use by the federal, state, county
and municipal governments, as well as other specialized governmental entities, with jurisdiction within the town.
Sec. 14.02.717 Permitted uses
Within the G zoning district, only the following uses shall be permitted:
(1) Government offices, buildings, structures and sites for government functions.
(2) Specialized districts serving a governmental function.
(3) Fire stations.
(4) Public utility stations and structures, including sewage treatment facilities.
Sec. 14.02.718 Permitted accessory uses
(a) Any accessory use related to the support of the permitted uses stated above in section 14.02.717.
(b) Off-street parking and loading areas and signage in lots or structures related to the functioning of
governmental activities.
Sec. 14.02.719 Conditional use or special use permits
There shall be no conditional use or special use permits granted within zone G.
Sec. 14.02.720 Height
Buildings and structures may be erected to any legal height not restricted by other laws or ordinances.
Sec. 14.02.721 Prohibited uses
(a) Any private use, structure or building not related to the functioning of the permitted uses stated in section
14.02.717 above shall be prohibited.
(b) Public schools and related uses are regulated under section 14.02.010, churches, schools, and fraternal
lodges in this code, and therefore said uses shall not be allowed in zone G.
(Ordinance 2008-10-14B adopted 10/14/08)
Secs. 14.02.722–14.02.750 Reserved
Division 16. Special Entertainment Zoning Overlay District
Sec. 14.02.751 Application and purpose
This section applies within the boundaries of a special entertainment zoning overlay district (“SEO district”),
said boundaries having been established by Town of Fairview Ordinance No. 2011-12-06A, and said boundaries
of the SEO district are incorporated herein by reference. Said SEO district shall be in full force and effect within
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 544/665
said boundaries as of the date that this ordinance becomes effective. The purpose of this section is to allow
within the SEO district, in addition to uses otherwise allowed in the area underlying the SEO district (as well as
uses allowed in any other overlay district(s) to the extent such districts also overlay any area within the SEO
district), the uses listed in section 14.02.752 to locate in the SEO district, subject to the requirements and
restrictions set forth in this section.
Sec. 14.02.752 Permitted uses
(a) Permitted uses as defined and only to the extent permitted in article 4.04 of the Fairview Code, including
and limited to:
(1) Adult arcades.
(2) Adult audio or video centers.
(3) Adult cabarets.
(4) Adult motion-picture theaters.
(5) Adult theaters.
(6) Adult media stores.
(7) Adult retail stores.
(b) Uses allowed by right and uses allowed when a conditional use permit has been approved in accordance
with the underlying zoning and or any other applicable overlay districts in the SEO district shall be allowed in
the SEO district, which shall not be designated exclusively for the uses permitted under this section.
Sec. 14.02.753 Requirements
(a) All uses permitted under section 14.02.752 shall conform to all applicable requirements and restrictions as
stated in article 4.04 of the Fairview Code, as amended.
(b) All uses permitted under section 14.02.752 shall meet the requirements of section 14.03.134 of the
Fairview Code, as amended.
(c) All development in the SEO district shall meet all applicable requirements within the FDC (Fairview
Development Code) as said code is defined in article 7 of the CPDD adopted under this ordinance, including but
not limited to provisions related to accessory uses and accessory structures or buildings.
(Ordinance 2014-9-11B, sec. 4, adopted 9/11/14)
ARTICLE 14.03 SITE PLAN REVIEW FOR NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 14.03.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning. Definitions contained in the existing town zoning and subdivision ordinances, as
appropriate, shall apply herein.
Abutter. Any person whose property is located in the town and adjoins or is directly across any street or any
other way or stream from the land to be considered or under consideration by the planning commission for site
plan review approval. For purposes of receiving testimony, and not for purposes of specific notification, the term
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 545/665
“abutter” shall include any person who is able to demonstrate that his land will be directly affected by the
proposal to be considered or under consideration.
Accessory building. A detached building on the same lot with the primary building, the use of which is clearly
incidental to that of the primary building or use of the land.
Building. Shall include the word “structure.”
Development. The construction of improvements on a tract or tracts of land, which shall include the enlargement
of the structure or physical changes to the site to accommodate the intended use.
Engineer. Whenever used without a prefix, shall refer to a registered professional engineer retained by a
subdivider or developer.
Enlargement. The increase in size or the expansion of any structure or appurtenance, whether said appurtenance
exists alone or in service of a structure or other appurtenance.
Improvement. All structures, appurtenances or additions to the site whether above or below the surface of the
land, and including but not limited to buildings, construction of any kind, site grading, landscaping, street
construction, and utilities (including water, sewer, electric, gas, and storm drainage), whether proposed by the
developer or required by the commission under these regulations.
Lot. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building or accessory building and including such open spaces as are
required by ordinances of the town and having its principal frontage on a public street or officially approved
place.
Nonpublic or individual water supply system. Any private system providing potable water.
Nonresidential use. Any use other than that of a single-family residence (includes conversion permitted use) and
which is specifically permitted under article 14.02, the zoning code.
Planning and zoning commission. The body of members charged with the responsibility of reviewing for
approval all subdivisions, preliminary plats and final plats in the town.
Site plan. A development plan, drawn to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for a parcel of land as
required by this article.
Street. A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or however otherwise designated.
Subdivision. Any division of any lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more parts for the purpose of sale or of
building development, whether immediate or future. It also includes resubdivision or replatting of land, lots, or
tracts. Divisions of land for agricultural purposes in parcels of ten acres or more shall not be included within this
definition, unless any such division of five acres or more includes the planning or development of a new street or
extension of public utilities.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.001)
Sec. 14.03.002 Purpose
The purpose of the site plan review is to provide an orderly process to evaluate proposed nonresidential
development, thereby promoting the public health, safety, convenience and welfare of the residents of the town.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.002)
Sec. 14.03.003 Title
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 546/665
This article shall be known as the site plan review regulations for nonresidential development. (1998 Code, sec.
155.003)
Sec. 14.03.004 Applicability
(a) These regulations govern all nonresidential development in the GB (general business) zone and PC
(planned center) zone. Permitted uses in the GB and PC zones are listed in article 14.02 (zoning regulations),
and development in these zones shall comply with the provisions of this article. (1998 Code, sec. 155.004)
(b) Approval of site plans and the design and construction requirements for developments within the
commercial planned development district shall be governed by the provisions of article 14.02, division 14, and
not this article; provided, however, that the provisions of sections 14.03.031 through 14.03.140 shall not be
applicable to such developments. (1998 Code, sec. 155.004; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 14.03.005 Scope
(a) With the intent of providing for the orderly present and future development of the town, these provisions
and regulations shall govern nonresidential development within the area of jurisdiction of the town, whether or
not such development includes a subdivision of the site.
(b) The site plan review procedure in no way relieves the applicant from compliance with the zoning code,
subdivision regulations or other regulations which pertain to the proposed development. No site plan will be
approved unless it complies in all respects with any and all pertinent ordinances and regulations.
(c) Consistent with enabling legislation, these regulations are intended to ensure that nonresidential
developments:
(1) Are harmonious with the town and its environs;
(2) Are provided with adequate services and utilities;
(3) Are provided with safe and convenient traffic flows both on and off the site;
(4) Do not necessitate an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services;
(5) Promote the public's health, safety and convenience;
(6) Are consistent with the balanced growth objectives of the town; and
(7) Are compatible with and do not have adverse or other disharmonious effects on contiguous
sites and uses.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.005)
Sec. 14.03.006 Development requiring site plan review
(a) The planning commission requires site plans to be submitted to it for review by any applicant seeking any
of the following:
(1) The construction of any new nonresidential use in the GB zone and PC zone.
(2) Any modification or intensification of any nonresidential permitted use or grandfathered use.
(3) The construction or conversion of any nonresidential use in which development of the site is
contemplated or required by virtue of any other town or state ordinance, statute, regulation or
decision of the town's zoning board of adjustment.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 547/665
(4) The change within a structure from one permitted use to another permitted nonresidential use
which will require development of the site, including, but not limited to, improvement or alteration to
the site required by virtue of any other town or state ordinance, statute or regulation.
(b) Site plan review shall not be required when:
(1) There is no alteration in septic or water supply requirements; and
(2) The addition to any building does not exceed 300 square feet in size; or
(3) Parking areas, driveways, or other areas covered with impermeable material for the first time
do not exceed 1,000 square feet.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.006)
Sec. 14.03.007 General standards for review
(a) In reviewing site plans, the planning commission must take into consideration the public health, safety, and
general welfare, the comfort and convenience of the general public, and comprehensive plan objectives, and, as
a condition of approval, may require such modifications of the proposed site plan as it deems necessary to
comply with the spirit as well as the letter of these regulations.
(b) The planning commission shall take into account the following objectives:
(1) Safe, adequate and convenient vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation both within and
without the site. At least the following aspects of the site plan shall be evaluated to determine the
conformity of the site plan to this standard:
(A) The effect of the proposed development on traffic conditions on abutting streets.
(B) The number, location and dimensions of vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exits, drives
and walkways.
(C) The visibility in both directions of all exit points of the site and the visibility of vehicles
entering or exiting the site to drivers of vehicles traveling on abutting streets.
(D) The location, arrangement and adequacy of off-street parking facilities.
(E) Interconnection of parking areas via access drives within the site and between the site and
adjacent lots, in order to provide maximum efficiency, minimize curb cuts, and encourage safe
and convenient traffic circulation.
(F) The location, arrangement and adequacy of truck loading and unloading facilities.
(G) Patterns of vehicular and pedestrian circulation both within the boundaries of the site and
in relation to the adjoining street and sidewalk system.
(H) The location and adequacy of landscaping within the site and bordering parking and
loading facilities.
(2) The protection of environmental quality and the preservation and enhancement of property
values. At least the following aspects of the site plan shall be evaluated to determine the conformity
of the site plan to this standard:
(A) The location, height and materials of walls, fences, hedges and plantings so as to ensure
harmony with adjacent development, screen parking and loading areas, and conceal storage
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 548/665
areas, utility installations and other such features.
(B) The prevention of dust and erosion through the planting of ground cover or installation of
other surfaces.
(C) The landscaping of the site, which shall consist of natural undisturbed vegetation or
features, or ground cover, shrubs, or trees, as appropriate.
(D) The preparation of the site with minimal disturbance to existing vegetation.
(E) The grading and filling of the site to minimize the alteration of surface and subsurface
drainage to, toward or across abutting properties.
(F) The protection of residential abutters against undue noise, glare, unsightliness or other
nuisances detrimental to property values.
(3) In acting upon any site plan, the planning commission may take into consideration the
recommendations of the town building inspector, the public works department, the fire department,
and any other town agencies or outside specialists with which the planning commission consults.
(4) (A) These regulations shall be interpreted as minimum requirements, and compliance
with these minimum requirements in no way obligates the planning commission to approve any
particular application solely on that basis.
(B) The planning commission will fully consider all aspects of an application before
rendering its decision. This will include a study of all site design and technical aspects of the
proposal as well as consideration of the impact of the development on the open space, wildlife
habitat and other natural resources, on local traffic patterns and on available public utilities,
services and municipal resources. Only after the planning commission has fully satisfied itself
that the proposed project is in the best public interest and that it will not prove detrimental to
the public health, safety, welfare or prosperity will the application be recommended for
approval.
(5) If any other provision of town or any provision of state or federal law relates to any matter
covered herein, the provision which imposes the greater restriction or higher standard shall govern.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.007)
Sec. 14.03.008 Suitability of land
(a) Land unsuitable for development due to the presence of poorly drained soils, flood hazard areas, steep
slopes or subsurface factors or other conditions constituting a danger to health, safety or the environment shall
not be approved for development unless the applicant presents satisfactory evidence or data to the planning
commission establishing that the methods proposed to overcome any such conditions are adequate.
(b) The planning commission, in its discretion, shall not recommend for approval such scattered or premature
developments that would endanger or be injurious to health, safety or prosperity by reason of the lack of public
services, or necessitate an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services.
(c) In no case shall a dwelling, septic system, or other structure be sited in any floodplain area as defined in
the town's flood damage prevention regulations contained in article 3.12, division 2, of this code.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.008)
Sec. 14.03.009 Issuance of building permit and certificate of occupancy
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 549/665
No building permit shall be issued by the building inspector for the construction of any building or other
structure on a development subject to these regulations until approval is granted by the town council, and no
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the terms and conditions of the planning commission's
recommendations and the town council's approval have been fulfilled. (1998 Code, sec. 155.009)
Secs. 14.03.010–14.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Planning Commission Review
Sec. 14.03.031 Generally
Three steps of site plan review are generally required to develop a nonresidential site:
(1) The developer is encouraged to meet with members of the planning and zoning commission in
informal work sessions to discuss the development process before submitting plans. These first
presentations to planning and zoning should show a concept plan as described below.
(2) When the plans are acceptable in these early concept stages, then formal submission of the site
plan may be made through the application process and presentation of a preliminary site development
plan and a preliminary plat.
(3) Final site plan approval will be either granted or denied through the submission of the final site
plan and final plat and its outlined procedure.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.025)
Sec. 14.03.032 Concept plan
(a) The concept plan is the initial plan required in the site plan review process. This plan is a general site
assessment and development concept that defines basic schematic design for development. The purpose of the
plan is to:
(1) Evaluate the site's natural condition, including vegetation, topography, drainage, surface, and
subsurface factors affecting the site's development;
(2) Determine building sites and the use, intensity, bulk, and height of structures to be constructed;
(3) Locate public streets and rights-of-way, and determine points of ingress and egress between the
development and public streets, including median breaks and turn lanes;
(4) Determine primary routes of vehicular circulation and parking areas internal to the
development;
(5) Delineate development phasing, if any; and
(6) Show any other site improvements planned.
(b) When the concept plan assures planning and zoning that the general layout will be acceptable, the
applicant may proceed with more detailed engineering and design and submit a formal application with a site
plan map and preliminary plat for site plan approval.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.026)
Sec. 14.03.033 Application
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 550/665
A completed application shall fulfill all requirements of divisions 2 and 3 of this article and be on forms
obtained from the town clerk. The application shall be accompanied by payment of all fees and other charges, or
evidence thereof. Procedures for filing, review, and times for action shall follow those steps as outlined in article
10.02 of this Code of Ordinances. (1998 Code, sec. 155.027)
Sec. 14.03.034 Review process
(a) The preliminary site development plan and preliminary plat presentation is a joint process. The
submission, review, and approval procedures shall follow those steps outlined in article 10.02 of this Code of
Ordinances.
(b) The purpose of the preliminary site plan is to:
(1) Ensure compliance with applicable development regulations and previously approved valid
plans affecting development of the property;
(2) Determine the placement, configuration, coverage, size and height of buildings;
(3) Determine the design of public street improvements and right-of-way, and the design and
location of drives, aisles, and parking;
(4) Determine location and preliminary design of open space, landscaping, walls, screens, and
amenities;
(5) Determine the preliminary design of drainage facilities and utilities and all items required and
submitted through the preliminary plat procedures and regulations; and
(6) Prepare a preliminary traffic impact analysis if needed.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.028)
Sec. 14.03.035 Commission action
Following the public hearing on the application, and in accordance with article 10.02 of this Code of
Ordinances, the planning and zoning commission shall act to recommend for approval or disapproval of the
application within 30 days of the filing date. (1998 Code, sec. 155.029)
Sec. 14.03.036 Fees
(a) This section applies to either new construction or enlargement of existing facilities.
(b) An application [fee] for nonresidential site plan review shall be paid according to the master fee schedule
set forth in appendix A of this Code of Ordinances.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.030)
Secs. 14.03.037–14.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. Submission Items
Sec. 14.03.061 Generally
(a) The purpose of the site development plan is to provide sufficient data to determine compliance with the
town's regulations and requirements for nonresidential development. The site development plan/preliminary and
final plats shall follow those additional guidelines outlined in article 10.02 of this Code of Ordinances.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 551/665
(b) With the submission of the site development plan, the applicant or his authorized agent must submit site
plan maps and supporting data to the planning commission, which shall include the information required by this
division.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.050)
Sec. 14.03.062 Existing site information
The applicant or his authorized agent shall submit the following:
(1) Location of site, computed acreage or square footage, current names and addresses of
developer, owners of record, and abutting landowners and project name if applicable.
(2) Name and address of the person or firm preparing the map (which must be prepared and
stamped by a registered land surveyor or registered professional engineer), the scale of the map, north
arrow and date. Name and address of the persons or firm preparing other data and information if
different from the preparer of the map.
(3) The boundary lines of the area included in the site, including angles or bearings of the lines,
dimensions and the lot area.
(4) The existing grades, drainage systems, structures and topographic contours at intervals not
exceeding two feet with spot elevations where grade is less than 3%.
(5) The shape, size, height and location of existing structures located on the site and within 200
feet of the site, including all driveways.
(6) All easements and rights-of-way.
(7) Natural features such as streams, marshes, lakes or ponds and manmade features such as, but
not limited to, existing roads and structures indicating which of such features are to be retained and
which are to be removed or altered.
(8) Abutting properties with approximate location of the structures thereon, including access roads.
(9) The size and location of all existing public and private utilities and all existing landscaping,
including the location and size of existing public utilities that are located off-site with which
connection is planned or located within 100 feet of the site.
(10) A vicinity sketch (1 inch equals 1000 feet) showing the location of the site in relation to the
surrounding public street system and the zoning districts and boundaries for the site and within 2,000
feet of the site. The one-hundred-year flood elevation contour shall be included within floodplains.
(11) Location of all existing trees and tree masses.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.051)
Sec. 14.03.063 Site development plan and information
The applicant or his authorized agent shall submit the following:
(1) On a scale of one inch equals 20 feet, proposed grades, drainage systems, structures and
topographic contours at intervals not exceeding two feet with spot elevations where grade is less than
five percent (5%).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 552/665
(2) The shape, size, height and location of the proposed structures, including expansion or other
exterior alteration of existing buildings.
(3) Proposed streets, driveways, parking spaces, sidewalks, and curbs with indication of direction
of travel for one-way streets and drives and inside radius of all curves. The width of streets,
driveways and sidewalks and the total number of parking spaces must be shown. In addition, loading
spaces and facilities associated with the structures on the site must be shown.
(4) The size and location of all proposed public and private utilities, as well as fire hydrant
locations (250 feet from major structures).
(5) The location, type and size of all proposed landscaping and screening.
(6) Exterior lighting plan.
(7) A storm drainage plan, including plans for retention and slow release of stormwater where
necessary.
(8) A circulation plan of the interior of the lot showing provisions for both auto and pedestrian
circulation. An access plan showing means of access to the site and proposed changes to existing
public streets, including any traffic-control devices necessary in conjunction with the site
development plan.
(9) Construction drawings, including but not limited to pavements, walks, steps, curbing and
drainage structures.
(10) Open spaces, green areas and landscaping, tree protection plans, and any land dedication if
applicable.
(11) Proposed signage; specifications must follow article 3.13 of this Code of Ordinances.
(12) Facade plan which shows the proposed exterior building materials and the general color
scheme of the building exterior.
(13) Proposed name of business.
(14) Front, rear, and side yard building setback lines.
(15) Sanitation: dumpster pad and/or compactor locations.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.052)
Sec. 14.03.064 Document specifications
The applicant or his authorized agent shall submit documents in the following format:
(1) Sheet size 24" x 36" maximum.
(2) Scale not less than 1 inch equals 100 feet.
(3) Six prints of each plan sheet (blue or black line).
(4) Adequate space for planning commission and town council action to be recorded and dated.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.053)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 553/665
Sec. 14.03.065 Additional information
The planning commission may require such additional information as it deems necessary in order to impose the
regulations contained herein, including but not limited to a traffic impact analysis. (1998 Code, sec. 155.054)
Secs. 14.03.066–14.03.090 Reserved
Division 4. Design and Construction Requirements
Sec. 14.03.091 Access design
(a) Traffic access to the site from town streets must ensure the safety of vehicles and pedestrians.
(b) The planning commission must give its approval of the design for a proposed access/egress point onto the
public way, which point shall provide an adequate sight distance, grade, width and curb.
(c) In all cases, the number of points of access to a given street shall be held to a minimum, preferably one, in
order to reduce traffic hazards from turning movements and installations of traffic-control devices.
(d) The planning commission may require improvement of existing access/egress point(s) to provide safe flow
onto abutting streets should increased traffic be generated by the development.
(e) Any approval or requirements above shall in no way be in lieu of or superior to any approval or permit
which may be granted by the state department of transportation in any case where that body has preemptive
jurisdiction.
(f) Off-site requirements may be required, such as pavement width, deceleration lanes, curbing or signal
devices.
(g) Traffic circulation, pedestrian access, parking and loading facilities, and access for emergency vehicles
shall be designed and provided to ensure safety on the site.
(h) Provision shall be made to assure that the proposal is consistent with the need to minimize flood damage,
and that all public utilities and facilities, such as sewage, electrical and water systems, are constructed and that
adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. Design provisions shall also be made to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary
sewage systems and discharges from these systems into floodwaters. On-site waste disposal systems shall be
located so as to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(i) The number of required parking spaces shall conform with the off-street parking requirements set forth in
section 14.02.015 of this Code of Ordinances. Parking areas and drives shall be paved if public use is intended;
however, the planning commission, at its discretion, may waive or modify paving to reduce runoff.
(j) Access to public streets shall meet the requirements of the state department of transportation and/or the
town, as adopted and amended, and shall conform to whichever standards are higher.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.070)
Sec. 14.03.092 Landscaping and screening
(a) Landscaping and screening must be provided with proper regard to adjacent properties and the public
highway and within the site, including interior landscaping of parking areas.
(b) Buffer strips of at least 35 feet minimum width must be provided where a proposed nonresidential
development abuts other nonresidential properties, and 75 feet minimum width where a proposed nonresidential
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 554/665
development abuts residential properties. Where appropriate, existing growth must be incorporated into the
buffer strips or landscaping design. Buffer strips must contain vegetation which will screen the view from
adjacent residential property during all seasons.
(c) A landscaping plan must be submitted and approved according to the requirements set forth in article
14.02 of this Code of Ordinances.
(d) All commercial areas shall be separated from residential areas by the erection of a site [sight] barrier fence,
the construction of materials and height to be determined by the town.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.071)
Sec. 14.03.093 Storm drainage
(a) An adequate surface stormwater drainage system must be provided. Storm drainage shall be carried to
existing watercourses, or connect to existing storm drains. Stormwater runoff shall be restricted to existing
drainageways. No new drainageways shall be created unless necessary easements are obtained by the applicant.
No increase in surface runoff shall be permitted if such increased runoff passes beyond the property lines unless
it is to be within an existing approved public storm drainage system.
(b) Storm sewers and drainage facilities shall follow regulations as outlined in article 10.02 of this Code of
Ordinances.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.072)
Sec. 14.03.094 Screening; waste disposal
(a) All outdoor storage areas and trash receptacles must be located or screened to prevent visibility from
within the parking areas and neighboring properties. All trash receptacles shall be screened to a minimum of six
feet in height and 30 feet in length.
(b) The manner of waste disposal must be specified and include areas for safe disposal. Litter and/or garbage
collection and holding areas must be secured.
(c) The use of either fencing or hedges is permitted for the foregoing purposes.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.073)
Sec. 14.03.095 Sidewalks
Sidewalks must be provided for pedestrian traffic to permit passageways between the main entrances of
business, housing or industrial establishments and parking areas. All such sidewalks must follow the regulations
outlined in article 10.02 of this Code of Ordinances. The design must include means for access by handicapped
persons. (1998 Code, sec. 155.074)
Sec. 14.03.096 Illumination
(a) Outdoor lighting must not directly shine on abutting properties or on public highways or streets.
(b) Indirect lighting should be used on signs advertising goods or services offered on the premises. Moving,
fluttering, blinking or flashing lights or signs shall not be permitted.
(c) Outdoor lighting must be restricted to that which is necessary for advertising, safety, and security of the
site.
(d) Fixtures and locations must be approved by the building inspector.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 555/665
(1998 Code, sec. 155.075)
Sec. 14.03.097 Parking areas and access drives
Drives and parking areas must be constructed to the following specifications:
(1) Loam and/or yielding material must be removed to a depth of no less than 12 inches below
finished grade.
(2) Construction must consist of a six-inch lime-stabilized subgrade with six-inch 3000 psi
concrete.
(3) The minimum grade for parking areas shall be 1%; the maximum grade shall be 5%.
(4) If approved by the board, permeable pavement may be used which might minimize dust,
erosion, and runoff conditions that could have a detrimental effect on abutting or neighboring
properties.
(5) Driveways and parking areas shall be located in such a fashion so as not to unduly harm the
owners or occupants of neighboring parcels. Ordinarily, driveways and parking areas shall not be
located in the required setbacks. The planning commission may approve the location of driveways
and parking areas within the required setbacks if such location is necessary and reasonable given the
intended use of the lot or parcel and the existing or intended uses of abutting lots or parcels.
(6) All off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of not less than prescribed in section
14.02.015 of this Code of Ordinances.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.076)
Sec. 14.03.098 Additional construction standards
(a) Construction of improvements shall also comply with the requirements of articles 3.01 through 3.11 of this
Code of Ordinances.
(b) Unless otherwise specified on the site plan and approved by the planning commission and town council,
roadway and ancillary improvements shall comply with the state department of transportation' manual, Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
(c) All construction must also follow those regulations as outlined in sections 14.02.006, 14.02.007, and
14.02.008 of this Code of Ordinances.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.077)
Sec. 14.03.099 Dumpster and compactor pads
(a) For dumpsters:
(1) A concrete pad, 20 feet by 40 feet, or six-inch concrete, 3,000 psi with number 3 rebar, 24
inches on the center, shall be provided for each trash receptacle or dumpster unit.
(2) All trash receptacles shall be screened by a six-foot screening fence of redwood material or
masonry and/or trees or shrubs.
(3) All trash receptacles oriented perpendicular to the principal means of access to the receptacle
shall be located in such a manner as to provide a minimum turning radius of 40 feet for the collection
vehicle.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 556/665
(4) Any trash receptacle not perpendicular to the principal means of access to the receptacle shall
be oriented at a 30-degree angle from the fire lane, alley, or other means of access.
(5) Alternative design standards must be approved by the director of public works.
(b) For compactors:
(1) A six-inch concrete pad, 3,000 psi, with number 3 rebar, 24 inches OCEW, shall be provided
with each compactor.
(2) A screening wall or fence shall be provided, which shall be six feet minimum height and 30
feet in length.
(3) The compactor guide bar shall be a maximum of six feet in length.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.078)
Secs. 14.03.100–14.03.130 Reserved
Division 5. Supplementary Regulations
Sec. 14.03.131 Water and sewer service
In areas of the town where municipal water and sewer service is not provided, water supply and sewage disposal
systems must be sized to meet the needs of the proposed use. All water, septic and sanitary sewer systems must
be sized to meet the needs of the proposed use and will be guided by the regulations in chapter 13 of this Code
of Ordinances. (1998 Code, sec. 155.090)
Sec. 14.03.132 Fire protection
Buildings to be used by the public and/or for human occupancy must contain an adequate fire alarm/warning
system. Such fire alarms shall be indicated on the plans and installed by the applicant. Sprinkler systems should
also be installed as per the building code specifications. (1998 Code, sec. 155.091)
Sec. 14.03.133 Erosion and sedimentation plan
(a) Provision must be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface
conditions during and after development. Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped by the use of sediment
basins or other acceptable methods until the disturbed area is stabilized. Diversions, sediment retention basins,
and other such devices shall be constructed prior to any on-site grading or disturbance of existing surface
material.
(b) Control must show measures both during construction and any permanent controls to remain after
construction.
(c) The site plan must identify, locate, and show elevation, grades and/or contours at intervals of not more
than two feet for the existing and proposed drainageways, drainage easements, drainage structures and water
bodies.
(d) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be done in such a way that will minimize
soil erosion. The disturbed area shall be kept to a minimum and the duration of exposure shall be under a
maximum of six months. Temporary seeding and/or mulching shall be used to protect exposed critical areas
during development. Whenever practical, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.092)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 557/665
Sec. 14.03.134 Performance standards
All nonresidential developments and businesses shall follow the state regulations applicable to matters such as
emission of toxic, noxious and odorous matter, and must follow state regulations which address permissible
decibel limits. (1998 Code, sec. 155.093)
Sec. 14.03.135 PC zone regulations adopted
The PC zone site development regulations, as may be adopted or amended by council from time to time, are
hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full in this article. (1998 Code, sec. 155.094)
Sec. 14.03.136 Inspection of improvements
(a) The town engineer, or, in the absence of a town engineer, a registered engineer hired by the town, shall
inspect all site improvements.
(b) The applicant must pay the cost of the planning commission's employment of said engineer and the cost of
any inspector(s) and test(s) deemed necessary by the commission or the engineer.
(c) A letter certifying to the applicant's concession to the employment of said engineer shall be filed with the
planning commission as part of the site plan review.
(d) The town engineer shall, among other duties, certify to the planning commission and the town council that
the site development is in accordance with all plans and other data upon which the site plan review approval was
based, or, finding otherwise, render to those boards a report(s) describing in detail any deficiencies found and, if
appropriate, his recommendations as to the seriousness of these deficiencies and measures required for the
correction thereof. A copy of his findings shall also be filed with the building inspector. There shall be no release
as respects any performance bond or other financial guaranty until the town engineer agrees that all conditions to
this approval have been met.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.095)
Sec. 14.03.137 Flood hazard areas
Any proposed land use, including construction thereon, shall be subject to the regulations outlined in article
3.12, division 2, of this Code of Ordinances. (1998 Code, sec. 155.096)
Sec. 14.03.138 Record drawings (as-built plans)
(a) Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the engineer for the developer shall submit to the town a
complete set of drawings of the paving, drainage, water, and sanitary sewer improvements showing all changes
made in the plans during construction and containing on each sheet a “record drawing” stamp bearing the
signature of the engineer and the date. In addition, six reproducible drawings of the utility plan sheets,
containing the record drawing information, shall be submitted to the town.
(b) No final acceptance of the site plan will be made by the town until this requirement has been made to the
satisfaction of the town. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to furnish copies of the record drawing
plans to the appropriate state agencies.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.097)
Sec. 14.03.139 Land dedication
Where applicable, all site plans, preliminary plats and final plats shall reserve land for future public use as
designated in the comprehensive plan. (1998 Code, sec. 155.098)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 558/665
Sec. 14.03.140 Compliance hearings; certification of compliance
(a) If the completed application is approved with one or more conditions precedent which are to be fulfilled
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the town council shall, at its discretion, hold a compliance
hearing to determine whether the applicant has complied with and fulfilled the conditions previously set. Notice
and time limitations prescribed elsewhere in these regulations shall apply to this hearing.
(b) If the town council finds it necessary, it shall request the town engineer to certify as to compliance, and all
reasonable costs in connection therewith shall be borne by the applicant.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.099)
Secs. 14.03.141–14.03.170 Reserved
Division 6. Telecommunications Towers and Antennas*
Sec. 14.03.171 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Alternative mounting structure. A manmade tree, clock tower, church steeple, bell tower, utility pole, light
standard, identification pylon, flagpole, or similar structure, designed to support and camouflage or conceal the
presence of telecommunications antennas.
Antenna. A structure or device used to collect or radiate electromagnetic waves, including directional antennas,
such as panels, wireless cable and dishes, and omnidirectional antennas, such as whips, but not including
satellite earth stations.
Antenna array. An arrangement of antennas and their supporting structure.
Antenna, dish. A parabolic or bowl-shaped device that receives and/or transmits signals in a specific directional
pattern.
Antenna, panel. An antenna which receives and/or transmits signals in a directional pattern.
Antenna, whip. An omnidirectional dipole antenna of cylindrical shape that is no more than six inches (15 cm) in
diameter.
Co-location. A single telecommunications tower designed and built to accommodate a minimum of two wireless
communication providers.
Structure. An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but not limited to,
buildings, poles, water towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations and overhead transmission lines.
Telecommunications. The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of audio and/or visual
information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and
received.
Tower, guyed. Any telecommunications tower supported in whole or in part by cables anchored to the ground.
Tower, height. The distance measured from grade to the highest point of any and all components of the structure,
including antennas, hazard lighting, and other appurtenances, if any.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 559/665
Tower, monopole. A self-supporting telecommunications tower which consists of a single vertical pole fixed into
the ground and/or attached to a foundation.
Tower, self-supporting lattice. A telecommunications tower which consists of an open network of metal braces
forming a tower which is usually triangular or square in cross-section.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.110)
Sec. 14.03.172 Violations; penalty
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this division, and any person violating or failing to
comply with any provision hereof shall be fined, upon conviction, in accordance with town codes, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1998 Code,
sec. 155.117)
Sec. 14.03.173 General provisions
(a) Wireless service facility permits. All wireless service facility permits for a telecommunications tower,
antenna, or other facility to provide a telecommunications service shall include a completed supplemental
information form provided by the town regarding said facilities.
(b) Platted lot required. Unless an exception is recommended by the planning and zoning commission and
approved by the town council, telecommunications facilities, including towers and related equipment buildings,
shall be located on a platted lot.
(c) Technical and legal assistance. When, in the town's opinion, the technical and legal issues are beyond the
capacity of the town staff to review, the applicant, in addition to the usual application fee, shall reimburse the
town for actual cost to the town for the reasonable services of legal and technical experts to review the
application, design plans, and general information and advise the town before approval of application.
(d) Preapplication meetings. Prior to leasing or purchasing facilities, the telecommunications service provider
is encouraged to meet with the town manager and review the merits of potential locations.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.111)
Sec. 14.03.174 Design and construction standards
(a) Compliance with applicable standards. All telecommunications towers, antennas, and facilities shall be
constructed and operated in compliance with current Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) and any other relevant federal, state or local rules and regulations. If said rules
and regulations change, then the owners/operators of the towers and antennas shall bring towers and antennas
into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such
standards and regulations.
(b) Structural standards. Guyed telecommunications towers shall be designed and located such that if the
structure should fall it will avoid habitable structures and public streets. The owner/operator shall ensure that the
tower is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable
standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association (EIA), as amended from time to
time. If, upon inspection, the tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to
persons and property, then, upon notice being provided to the owner/operator of the tower, the owner/operator
shall have 30 days to bring to such tower into compliance with such codes and standards. If the owner fails to
bring such tower into compliance within the 30 days, the town may remove such tower or cause such tower to be
removed at the owner's expense.
(c) Aesthetics. Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of
the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. At the buildable site, the design of the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 560/665
buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend
the tower facilities to the natural setting and the surrounding environment. If an antenna is installed on a
structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of neutral
color that is identical. Those persons erecting or building wireless service facilities are encouraged to use
camouflaging and other covering techniques to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(d) Fencing and landscaping. Wrought iron fencing should be six feet in height, and landscaping eight feet,
and both must encompass the wireless service facility. The landscaping must effectively screen the view of the
wireless service facility from residential and commercial property. The standard buffer zone shall consist of a
landscaped strip five feet wide outside the perimeter of the fence. A wrought iron gate must include a mesh
cover. In addition, the gate location will be determined by the council.
(e) Setbacks. All guys and anchors shall be located within the buildable area of the lot. Towers/antennas must
be set back a distance of 2-to-1 ratio to height from residential property, roads and rail lines. (Example: If the
tower height is 100 feet then the required setback will be 200 feet.)
(f) Signage. Except for warning, safety, and signs required by the FCC, no signage, lettering, symbols, images
or trademarks will be placed on or affixed to the fence or equipment building grounds. No signage, lettering,
symbols, images, or trademarks for any reason will be placed on or affixed to towers/antennas.
(g) Lighting. Except as otherwise permitted in this division, no signals, lights or illumination of any kind shall
be permitted on or directed toward any tower unless required by the FCC, the FAA or other appropriate public
authority. If lighting is required, planning and zoning and the town council shall review the available lighting
alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.
(h) Abandonment. Any antenna or tower (wireless communication facility) that is not operated for a
continuous period of six months shall be considered abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall
be made by the building inspector, who shall have the right to request documentation from the owner/operator
regarding the issue of usage. Upon the determination of abandonment, the owner/operator of the antenna or
tower shall remove the tower/antenna/structure within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the building
inspector notifying the owner/operator of such abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed within the
90 days, the council may remove such antenna or tower at the owner's/operator's expense. If there are two or
more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the
tower/antenna. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall secure and deliver to the town a cash deposit or
performance bond with a AA rated (or better) bonding or surety company for an amount reasonably determined
by the town to cover the cost of dismantling and removing an abandoned tower and restoring the immediate area
to its original condition existing prior to construction. Such cash deposit or bond shall be in an amount and form
as may be reasonably determined by the town.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.112)
Sec. 14.03.175 Approval process
(a) Application. Complete applications for permit shall be accompanied by the following information and fee:
(1) Construction drawings showing the proposed method of installation.
(2) The manufacturer's recommended installation.
(3) Each wireless communication facility must provide a $1,000,000 general liability insurance
certificate, to be issued by a company authorized to do business in the state.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.113)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 561/665
(4) Certification by a structural or civil engineer registered by the state that the proposed
installation complies with the structural requirements of the building code in effect. (1998 Code, sec.
155.113; Ordinance adopting Code)
(5) Each applicant shall submit a scaled site plan showing the location of the tower/antenna
structure with a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other
documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate professional engineers, showing the location and
dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency
coverage, tower height requirements, property and setback lines, drives, parking fences, landscaping,
easements, power lines, adjacent uses, all structures, and other information necessary to assess
compliance with this division.
(6) Plat upon which the site is built.
(7) Any other information required by the town staff, attorney, or engineer.
(8) Refer to the town's master fee schedule in appendix A of this code for all associated fees. An
application for permit is not considered complete and no action will be taken on said permit
application until the staff has had the opportunity to review the application for completeness and the
staff has responded to the applicant that the application is complete.
(b) Once the application for permit is complete and all appropriate fees paid, the application will be reviewed
by the staff, attorney, and engineer.
(c) Once the technical review is complete, its consideration may be placed on the next regular agenda of the
planning and zoning commission for approval or disapproval. A recommendation from planning and zoning will
be forwarded to town council.
(d) Once approved by planning and zoning, its consideration shall be placed on the next regular agenda of the
town council. Factors the town council and planning and zoning shall consider in approving an application are:
(1) Has the application met all technical review regulations and standards.
(2) Height of the proposed tower.
(3) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential boundaries.
(4) Nature of uses on adjacent and residential boundaries.
(5) Surrounding topography.
(6) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
(7) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of
reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness.
(8) Proposed ingress and egress.
(9) Other requirements established under site plan review.
(10) Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures. No new tower shall be permitted
unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the planning and zoning
commission and town council that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's
proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can
accommodate that applicant's proposed antenna may consist of the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 562/665
(A) No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet
the applicant's engineering requirements.
(B) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the
applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
(C) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the
antennas on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures
would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
(D) The applicant demonstrates that there are other factors that render existing towers and
structures unsuitable.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.113)
Sec. 14.03.176 Location
(a) Location in residential district prohibited; setbacks. Telecommunications towers and antennas are not
permitted in any residential zoning district and must be a minimum 2-to-1 distance-to-height ratio from a
residential district, roads and rail lines.
(b) Tower spacing. Any new telecommunications tower must be located a minimum of one mile (1.6 km)
from an existing tower.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.114)
Sec. 14.03.177 Whip and panel antennas
(a) Individual telecommunications antennas are allowed on existing electric utility poles, light standards, and
telecommunications towers. Individual whip antennas shall not exceed ten feet in length, except whip antennas
15 feet or less in height are permitted on conforming billboard structures.
(b) Panel antennas may be attached to but shall not exceed the height of the structure to which they are
attached.
(c) Building-mounted panel antennas are permitted on nonresidential buildings in the commercial district,
providing that they are mounted flush with the exterior of the building and that they do not project away from
the building wall more than ten inches from the surface of the building to which they are attached. Radiotransparent
coverings shall be placed in such a manner as to hide all building-mounted panel antennas. The
covering's appearance shall be such that its color and texture blend with the surrounding surface of the building.
(d) Whip antennas are permitted on nonresidential buildings in the area of commercial zoning, providing that
the total length of the whip antennas, regardless of mounting method or location, does not exceed ten feet in
height above the height of the building.
(e) Only one building/roof-mounted antenna or four panel antennas are permitted per 5000 square feet of
building floor area. This regulation does not apply to town property.
(f) Whip and panel antennas are not permitted in any residential zoning district. This regulation does not apply
to town property.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.115)
Sec. 14.03.178 Three-month approval process and waiver of fees
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 563/665
The town will provide a three-month approval process and waive half the permit fee associated with approving a
telecommunication application when alternative mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of
telecommunications antennas, towers, and facilities ensure that landscapes are protected and the views of
surrounding structures are not impaired or diminished. Alternative mounting structures must be similar in color,
scale and character to adjoining buildings or structures or blend with the landscaping and other surroundings
immediately adjacent to them so as to generally avoid the creation of unique visual objects that stand out in the
environment. (Alternative mounting structure: a manmade tree, clock tower, church steeple, bell tower, utility
pole, light standard, flagpole or similar structure.)
(1) Co-location. Towers/antennas support structures must be constructed to support a minimum of
two cellular or PCS providers. The owner of the tower must certify to the town that the tower is
available for use by other telecommunications service providers on a reasonable and
nondiscriminatory basis.
(2) Wooded creek location (commercial district). The town encourages location of towers and
structures in existing tree growth and natural land along the creek in the commercial district. Certain
requirements may be reduced by the council in some cases.
(3) Town property. When town property is used as a location for the wireless communication
facility and a lease agreement is approved.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.116)
Secs. 14.03.179–14.03.220 Reserved
Division 7. Waivers
Sec. 14.03.221 Authorized; procedure
The requirements of this article may be waived or modified by the town council where appropriate hardship
exists or specific circumstances warrant. The applicant shall write to the planning commission describing the
requested term to be waived. The granting of said waiver shall not impair nor diminish the public health, safety
and welfare, and shall conform to and carry out the purpose and intent of this article, this chapter, and article
14.02 of this code. (1998 Code, sec. 155.120)
Secs. 14.03.222–14.03.250 Reserved
Division 8. Streets
Sec. 14.03.251 Construction standards; ownership and maintenance
(a) Streets or accessways in nonresidential developments shall be constructed to town specifications as set
forth in article 3.16, division 2, of this Code of Ordinances.
(b) Streets serving nonresidential development (unless a public roadway such as in an industrial park) shall
remain in private ownership, and the applicant shall execute and provide legal instruments to insure their
continued maintenance and ownership, any such instruments being subject to the approval by the town attorney.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.125)
Secs. 14.03.252–14.03.280 Reserved
Division 9. Agreements and Bonding
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 564/665
Sec. 14.03.281 Agreement with town required
As a condition of the town council's approval, the applicant must execute a legal agreement which specifies the
terms and conditions and the understandings between the parties with respect to the regulations set forth in this
article. (1998 Code, sec. 155.130)
Sec. 14.03.282 Performance bond for improvements
(a) The town council may require a performance bond for such improvements as it deems should be bonded in
a form as may be approved by the town attorney before any work commences on a development. The steps for
issuing and releasing a performance bond (or other surety) shall be the same as required in the pertinent zoning
ordinance(s) and subdivision regulation(s), including but not limited to determining the amount, the sufficiency,
and the term and form of the bond (or other surety).
(b) No development may be occupied or used unless a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
building inspector. The building inspector shall not issue such certificate of occupancy until the regulations set
forth in this article have been complied with and improvements made or a performance bond (or other approved
surety) provided to the town for unfinished improvements.
(1998 Code, sec. 155.131)
Secs. 14.03.283–14.03.310 Reserved
Division 10. Enforcement
Sec. 14.03.311 Generally; enforcement actions
These regulations shall be enforced by the town and its town council. In the event that the council or its
representative shall determine that these regulations have not been complied with, or that the terms of any
approval given under these regulations have not been timely met or satisfied, the council shall have the authority
to take such action as it shall deem lawful or necessary, including but not limited to the revocation of any
approval(s) granted, the withdrawal of any building permits which may have been issued, or the withholding of
any building permit. (1998 Code, sec. 155.150)
Sec. 14.03.312 Notice of violation
The council shall notify any offending person, firm or organization by certified mail, which notice shall contain
the specifics of the council's findings and if necessary a cease and desist order. (1998 Code, sec. 155.151)
ARTICLE 14.04 OIL AND GAS WELL DRILLING AND PRODUCTION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 14.04.001 Purpose
It is the purpose of this article to establish safeguards and regulate the exploring, drilling, developing, producing,
transporting, and storing of oil and gas and other substances produced in association with oil and gas. The
purpose of this article is to promote public health, safety, and welfare by establishing procedures for review and
approval of oil and gas production site plans and to provide regulations for present and future operations related
to producing and transporting oil and gas and other substances produced in association with oil and gas.
Additionally, this article establishes a system of local permits and fees implemented to ensure that entities
engaged in the aforementioned oil and gas production and transportation activities within the town comply with
local ordinances and regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 565/665
Sec. 14.04.002 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning. Definitions contained in the existing town zoning and subdivision ordinances, as
appropriate, shall apply herein.
Abandonment. As defined by the railroad commission and includes the plugging of the well and restoration of
the drill site as required by this article.
Administrator. The town manager or the town manager's designated representative assigned to administer this
article.
Ambient noise level. The all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite
of sounds from all sources at the location, constituting the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a
given location.
Applicant. A person requesting a permit or certificate for the drilling, operation, and production of a well, or the
installation or operation of a pipeline, or any other associated activities, as the case may be, is issued under this
article, including but not limited to the applicant's heirs, legal representatives, successors or assigns.
Base flood. The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Blind/shear ram. An integral part of a blowout preventer, which serves as the closing element to an open hole.
Its ends do not fit around the drill pipe but seal against each other and shut off the space below completely.
Blowout preventer. A mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic, or other device or combination of such devices secured
to the top of the well casing, including valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected therewith, which can
be closed around the drill pipe or other tubular goods which completely close the top of the casing and are
designed to prevent blow outs.
Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy, which includes, but
not limited to all related site work and placement of construction materials on the site.
Christmas tree. The control valves, pressure gauges, and chokes assembled at the top of a well to control the
flow of oil and gas after the well has been drilled and completed. It is used when reservoir pressure is sufficient
to cause reservoir fluids to flow to the surface.
Closed loop mud system. An enclosed suite of solids control equipment used for mud circulation and intended to
minimize drilling fluid dilution to provide for handling of the drilling wastes so that reserve pits are not used.
Completion of drilling, redrilling and reworking. The date the work is completed for drilling, redrilling, or
reworking and the crew is released by completing its work or contracted by its employer.
Compression facility. Those facilities that compress natural gas after production-related activities occur.
Conditional use permit or drill site conditional use permit. A permit recommended by the planning and zoning
commission and authorized by the town council for the use of land or structures as a drill site and operation site,
issued in accordance with this article and the provisions of the conditional use permit zoning district.
Construction. Causing or carrying out any building, bulk head, filling, clearing, excavation or substantial
improvement to land or to the size of any structure.
Daytime. The period from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Dedication. A transfer of an interest in real property to the town for purposes of complying with regulatory
requirements, including but not limited to a permanent easement or fee simple title for a specific purpose.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 566/665
Derrick. Any portable framework, tower, mast and/or structure that is required or used in connection with
drilling or reworking a well for the production of oil and/or gas.
Drill site. The entire area or acreage used during the drilling, redrilling, or reworking of one or more permitted
wells; including storage, trailers, and parking; prior to the reduction and conversion of the area to an operation
site.
Drilling. Digging or boring a new well for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing oil and/or gas
or other hydrocarbons, or for the purpose of injecting gas, water or any other fluid or substance into the earth.
Drilling equipment. The derrick, draw works, power plant, rotary table, pumps, together with all parts of an
apparatus to such structure, and every piece of apparatus, machinery or equipment used in connection with
drilling and operations.
Environmentally sensitive area. An area under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers where
scientific, ecological, cultural, or aesthetic features have been identified by the Corps of Engineers.
Established pipeline corridor. Either:
(1) An area within a public right-of-way in which town-owned and/or franchised utilities are
already located or within which franchised utilities are to be located; or
(2) A utility easement created to contain either:
(A) A utility other than a pipeline; or
(B) A pipeline which preexisted the pipeline under consideration, provided the location of
such pipeline has been approved as part of a conditional use permit or a variance has been
granted under this article; or
(3) An easement for a pipeline which was in existence prior to the effective date of this article.
Excavation. Any movement or alteration of the surface of the ground by machinery in conjunction with or
anticipation of drilling activities or construction of a pipeline, including but not limited to scraping or grading a
site.
Exploration. Geologic or geophysical activities, including but not limited to surveying and seismic exploration,
related to the search for oil and gas or other sub-surface hydrocarbons.
Filling. Any addition of rock, dirt, soil, or other earthen material in conjunction with or anticipation of drilling
activities or construction of a pipeline, including but not limited to disposal of excavated materials.
Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas in a base flood from overflow of inland waters or from the unusual and rapid
accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, as designated by the town, the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, or other regulatory authority.
Frac, fracture, or fracturing. The process of fracture stimulation of a rock formation, including but not limited
to the process of pumping sand laden fluids down a well, or any other means used, to stimulate a rock formation.
Franchise. An agreement between a utility provider and the town authorizing such utility to utilize public rightsof-
way for the location of such utility's service lines for the purpose of providing utility services to the public
located within the town.
Franchised utility. A person authorized to provide utility services to the town pursuant to a franchise agreement
with the town; provided, however, that such definition shall not extend to any pipelines or other utility lines
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 567/665
which collect or transport gas, hazardous liquids, or chemicals from wells located within the town into a larger
pipeline system, regardless of whether such pipelines are owned by a person which holds a franchise within the
town for other purposes.
Freshwater intermittent stream. A body of water that flows only at certain times of the year in a natural or
manmade channel. It can be identified by a “broken blue line” on the United States Geological Survey maps.
Freshwater perennial stream. A body of water flowing in a natural or manmade channel yearround, except
during periods of drought. It can be identified by a “continuous blue line” on the United States Geological
Survey maps.
Freshwater pond or lake. An inland body of standing water typically artificially created.
Gas. Any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and
which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions and/or the gaseous
components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas, and/or any material defined or
referred to as “gas” in the rules, regulations or forms of the railroad commission.
Green completion. Using technology to recover gas that may otherwise be vented or flared during the
completion phase of a natural gas well; using equipment designed to handle high pressure, high rate flowback
fluids so as to safely handle and to sell the natural gas produced during flowback period; using flowback
equipment to separate sand, water and gas during initial flowback; having a sales line in place prior to
completion of the fracturing process; using the recommended technologies and practices outlined in the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency Natural Gas STAR Program and also including, but not limited to, vapor
recovery systems, no-bleed pneumatic valves, flaring and venting bans, and electric compressors.
Habitable structures. Structures suitable for human habitation or occupation, including but not limited to single
or multifamily residences, hotels, condominium buildings, public buildings, buildings for commercial or
industrial purposes and enclosed spaces in which individuals congregate for education, worship, amusement, or
similar purposes, or in which occupants are engaged at labor, which is equipped with means of egress, light and
ventilation facilities. Each building of a condominium regime is considered a separate habitable structure, but if
a building is divided into apartments, then the entire building, not the individual apartments, is considered a
single habitable structure. A habitable structure shall not include accessory buildings, garages and sheds. Any
structure for which a certificate of occupancy is required shall be deemed to be a habitable structure.
Hazardous liquid. Any liquid identified as hazardous by any federal or state law or regulation, including but not
limited to those liquids defined by the railroad commission at 16 Texas Administrative Code, section 8.5,
definitions, as amended, specifically including but not limited to, petroleum or any petroleum product, and any
substance or material which is in a liquid state when transported by pipeline facilities and which has been
determined by the U.S. Secretary of Transportation to pose an unreasonable risk to life or property when
transported by pipeline facilities. The term shall be enlarged to include liquefied natural gas and anhydrous
ammonia should such materials at any time be introduced into any pipeline subject to this article. It shall also
include carbon dioxide, defined at 49 CFR 195.2 as a fluid consisting of more than 90 percent carbon dioxide
molecules compressed to a supercritical state.
Hazardous materials management plan. The hazardous materials management plan and hazardous materials
inventory statements required by the fire code.
Idled pipeline. A pipeline that has been inactive for at least two years, regardless of whether there may be
specific plans to reactivate the pipeline.
Inactive pipeline. A pipeline that has temporarily been taken out of service for a period of at least six months for
hazardous materials or hazardous liquids, or for a period of at least one year for natural gas, with the expectation
that the pipeline may be reactivated within two years, even though there may be no specific plans to reactivate
the pipeline.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 568/665
Inspector. The oil and gas inspector designated by the administrator.
Leak detection and repair (LDAR) program best practices pamphlet. An environmental protection agency
brochure that outlines a model for a successful LDAR program.
Lightning arrester. A device incorporated into an electrical system to prevent damage by heavy surges of highvoltage
electricity, such as a stroke of lightning or voltage surges resulting from mishaps in operations.
Line marker. A marker identifying the location of a buried pipeline, as further defined in, and located as required
under 49 CFR 192.707.
New pipelines. Pipelines constructed after the effective date of this article, provided that the following shall not
be included:
(1) The replacement or repair of any existing pipeline;
(2) The realignment of a portion of an existing pipeline to a position that is not greater than 50 feet
from its original position; or
(3) Surface appurtenances added to existing pipelines.
New well. A new well bore or new hole established at the ground surface and shall not include the reworking of
an existing well that has not been abandoned unless the reworking involves drilling to a deeper total depth.
Nighttime. The period commencing at 7:00 p.m. and ending at 7:00 a.m.
Operation site. The area used for development and production of oil and gas and all related operational activities
after drilling activities are complete.
Operations. Activities leading to and supporting the production of oil, gas and/or other hydrocarbons.
Operator. The person listed on the railroad commission form W-1 or form P-4 for a well as the person that is,
has applied for, or will be, actually in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping, or
controlling any well including, without limitation, a unit operator. If the operator, as defined herein, for any well
is not the lessee of any premises affected by the provisions of this article, then such lessee shall also be deemed
to be an operator. In the event there is no oil and gas lease relating to any premises affected by this article, the
owner of the fee mineral estate in the premises shall also be deemed an operator.
Pad site. The area around a well or a proposed well that serves or is proposed to serve as a foundation for the
drilling rig.
Permittee. Any person authorized to act under a permit or a certificate issued by the town.
Person. An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, consortium, joint venture, commercial entity,
other noncorporeal legal entity, the U.S. Government, a state, a municipality (excluding the Town of Fairview),
commission, political subdivision or any international or interstate body or any other governmental entity.
Pipeline. All parts of those physical facilities through which gas, hazardous liquids, or chemicals move in
transportation, including but not limited to pipe, valves, and other appurtenance attached to pipe, whether or not
laid in public or private easement or public or private right-of-way within the town, including but not limited to
gathering lines, production lines, and transmission lines.
Pipeline operator. Any person owning, operating, or responsible for operating a pipeline.
Pipeline or well emergency. A pipeline or well incident in which any of the following has occurred or is
occurring:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 569/665
(1) Fire or explosion not intentionally initiated by the operator as part of its normal and customary
operations (in accordance with accepted safety practices).
(2) Release of a gas, hazardous liquid, or chemical that could adversely impact the environment or
health of individuals, livestock, domestic animals, and/or wildlife within the town.
(3) Death of any person or individual directly attributable to the operations of the pipeline or well.
(4) Bodily harm to any person that results in any of the following: loss of consciousness, the need
to assist a person from the scene of the incident, or the necessity of medical treatment in excess of
first aid.
(5) Damage to private or public property not owned by the well operator or the pipeline operator,
as the case may be, in excess of $5,000.00 in combined values, as determined by the administrator.
(6) The rerouting of traffic or the evacuation of buildings.
Pipeline permit. A permit applied for and issued or denied pursuant to this article authorizing the movement of
gas, oil, water, or other products through a pipeline.
Practicable. That which reasonably may be accomplished, considering the effectiveness, scientific feasibility,
and commercial availability of current technology and/or techniques, and cost, as determined by the
administrator.
Private residential areas. Any area which is within the territorial limits of the town subject to a temporary or
permanent residential or multifamily zoning classification or any area which is designated as residential or
multifamily in the town's future land use plan, or both.
Protected use area. The real property used for a residence, church, public park, public library, hospital, school,
or other public facility.
Railroad commission. The railroad commission of the state.
Regulated pipelines. Those pipelines within the town that under federal and state rules and regulations are not
exempt from town regulations regarding construction standards, safety standards, or reporting requirements.
Residence. A building used or intended to be used as a place of general abode or dwelling place.
Road repair agreement. A written agreement obligating the operator to repair damage, excluding ordinary wear
and tear, if any, to public streets and related appurtenances, including but not limited to bridges, caused by the
operator or its employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors, or representatives in the performance of drilling or
production of any wells authorized by the town.
Street. The entire width between the boundary lines of the street right-of-way that is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
Street right-of-way. Land dedicated to the town or to public use by plat or by any dedication deed or other
instrument of conveyance, whether held as an easement, in fee simple, or otherwise, as well as land that qualifies
as a prescriptive easement, or prescriptive right-of-way, for the construction, use or maintenance of a street or
roadway, and for other public uses typically associated with streets and roadways, including but not limited to
sidewalks and/or adjacent areas included in such dedication or prescriptive use.
Structure. Without limitation, any building, or combination of related components constructed in an ordered
scheme that constitutes a work or improvement constructed on or affixed to land, including but not limited to
habitable structures, partially enclosed structures, and enclosed tanks.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 570/665
(Ordinance 2011-12-6D, sec. 2.03, adopted 12/6/11)
Supermajority. A requirement for an item to gain a specified level or type of support which exceeds a simple
majority of fifty percent. A supermajority shall be established by the town council with five affirmative votes of
approval. (Ordinance 2012-1-3A, sec. 2.01, adopted 1/3/12)
Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA). A system that collects data from various sensors on the drill
site equipment or in close proximity to the drill site and sends this data to a central computer, which then
manages and controls the equipment. The system usually includes signal hardware (input and output),
controllers, networks, user interface (HMI), communications equipment, and software. A key process of
SCADA is the ability to monitor an entire system in real time. The system is facilitated by data acquisitions
including, but not limited to, meter reading and sensor status monitoring, which are communicated at regular
intervals depending on the system.
Tank battery. Point of collection (tanks) and disbursement (tank, meter, lease automated custody transfer unit) of
oil or gas from producing well(s).
Technical advisor. A person(s) familiar with and educated in the oil and gas industry or the law as it relates to oil
and gas matters who may be retained from time to time by the town.
Town. The Town of Fairview, Texas.
Town council. The governing body of the Town of Fairview, Texas.
Town regulations. Any and all town ordinances and other requirements or restrictions duly adopted by the town,
whether or not codified in the Code of Ordinances, Town of Fairview, Texas.
Unregulated pipeline. Those pipelines within the town that under federal and state rules and regulations are
exempt from town regulations regarding construction standards, safety standards or reporting requirements.
Well. A hole or bore to any horizon, formation, or strata for the purpose of producing gas, oil, or other
hydrocarbons.
Well permit. A permit, applied for and issued or denied pursuant to this article, authorizing the drilling,
production, and operation of a well at a drill site.
Workover operations. Work performed in a well after its completion in an effort to secure production where there
has been none, restore production that has ceased or increase production.
Sec. 14.04.003 Applicability
(a) Generally. This article governs all oil and gas production and transportation activities within the town's
corporate limits to the extent regulated by this article. Any oil and gas production or transportation activities that
are to be undertaken within the town's corporate limits will be subjected to the permitting process that is outlined
in this article. Failure to acquire the required permits prior to engaging in these activities is unlawful and will
result in penalty, as specified in this article.
(b) Drill sites and operation sites. All provisions of this article that apply to drill sites also apply to operation
sites and vice versa unless such provisions clearly indicate otherwise.
Sec. 14.04.004 Variance requests
(a) Amendments made by ordinance. The town council may by ordinance amend, supplement, or change the
regulations, standards, or requirements of this article. Any such proposed change shall be first submitted to the
planning and zoning commission for public hearing and its recommendation and report.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 571/665
(b) Requests for amendment or variance. Any person, corporation, or group of persons having a proprietary
interest in any property, may petition the town council for a variance from the provisions of this article by
following the procedures set forth in this section. The planning and zoning commission may, on its own motion,
institute proposals for variances and amendments. All petitions for a variance shall bear the signature of the
owners of the oil and gas production entity that is the subject of the request.
(c) Variance procedures. Variances may be sought after issuance of a conditional use permit for oil and gas
well drilling and production or may be sought concurrently with an application for a conditional use permit. A
variance application that accompanies an application for a conditional use permit shall be considered in
conjunction with and granted as part of the conditional use permit application by the town council following a
recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. Each variance request will be listed as a separate item
on both the planning and zoning commission and town council agendas. The planning and zoning commission
and town council may take separate action on each variance request or may consider all variances collectively.
Any application for a variance shall initially be submitted to the director of planning. The application must
include the following, where applicable; provided, however, that the provision of the information below does not
automatically result in the approval of the variance request:
(1) A description of the requested variance and an explanation of why it should be granted.
(2) A description of alternatives considered and why each is not the preferred alternative.
(3) A description of the economic consequences if the variance is not granted.
(4) A description of any other planned uses for the land for which the variance is sought.
(5) A description of how the level of health, safety, and welfare of the public will be maintained if
the variance is granted.
(6) A description of any special circumstances or conditions applying to the land for which the
variance is sought, including how the circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land and do
not apply generally to lands in the same district or neighborhood.
(7) A description of how said circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the
provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land.
(8) A site plan of the site visually depicting the requested variance if the request for the variance
involves the location or orientation of persons or property.
(9) A notarized consent for the variance signed by all owners of both the affected surface and
mineral interests.
(d) Circumstances justifying variance. Any modification of the standards established by this article shall not
be granted to relieve a self-created or personal hardship, nor for financial reasons only, nor shall such
modification be granted to permit any person a privilege in developing a parcel of land not permitted by this
article to other parcels of land in the same district. Subject to said limitations on the granting of a variance,
where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in
unnecessary hardship and where, in the town council's judgment, the public convenience and welfare will be
substantially served and the appropriate use of the neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently
injured, the town council may, in specific cases, after public notice and public hearing, and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, authorize the types of variances specifically described in other sections of this article.
Before granting a variance, the town council must find that:
(1) There are special circumstances or conditions applying to the land for which the variance is
sought, which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land and do not apply generally to
lands in the same district or neighborhood, and that said circumstances or conditions are such that the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 572/665
strict application of the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of
the land.
(2) The granting of such variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the
property or improvements in such zone or neighborhood in which the land is located.
(3) The granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the land and that the
variance as granted by the town council is the minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose.
(4) The literal enforcement and strict application of the provisions of this article will result in an
unnecessary hardship inconsistent with the general provisions and intent of this article and that in
granting such variance the spirit of this article will be preserved and substantial justice done.
(e) Conditions of variance. In granting any variance under the provisions of this article, the town council may
designate such conditions in connection therewith which, in its opinion, will secure substantially the purpose and
intent of this article.
(Ordinance 2011-12-6D, sec. 2.03, adopted 12/6/11)
(f) Supermajority requirements. In granting any amendment or variance under the provisions of this article,
the town council shall be required to achieve a supermajority of affirmative votes in support of the proposed
amendment or variance. (Ordinance 2012-1-3A, sec. 2.02, adopted 1/3/12)
Sec. 14.04.005 Appeals
(a) An operator, pipeline operator, or other person adversely affected by a decision of the director of planning
or the administrator under this article may appeal such decision by filing written notice of such appeal to both
the director of planning and/or the administrator within ten business days of notice of such adverse decision. The
notice of appeal must state the appellant's desire to appeal, the ruling from which the appellant desires to appeal
and the relief or ruling sought. Any such appeal shall be to the town council. The town council, by the
affirmative vote of a majority of the members then present, may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the
director or administrator. The decision of the town council concerning an appeal under this article shall be final.
The decision being appealed shall be suspended pending such appeal, unless the administrator determines that
such suspension endangers the public health and safety, in which case, the filing of a notice of appeal shall not
act to suspend the decision of the administrator.
(b) Any appeal shall be governed by the following rules and procedures:
(1) Such appeal shall be set as an item on the regular town council agenda.
(2) The appellant shall bear the burden of persuasion that the ruling being appealed is in error and
shall bear the burden of proof on such matter.
(3) No formal testimony or swearing of witnesses shall be required, and the town council may
consider facts or evidence as the town council determines is appropriate. The director or
administrator shall present the facts and evidence relied upon by the director or administrator and the
reasons for the ruling; the appellant shall then have an opportunity to present the facts and evidence
relied upon by the appellant; the town council shall then consider any facts or evidence from the
public or other interested persons. The town council may ask questions of the director, administrator,
appellant and any other interested persons as the town council determines is appropriate. The town
council may limit the time for any presentation in its sole discretion.
(4) Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the town council shall then render its decision. Any appeal
shall be determined by majority vote of the members of the town council then present.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 573/665
(5) Written documents or evidence which any party wishes to submit must be filed with the
director and administrator and submitted to the town council no less than seven business days prior to
the appeal hearing.
(c) No appeal for the same or related issue on the same piece of property shall be allowed from a previous
ruling on any appeal absent a material change of circumstances. If the appellant asserts such a change of
circumstances and seeks rehearing of an appeal, such appeal need not be considered unless the applicant presents
in writing, evidence establishing such change of circumstances. Any such subsequent appeal shall be considered
entirely on its merits and the peculiar and specific conditions related to the property on which the appeal is
brought.
Sec. 14.04.006 Takings determination
(a) Any aggrieved person who believes that an action taken pursuant to this article by the town council or any
officer or employee of the town would legally constitute a taking of property without just compensation under
the Texas or United States Constitution, must file an application with the town council to request a takings
determination.
(b) The applicant seeking a takings determination from the town council shall file its application with the
office of the town secretary. The town secretary shall then forward the takings determination application to the
town council for consideration. An application fee in the amount set forth in the town's fee schedule shall
accompany each filing.
(c) The application shall state the reasons the applicant believes would support a finding that the town's
application of the provisions of this article to the applicant's property would legally constitute a taking under the
Texas or United States Constitution and shall include evidence substantiating the purported diminution in value
of the applicant's property.
(d) At the takings determination hearing conducted by the town council, the applicant must present detailed
economic information and other evidence necessary to establish that the town's application of the provisions of
this article to the applicant's property would legally constitute a taking of the property without just
compensation. The applicant has the burden of proof in establishing that the town's application of the provisions
of this article to the applicant's property legally constitutes a taking of property without just compensation under
the Texas or United States Constitution.
(e) The town council may administer oaths, compel the attendance of witnesses and require the disclosure of
financial and other information from the applicant that the town council determines is necessary to make a
determination regarding whether the town's application of the provisions of this article to the applicant's property
legally constitutes a taking of property without just compensation under the Texas or United States Constitution.
(f) If the council finds in favor of the applicant it may:
(1) Grant the relief requested;
(2) Direct the town manager to rescind action taken by town staff that formed the basis of the
takings determination application; or
(3) Direct the town manager to reconsider action taken by town staff that formed the basis of the
takings determination application.
If the council denies the application, or after a favorable determination the town council fails to take action as
specified above, the applicant may appeal the decision or inaction of the town council to the county or district
court of the county in which the affected real property is located within 30 days of the date that the council
issues its final decision.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 574/665
(g) In order to find in favor of the applicant, pursuant to subsection (f) of this section, the affirmative vote of a
majority of the members of the town council then present is required; provided, however, if the action
complained of relates to a drill site for which a three-fourths vote of all members of the town council was
required pursuant to the provisions of section 14.02.002(e) of this code, the affirmative vote of three-fourths of
all members of the town council, whether present or not, is required in order to find in favor of the applicant.
(h) An application filed pursuant to this section may only seek a takings determination regarding the
application of this article by the town council or any officer or employee of the town, occurring on or after the
date that this article becomes effective.
Secs. 14.04.007–14.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Oil and Gas Well Drilling and Production
Sec. 14.04.031 Permit requirements
(a) Drill site conditional use permit. No person shall establish a drill site nor engage in oil and gas drilling or
production activities without first obtaining a conditional use permit in accordance with this article and the
requirements set forth in this Code of Ordinances, article 14.02, division 11: Conditional Use Permit District
(CU). A separate conditional use permit shall be required for each drill site. Once issued, the conditional use
permit shall continue to apply to the site after any part of it has been reduced and converted to an operation site.
(b) Well permit.
(1) No person shall engage in oil and gas production activities without first obtaining a well
permit. Applications for a well permit shall not be considered by the town without:
(A) An approved CUP for the location of the drill site where the well is proposed to be
located; and
(B) An approved site plan.
(2) Well permit applications shall not be reviewed by the town staff prior to the submission of the
required fees associated with these activities. A separate well permit and well permit fee is required
for each well.
(c) Pipeline permit. No person shall engage in oil and gas pipeline activities without first obtaining a pipeline
permit. Applications for a pipeline permit shall not be considered by the town without an approved site plan.
Pipeline permits shall not be reviewed by the town staff prior to the submission of the required fees associated
with pipeline activities. Permit application requirements for pipelines are set forth in division 3 of this article.
(d) Seismic survey permit. No person shall engage in seismic surveying activities without first obtaining a
seismic survey permit. A separate seismic survey permit application and fee shall be submitted to the town for
each seismic survey that the person wishes to execute. The permit application requirements are set forth in
section 14.04.041 of this article.
Sec. 14.04.032 Permit application requirements
(a) In order to engage in any oil or gas production activities within the town's corporate limits, potential
operators must submit the appropriate permit application(s) to the planning director for each drill site, well,
pipeline and/or seismic survey that the operator is proposing. A well permit may not be granted unless the well
is to be located on a drill site previously approved by the town under this article, or is granted in conjunction
with a drill site conditional use permit for the drill site proposed for the well. A new well permit is required to
rework a well for the purposes of redrilling, deepening, or converting the well to a depth not indicated on the
original well permit. An existing well permit shall not give an operator the authority to reenter an abandoned
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 575/665
well. To reenter, the operator must submit a new well permit application in accordance with the requirements of
this article.
(b) Each well permit application shall contain and/or, as applicable, be accompanied by the following:
(1) The date of the application.
(2) An accurate legal description by metes and bounds - or if recorded by plat, then by subdivision,
block and lot numbers - of:
(A) The property to be used for the drill site where the well is proposed to be located; and
(B) The applicable parcel, the production unit and name of the geologic formation as
designated by the railroad commission.
(3) A site plan of the proposed drill site that meets the requirements outlined in section 14.04.033,
and that delineates the precise location of the proposed well and pad site on the drill site.
(4) The following information regarding the proposed well(s):
(A) The exact and correct acreage and number of wells in the current application.
(B) Whether the application is for the first well to be drilled on the drill site.
(C) If gas produces in paying quantities, the total number of wells planned for the drill site,
and their proposed locations, including pad site(s) and bore path(s).
(D) The total number and names of any currently permitted wells on the drill site.
(E) The total number and names of any currently operating wells on the drill site.
(F) The total number and names of any abandoned wells on the drill site.
(5) A transportation plan showing proposed transportation routes and roads, both public and
private, to be used for transporting equipment, chemicals, or waste products used or produced by the
operations.
(6) Evidence of permission from the surface owners for the operator to access the drill site.
(7) Agreement signed by the applicant, agreeing that as a condition for the issuance of a permit
under this article, the roads identified in item (b)(5) of this section are the only roads that the operator
and its employees, agents, and subcontractors may use unless an amended route plan is filed with and
approved by the town or there are circumstances requiring evacuation using an alternate route due to
an imminent threat of bodily injury or death.
(8) A list that includes the names and addresses of all trucking contractors or employees of the
operator who will travel to and from the drill site and operation site and evidence of each driver's
required registrations, licenses, and insurance coverage.
(9) Proposed well name.
(10) Surface owner name(s) and address(es) of the lease property.
(11) Mineral lessee's name and address, and if the lessee is a corporation, the state of
incorporation, and if the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 576/665
(12) If the applicant is not the mineral lessee, the applicant's name and address and if the applicant
is a corporation, the state of incorporation, and if the applicant is a partnership, the names and
addresses of the general partners.
(13) Name and physical and mailing address of the individual agent designated by the applicant to
receive notice.
(14) Names, physical addresses, and local telephone numbers of two representatives of the
applicant who are authorized and responsible to ensure compliance with all conditions of the well
permit, this article and other applicable regulations, together with a sworn statement from each
representative that he or she agrees to be responsible for ensuring that the operator's employees,
contractors, and subcontractors comply with all conditions of the well permit, this article, and other
applicable laws and regulations.
(15) Location and description of all improvements and structures within one thousand (1,000) feet
of the drill site boundary.
(16) Location of any freshwater wells that are within one thousand feet (1000') of the drill site
boundary.
(17) Owner name and address of each parcel of property within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
boundaries of the proposed drill site.
(18) A circulation plan showing existing and proposed internal drives and circulation.
(19) A sign plan which meets all requirements of the railroad commission and town regulations
relating to signs.
(20) A noise management plan.
(21) A continuous air quality monitoring plan.
(22) A continuous water quality monitoring plan.
(23) A screening and fencing plan detailing compliance with all screening and site security
requirements required by town ordinance. Plan should include specifications for all fencing, walls,
and gates at the drill site and it should include a proposed schedule detailing the timing of installation
for all fencing, walls, and gates.
(24) A landscape plan prepared by a state-licensed landscape architect detailing the appropriate
type of landscaping and irrigation for the site; measures to be taken to adequately irrigate all
landscaping, including indicating the water source for irrigation, and the proposed efforts to replace
dead or dying screening vegetation. The plan shall include a proposed schedule detailing the timing
of installation for all landscaping and irrigation requirements.
(25) A fully executed third-party landscape maintenance agreement detailing the frequency and
scope of the landscaping services to be provided.
(26) A tree preservation plan that meets the requirements of town regulations relating to tree
preservation.
(27) Copies of all reports required by the commission and TCEQ.
(28) A signed road repair agreement in a form approved by the town.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 577/665
(29) A site security plan that includes the location or proposed location of all security cameras and
the security measures taken at all points of entry.
(30) If applicable, the names and addresses of owners within the setback distance prescribed by
this article for a well bore, tanks, or other equipment and evidence of their consent to the proposed
location of the same.
(31) A dust mitigation plan detailing measures to be implemented to mitigate and suppress dust
generated at the drill site and the private vehicle access route, including a mud shaker for vehicles
exiting the site, or, if a dust mitigation plan has already been approved by the town as part of a
previous application for the drill site, a copy of the approved plan.
(32) A description of the water source to be used during drilling, the estimated quantity of water to
be used, and evidence of permits or approvals for such water source and the method of transporting.
(33) All material safety data sheets (MSDS's) detailing the hazardous and nonhazardous
liquids/materials that will be located, stored, transported, and/or used at the drill site and operation
site shall be provided to the fire inspector.
(34) A description of all chemicals to be used in drilling and operation, including a description of
the substances contained in the fracturing fluid to be utilized.
(35) A waste management plan that addresses management of human, solid, and drilling
production waste, including the method to be used for removal of produced water.
(36) A description of all fuel and power sources, including but not limited to steam generation, to
be used at the proposed drill site and operation site, including but not limited to all public utilities
needed during drilling and operation.
(37) A copy of any previously approved permit issued by the town that relates to the drill site or
operation site together with any attachments, site plans, and survey plats that are applicable to the
drill site or operation site.
(38) A copy of the stormwater pollution prevention plan as required by the environmental
protection agency. Copies of the notice of intent shall be submitted to the town engineer and planning
director ten business days prior to the commencement of any on-site activity.
(39) A copy of the erosion control plan required by the town.
(40) A copy of the determination by the state commission on environmental quality of the depth of
useable quality groundwater.
(41) Evidence of satisfaction of insurance and financial security requirements of this article.
(42) All required application, well permit fees, and any other required fees.
(43) The proposed gathering pipeline route from the well to the transmission pipeline, to include:
(A) Evidence of easements to cross private property along the route; and
(B) An approved pipeline license from the town to utilize any public right-of-way shown on
the route.
(44) The name, address and phone number of the well owner(s) and of the well operator(s) and the
name and address of the pipeline owner(s) and of the pipeline operator(s) of any pipeline that
connects to the well.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 578/665
(45) An emergency response plan.
(46) A detailed evacuation plan addressing the evacuation strategy for a public or private school,
hospital, assisted living and/or nursing care facility, or daycare facility if any such facility will be
located within one-half (1/2) mile (2,640') of the boundary of the proposed drill site and operation
site; and a detailed list of all persons to be notified in the event of an evacuation, including, without
limitation, all persons residing within one-half (1/2) mile (2,640') of the boundary of the proposed
drill site and operation site. The plan should address the methods that the operator will employ to
notify the town in a timely manner that an event requiring evacuation has occurred, as well as the
methods that will be employed to maintain a current, up-to-date, notification list.
(47) A hazardous materials management plan meeting the requirements of the fire code, or, if a
plan has already been approved for the drill site and operation site, a copy of the applicable
hazardous materials management plan if previously approved.
(48) A lighting plan, depicting all nighttime lighting to be used or occurring on the drill site and
operation site and the measures to be taken to reduce glare on the properties adjacent to the site. The
plan should include a photometric plan, indicating the type and color of light(s) to be used and
demonstrate compliance with all Federal Aviation Administration requirements and town regulations
relating to dark skies requirements.
(49) A leak detection and compliance plan to ensure that all site activities and equipment are in
compliance with applicable rules and regulations. The plan shall address the best management
practices outlined by the environmental protection agency's (EPA) leak detection and repair (LDAR)
program - best practice pamphlet. This includes addressing regulatory requirements and facilityspecific
procedures, data to be collected, personnel and description of their roles, training; audits;
contractor accountability; internal leak definition; frequency of monitoring; repairing of leaking
components; electronic monitoring and storage of LDAR data; quality assurance and control that
EPA method 21 procedures are being followed; verification that LDAR personnel are monitoring the
correct components in the proper manner; calibration/calibration drift assessment; records
maintenance; and the evaluation of potential impact of leaks to air, soil, surface water, and
groundwater. Quarterly reporting of the monitoring results to the town engineer and planning director
is required with all laboratory data sheets, field logs, data summaries, and actions taken in response to
problems identified during the prior quarter.
(50) A green completion plan that addresses equipment, techniques, practices, and programs that
will be implemented to reduce emissions.
(51) A gas dispersion model and a risk assessment study that includes a blowout contingency
assessment and a blast study conducted by an unaffiliated third party with a licensed engineer on
staff.
(52) A cement casing program. The program must demonstrate adherence to all railroad
commission regulations and shall include a proposed schedule of work, a summary of other best
management practices that the operator will employ, coordinate the on-site inspection of casing
installation by the inspector, and authorize access to all relevant operator-maintained reports.
(53) A traffic impact analysis study performed by a professionally licensed traffic engineer, which
includes but is not limited to, proposed truck routes, types and weights of trucks and vehicles
accessing the drill site, hours of the day that truck and vehicle traffic will be entering and leaving the
site, days of the week that truck and vehicle traffic will be entering and leaving the site, turning
movements associated with truck and vehicle traffic, proposed access points and proposed trafficcontrol
devices.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 579/665
(54) Colored renderings of the site as viewed from all adjacent rights-of-way showing site
elevations, screening walls, and other landscaping and screening at the site.
(55) A line of site analysis indicating that permanent equipment on the site such as tanks,
dehydrators, separators, vapor recovery systems, and Christmas trees will be screened and not visible
from adjacent rights-of-way or residential.
(56) A list of green compounds that will be employed in the fracturing/drilling process.
(57) A supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) plan. The plan shall outline how data
from the drill site will be continuously collected in a real-time manner and how this data is
monitored. Data shall be collected at every stage of the oil or gas drilling and production process. The
plan shall address how the SCADA system will control factors such as leakage, fire, emergency shutdown,
oil or gas flow rate, and accumulated flow, line pressure, detection and control, well-head
pressure, pump status, tank level, and other critical factors defined by the town's consultant. In
addition, the plan should define the equipment, sensors, hardware, communication interfaces (radio,
wire, fiber optic and microwave), and electro-mechanical devices that will be employed and how
these devices will function during an emergency situation.
(58) A soil sampling plan that addresses the parameters for testing requirements.
(59) A statement, under oath, signed by the applicant, or the applicant's agent acknowledging that
the information submitted with the application is true and correct.
(60) A true and correct copy of any lease associated with the proposed operating site.
Sec. 14.04.033 Site plan requirements
For each permit required under this article, a site plan must be submitted to the town planning department on a
24" x 36" map sheet and must contain the following elements:
(1) Title block. A title block containing proposed name of the gas well(s), acres in the lease,
survey, and jurisdiction.
(2) Surveyor name. The name, address, and phone number of the surveyor responsible for the site
plan. The site plan must bear the seal of a Texas Registered Professional Land Surveyor.
(3) Owner/operator information. The names and addresses of the current owner of record, mineral
lessee, mineral owner, and well operator.
(4) Date. The date the site plan was prepared.
(5) Scale and north arrow. The site plan must be prepared at a numerical scale no greater than one
inch (1") equals one hundred feet (100'). The site plan must also include a graphic symbol depicting a
north-seeking arrow indicating approximate true north.
(6) Location map. A location map depicting the location of the drill site, including but not limited
to a precise delineation of the drill site boundaries, in relation to adjacent streets, highways, and
landmarks.
(7) Metes and bounds legal description. A written metes and bounds description of the land
encompassed by the drill site or proposed operation site and the tract of property upon which the
proposed drill site is to be located if the boundary lines of such tract depart to any extent from the
boundary lines of the drill site or proposed drill site.
(8) Boundary lines. Boundary lines shall be precisely delineated in a scaled drawing for:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 580/665
(A) Each existing or proposed pad site;
(B) Each existing or proposed drill site;
(C) The tract of property upon which a drill site is located or proposed to be located if the
boundary lines of such tract of property depart to any extent from the boundary lines of the drill
site or proposed drill site; and
(D) Adjacent tracts of property.
(Note: if the boundary lines of existing or proposed pad site(s), existing or proposed drill site(s)
or the tract of property upon which is located any such existing or proposed site are either
identical or share one or more common boundary lines, then the drawing shall clearly delineate
and describe same with appropriate labeling or explanation).
(9) Lease area. The lease area or proposed lease area designated for drilling activities expressed in
square feet shall be shown on the site plan.
(10) One hundred (100) year floodplain. The location of the one hundred (100) year floodplain
must be clearly depicted and labeled on the site plan.
(11) Location of natural features. The location of vegetation, creeks, and other topographic features
must be clearly depicted and labeled on the site plan.
(12) Adjacent properties. All property lines, streets and easements on lands adjacent to the drill site
and extending one thousand feet (1,000') from the drill site shall be shown with the names of the
owners of such properties as shown on the most current tax assessor's files and, in the case of any
easements, the names of the holder(s)/owner(s) of the dominant estate.
(13) Streets/street rights-of-way. The locations and width of all public and private streets as well as
all street rights-of-way within one thousand feet (1,000') of the drill site shall be depicted on the site
plan. The distance between the edge of street rights-of-way nearest to the drill site and the drill site
boundary must be clearly delineated on the site plan.
(14) Easements. The location and dimension of all existing and future easements proposed by the
applicant shall be shown on the site plan drawing indicating whether such easement is for any
specific purpose.
(15) Permanent structures. The location and general outline of any existing permanent structures,
parking lots, driveways, freshwater wells, drainage facilities, and other significant structures within
one thousand feet (1,000') of the drill site. The distance between these structures and the nearest point
of the drill site boundary must be clearly delineated on the site plan.
(16) Proposed structures. The height, size, bulk and location of all improvements and equipment,
including the location of the proposed well(s) and other facilities, including, but not limited to, tanks,
compressors, separators, storage sheds, and signage. The distance between the nearest exterior
surface of such structures and the point on the property line of any protected use areas nearest such
structures that are within a distance of one thousand feet (1,000') must be clearly delineated on the
site plan.
(17) Fuel and power sources. The proposed location of all fuel and power sources, including but
not limited to steam generation.
(18) Proposed pipelines. The location of all proposed underground pipelines and the point of
connection with an off-site pipeline or a statement that there is no off-site pipeline.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 581/665
(19) Site screening. The location or proposed location of all temporary and permanent screening
fencing and landscaping.
(20) Street names. All street names shall be depicted on the site plan.
(21) Ingress/egress points. All ingress and egress points to the drill site and operation site shall be
clearly depicted on the site plan.
Sec. 14.04.034 Separation standards
Separation standards. The following standards apply to all oil and gas production activities within the town
limits.
(1) Unless otherwise expressly permitted under this article, a drill site may not be located within
one thousand feet (1,000') of:
(A) Any existing protected use area or freshwater well currently in use at the time an
application and/or site plan is submitted to the town for a permit required under this article.
(B) Any undeveloped property with a previously approved, unexpired plat or site plan that
indicates a use that is included in the definition of protected use area under this article.
(C) A freshwater well if such well is indicated for use in a previously approved, unexpired
plat or site plan.
(Ordinance 2011-12-6D, sec. 2.03, adopted 12/6/11)
(D) The one hundred (100) year floodplain, as determined by FEMA and the town's
floodplain administrator. (Ordinance 2012-1-3A, sec. 2.03, adopted 1/3/12)
(2) Except where more stringent separation distances are specified, the minimum separation
distance between a drill site and a habitable structure shall be one thousand feet (1,000').
(3) All potential off-site permanent sources of ignition, such as fuel stations and fuel storage tanks
shall be set back a minimum distance of three hundred feet (300') from the drill site.
(Ordinance 2011-12-6D, sec. 2.03, adopted 12/6/11)
(4) The town council may grant a variance in accordance with section 14.04.004 of this article
reducing the minimum separation distances established in subsections (1) and (2), except that the
minimum separation distance that the town council may grant under a variance shall not be less than
seven hundred and fifty feet (750'). Notwithstanding this provision or any other provision in this
article, the town council may not grant a variance or approve of a reduction in any distance
requirement that would allow a drill site to be located less than one thousand feet (1,000') from a
freshwater well.
(5) With respect to a proposed or existing drill site, the separation distances established in
subsections (1) and (2) may be reduced and any separation distance established by a previously
approved variance under subsection (3) may be further reduced if all owners of protected use areas -
and all owners of undeveloped property designated for development as protected use areas under an
unexpired plat or site plan - consent to the reduction and the town council formerly approves the
reduction after receiving proof of such consent. The applicant desiring such a reduction must provide
proof of such consent to the town in the form of notarized waivers signed by each of the property
owners described above, which must be submitted to the planning department. This subsection does
not allow the reduction of any separation distance established under this article that applies to a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 582/665
freshwater well. This subsection does not allow any separation distance set forth in this article or
previously approved by variance to be reduced to less than five hundred feet (500').
(Ordinance 2012-1-3A, secs. 2.04–2.05, adopted 1/3/12)
(6) A proposed protected use area may be located as close as two hundred fifty feet (250') to a
preexisting drill site or operation site, provided that the protected use area is not served by a
freshwater well that is located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a drill site.
(7) Separation distances shall be measured from the nearest point on the drill site boundary, in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to, as applicable:
(A) The nearest point on the property boundary of any existing protected use area;
(B) The nearest exterior point of any habitable structure;
(C) The nearest exterior point of any freshwater well currently in use;
(D) The nearest point on the property boundary of any undeveloped property designated to be
used as a protected use area in a previously approved, unexpired plat or site plan; or
(E) The nearest exterior point of a freshwater well, whether or not such freshwater well is
currently in operation, provided that the freshwater well is designated to be used in a previously
approved, unexpired plat or site plan.
(8) No operator shall excavate or construct any lines for the conveyance of fuel, water, oil, oil and
gas or petroleum liquids on, under or through the streets, alleys or other properties owned - or held in
trust for the public - by the town without the town's consent, which is not effective unless set forth in
a duly adopted easement or right-of-way agreement.
(9) No person may dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine, break up, or damage any public
street or leave upon any public street any earth, or other material or obstruction without prior written
permission from the town.
(10) No well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled - and no person shall drill a well -
within any street, street right-of-way, or future street right-of-way shown on the master thoroughfare
plan, nor within one hundred feet (100') of any such existing or future street or right-of-way. No
street shall be blocked or encumbered or closed due to any exploration, drilling, or production
activities unless prior consent is obtained from the town.
Sec. 14.04.035 Drill/operation site management standards
(a) Transportation and circulation plan requirements.
(1) The operator shall submit a transportation plan showing proposed transportation routes and
roads, both public and private, to be used for transporting equipment, chemicals, or waste products
used or produced by the gas operation. The operator shall also submit a circulation plan showing
internal drives and circulation.
(2) Vehicles associated with drilling and/or production in excess of three tons shall be restricted to
such streets designated as arterials in the town's transportation plan. The vehicles shall be operated on
state arterials whenever possible. Such vehicles shall be operated only on town arterials when it is not
possible to use a state arterial to fulfill the purpose for which such vehicle is then being operated. No
vehicles shall be parked, stored or operated anywhere within the town's corporate limits where such
operation, parking, or storage is prohibited under state law or town regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 583/665
(3) A statement of intent to enter into a road repair agreement shall be submitted in conjunction
with the application for a permit. The terms of the road repair agreement must be approved by the
town council as a condition of the permit and signed by the operator prior to the issuance of any
permit under this article.
(4) The operator shall construct all facilities located off the pad side and used for parking, loading,
unloading, driveways, and other vehicular access areas of concrete. The operator shall maintain the
surface for such facilities and drive approach in good condition and repair and meet the minimum
requirements set forth in the town's fire code and fire prevention regulations. The pad site is not
required to be constructed of concrete or asphalt.
(5) The operator shall install truck shakers along the private access road to remove mud from
vehicles prior to entering the public right-of-way.
(6) The operator shall immediately notify the town of any substantial accumulations of dirt, dust,
mud, or other debris deposited on town thoroughfares by vehicles involved in the well drilling or
servicing or pipeline installation process. The operator shall be responsible for immediate removal of
accumulations of dirt, dust, mud, or other debris from streets within the town's corporate limits.
(b) Site security plan requirements.
(1) Security gates.
(A) Secured vehicle and personnel entrance gates shall be required and signs identifying the
entrance to the drill site or operations site shall clearly identify each point of entry and exit.
(B) The operator shall keep all gates to the drill site and operation site locked at all times that
the operator or the operator's employees are not within the enclosure. A “knox padlock” or a
“knox box with a key” shall be provided to the town's fire chief to access the drill site to be
used only in case of an emergency.
(2) Perimeter security fencing.
(A) The operator shall install and maintain a temporary chain-link fence with all-weather
screening fabric and secured entrance gate, both at least eight feet in height around the entire
drill site to secure the drilling site and obscure view of the drilling activities. In addition to the
foregoing, the operator shall also be required to comply with the screening requirements set
forth in subsequent sections of this article.
(B) A masonry perimeter wall of a minimum of eight feet in height shall be required to
enclose and visually screen the well and all associated equipment during post-drilling
operations. No permanent equipment shall be visible from the adjacent rights-of-way or from
residential properties. No permanent equipment on the drill site shall be a higher elevation than
the associated screening wall. Only devices such as antennas, lightning arrestors, or other
related devices may extend above the height of the screening wall. Such wall must be
completed within 60 days of completion of drilling or as required by the town council as a
condition of the conditional use permit. The masonry perimeter wall shall have an architectural
metal gate that shall remain locked when the operator or operator's employees are not within the
enclosure. In addition to the foregoing, the operator shall also be required to comply with the
screening requirements set forth in town regulations related to zoning.
(C) An eight-foot high chain link fence with barbed wire or similar device, as approved by
the town council, shall be installed around all equipment on the pad site and interior to the
perimeter screening wall.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 584/665
(3) Alarm system. Within ten days of completion of the perimeter fencing, the operator shall install
a fully operational security system that meets the following requirements:
(A) Remotely monitored access control system. The operator shall install and maintain at all
vehicular gates in the perimeter fencing a permitted, remotely monitored control access system.
The system shell meet the following requirements:
(i) Monitoring. The system shall be monitored by a central monitoring facility capable
of monitoring security related alarm systems and meeting all required state and federal
guidelines. The central monitoring facility shall be staffed and operational at all times.
(ii) Access control. Gate access shall be secured by an access control system with an
unlocking and relocking mechanism that requires a card, numeric code, or other
identification device for gate operation. The system shall record the identity of the
entering party and the date and time of such entry.
(iii) Intrusion detection system. The system shall include a gate closure contact sensor
that will be activated when the gate closure sensor is violated in any manner by
nonidentified access. The system shall be equipped to signal a control panel which
activates an on-site audible signal and registers at the monitoring facility when an access
breach is detected.
(iv) Leak detection system. The operator shall install and maintain an audible alarm
system at each drill site to provide warnings for a substantial drop in pressure, the release
of any gas or oil, or fire. Said alarm system shall be approved by the fire chief or his or
her designee prior to beginning any drilling or production operations.
(v) Open gate detection. The security system shall include an open gate detection alarm
to notify the monitoring facility if the gate closure sensors, once accessed, are not closed
and thereby reactivated within five minutes of being opened.
(vi) Exit sensor. The operator shall equip all gates with a motion sensor, weight sensor
or other device to unarm the gate for vehicles exiting the site.
(B) Personnel exit gate. The operator shall install an exit-only gate for personnel near the
vehicular gate entrance.
(C) Response to alarms. The operator shall obtain an alarm permit for the alarm system from
the police department in accordance with the town's alarm permit requirements. The monitoring
facility shall notify the operator and the police department in case of security breach at the drill
site. The operator shall respond on site with an authorized representative within 45 minutes of
notification of alarm.
(4) Security camera(s). The operator shall at all times after the perimeter fence is in place, have
installed a minimum of one operating security camera inside the perimeter fence and post on the
fencing of the site, signs indicating that any activity on the site may be recorded by video
surveillance. Such sign shall conform to the approved sign plan. The location of the security camera
and picture resolution of the recordings shall be subject to the approval of the police chief. Camera
systems shall be maintained in proper operating condition and do all of the following:
(A) Capture clear video images of all traffic entering and exiting the gate(s).
(B) Capture clear video images of all production equipment located on the site.
(C) Be equipped with motion detection technology.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 585/665
(D) Be equipped with panning technology to pan immediately to any motion detected on the
site.
(E) Show the date and time of all activity on the footage.
(F) Be capable of being viewed at the monitoring facility. The operator shall maintain
continuous video data for a period of at least 720 hours. At the request of the town, the operator
shall produce any recorded views of the fenced area.
(5) Watchperson. The operator must keep a watchman or security personnel at all times on site
during the drilling or reworking of a well when other workmen are not on the premises.
(c) Sign plan requirements.
(1) The operator shall immediately install and continuously display a sign at the gate on the
temporary and permanent site fencing erected pursuant to the requirements of this section. Such sign
shall be constructed of a durable material, maintained in good condition and, unless otherwise
required by the railroad commission, shall have a surface area of not less than two (2) square feet, or
more than four (4) square feet and shall contain the following:
(A) Well name and number.
(B) Name of operator.
(C) Address of property.
(D) The emergency 911 number.
(E) Telephone numbers of two persons responsible for the well who may be contacted 24
hours a day in case of an emergency.
(2) The operator shall post and continually maintain permanent weatherproof signs reading
“DANGER NO SMOKING ALLOWED” immediately upon completion of the drill site fencing at
the entrance of each drill site and in any other location approved or designated by the fire inspector of
the town. Such sign shall conform to the approved sign plan. Each such sign shall include the
emergency notification numbers of the fire department and the operator, well, and lease designations
required by the railroad commission.
(3) A sign shall be placed at the exit to the site that reads “ALL TRUCK TRAFFIC IS REQUIRED
TO FOLLOW THE APPROVED TRANSPORTATION ROUTE. VIOLATORS SUBJECT TO
$2,000.00 FINE. TODOS LOS CAMIONES ESTAN OBLIGADOS A SEGUIR LAS RUTAS DE
TRANSPORTE APROBADAS. LOS INFRACTORES ESTAN SUJETOS A MULTAS DE
$2,000.00.” The sign lettering, size, and background shall meet town specifications. A directional
arrow shall be placed immediately below the above sign and shall indicate the proper direction of
travel for exiting truck traffic. The sign shall be placed in a location that is visible to exiting truck
traffic and shall not be placed within town right-of-way.
(4) No other signs shall be permitted at the site other than those required by this article or other
law.
(d) Landscaping plan requirements. Screening shrubs shall be installed completely around the well site outside
of required screening fences and be sufficient to screen from view the structures sought to be screened.
Screening shrubs shall be planted once all equipment has been set in place and the first well has been drilled and
completed. The landscaping screening shall be indicated on the site plan and shall be subject to the approval of
the planning and zoning commission and town council.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 586/665
(1) The landscaping plan shall include measures to be taken to adequately irrigate all landscaping,
including indicating the water source for irrigation, and the proposed efforts to replace dead or dying
screening vegetation.
(A) All trees on site shall be irrigated by a bubbler system.
Sec. 14.04.036 Operations and equipment performance standards
(a) Gas or oil production activity performance standards.
(1) On-site refinement. No refining process or any process for the extraction of hydrocarbon
products shall be performed at a drill site or operation site, except that a horizontal separator may be
maintained for the separation of liquids from oil and gas. Any such separator may serve more than
one well. All production equipment on an operation site shall be maintained in good working order at
all times.
(2) Blowout prevention. In all cases, the operator shall install and utilize blowout prevention
equipment on all wells being drilled, worked-over, or in which tubing is being changed. Protection
shall be provided to prevent blowout during oil and/or gas operations as required by and in
conformance with the requirements of the railroad commission and the recommendations of the
American Petroleum Institute. The operator must equip all drilling wells with adequate blowout
preventers, flow lines and valves commensurate with the working pressures involved as required by
the railroad commission. A blind/shear ram shall be used as part of the blowout preventer stack. Well
control surface equipment shall be inspected after rig up to ensure function and appropriate
application for the well parameters. Upon completion of the well, the operator shall run a seating
nipple in the tubing string to accommodate the installation of a subsurface safety shutoff valve. The
subsurface safety shutoff valve shall be installed if producing conditions necessitate the use of the
device for the safe operation of the well.
(3) Closed loop mud systems. The operator shall install and use a closed loop mud system instead
of lined reserve pits.
(4) Frac or surface ponds. Fracturing ponds or surface freshwater ponds are not permitted within
the town.
(5) Disposal well. No saltwater or other type of disposal well shall be permitted.
(6) Fracturing operation standards. The operator shall notify the oil and gas inspector in writing no
less than twenty (20) days prior to starting completion procedures such as fracturing and perforating,
and such work shall not commence until the inspector has approved the proposed work in writing. At
least ten (10) business days before operations are commenced, the operator shall post a sign at the
access road entrance of the drill site advising the public of the date the operations will commence; the
sign shall have white letters on a red background. The well must be equipped with a blowout
preventer or Christmas tree in place before this operation is commenced. If a bridge plug is set over a
producing formation prior to additional completion, it must be pressure-tested to a sufficient pressure
to ensure that it is not leaking.
(7) Water usage standards. Hydraulic fracturing shall be prohibited during the summer months of
June, July, and August and during any periods of time in which water conservation measures have
been enacted by the town.
(8) Drilling. No air, gas, or pneumatic drilling shall be permitted.
(9) Drilling fluids. Low toxicity glycols, synthetic hydrocarbons, polymers, and esters as approved
by the town council, shall be substituted for conventional oil-based drilling fluids. Appropriate green
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 587/665
fluids shall be used to the extent possible. The operator shall add nonradioactive tracing or tagging
additives into fracturing fluids and the inspector shall be notified, in writing, of the formula
identifying such additive(s). The written formula submitted by the operator shall be unique for each
permitted drill site.
(10) Drilling fluid storage pit. No drilling fluid mud, storage, or reserve pits shall be located within
the town, except steel containers used in a closed loop mud system.
(11) Drill stem testing. Drill stem tests may be conducted only if the well effluent produced during
the test is processed through an adequate oil and/or gas separator to storage tanks and the effluent
remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling
fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe.
(12) Electric motors. Only electric prime movers or motors shall be permitted for the purpose of
pumping wells. No electric power shall be generated on location. All electrical installations and
equipment shall conform to town regulations and applicable national codes.
(13) Gas emission or burning restrictions. No person shall allow, cause, or permit gases to be
vented into the atmosphere or to be burned by open flame. No open flaring is permitted. A vapor
recovery system is required and the fracturing process shall not be completed until a sales line is in
place to service the well. Green completion methods, as defined by this article, are required.
(14) Muffling exhaust. Exhaust from any internal combustion engine, stationary or mounted on
wheels, used in connection with the drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment shall
not be discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler or mufflers, or an
exhaust muffler box constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and prevent
the escape of obnoxious gases, fumes, or ignited carbon or soot.
(15) Pipe dope. Lead-free, biodegradable pipe dope shall be substituted for American Petroleum
Institute (API) specified pipe dope. Sealant shall be used around pipe threads to ensure and maintain
the integrity of the seal.
(16) Three-pipe system. The three-pipe system to extract oil and gas shall be utilized. Water
storage tanks shall not be permitted on the pad site except for oil and gas separators used during
drilling and freshwater tanks used during fracturing.
(17) Utility lines. The operator shall bury all utility lines to the drill site and operation.
(18) Compression facilities. Compression facilities are prohibited in the town.
(19) Painting. The operator shall paint and maintain all production equipment at all times,
including wellheads, pumping units, tanks, and buildings or structures. Paint shall be of a neutral
color, compatible with surrounding uses. Neutral colors shall include sand, gray and unobtrusive
shades of green, blue, and brown. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town council may require the
use of specific paint colors, on a case-by-case basis, as part of the applicable permit.
(20) Blowouts. In the event of the loss of control of any well, the operator shall immediately take
all reasonable steps to regain control regardless of any other provision of this article and shall notify
the town as soon as practicable. If the town determines that danger to persons and property exists
because of such loss of well control and that the operator is not taking or is unable to take all
reasonable and necessary steps to regain control of such well, the town may then employ any well
control expert or experts or other contractors or suppliers of special services, or may incur any other
expenses for labor and material which they deem necessary to regain control of such well, and all
costs incurred by the town shall be assessed against the operator and the operator shall pay such costs
within ten days of receiving an invoice from the town. In the event that the operator fails to pay such
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 588/665
costs as provided herein, the town may charge such costs to any fund or bond posted by the operator
to secure such costs, and shall also have a valid lien against the interest in the well of all working
interest owners to secure payment of any expenditure made by the town pursuant to such action of
the town in gaining control of said well.
(b) Equipment storage requirements. On-site storage is prohibited on the drill site and operation site. No
equipment shall be stored on the site, unless it is necessary to the everyday operation of the well. Lumber, pipes,
tubing, and casing shall not be left on the site except when drilling or well servicing operations are being
conducted on the site. No refinery, processing, treating, dehydrating, or absorption plant of any kind shall be
constructed, established or maintained on the premises, provided that this shall not be deemed to exclude a
conventional horizontal gas separator.
(c) Storage tank performance requirements.
(1) All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the A.P.I. specifications unless other
specifications are approved by the town. All storage tanks shall be equipped with a secondary
containment system including lining with an impervious material. If the area is open to rainfall,
secondary containment shall be designed to include the volume of a 24-hour rainfall as determined by
a 100-year storm and provisions shall be made to drain accumulations of groundwater and rainfall.
(2) All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the railroad commission and the national
fire protection association, but in all cases, shall be at least three hundred feet (300') from any other
fuel source not related to the operator's operations, one hundred feet (100') from any public right-ofway
and/or adjacent property line, and shall not be placed within the floodplain. Each storage tank
shall be equipped with a level control device that will automatically activate a valve to close the well
in the event of excess liquid accumulation in the tank. The town council may require installation of
barriers and/or other protections for any tank located within one hundred and fifty feet (150') of a
public right-of-way or other public property.
(3) The operator shall equip any tank battery facilities with a remote foam line and lightning
arrestor system, and shall erect a sign clearly indicating the location of the foam line and lightning
arrestor system. All connections for the remote foam line arrestor system shall meet industry
specifications and be approved by the fire inspector.
(d) Work hours for well permits. Drill site operations shall be conducted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m.–
7:00 p.m., six days per week, excluding Sunday. Truck deliveries of equipment and materials associated with
drilling and/or production, well servicing, site preparation, and other related work conducted on the drill site or
operation site shall be limited to between the above same work hour restrictions except in cases of fires,
blowouts, explosions, and any other emergencies or where the delivery of equipment is necessary to prevent the
cessation of drilling or production.
(e) Lighting plan requirements.
(1) No person shall permit any lights located on any drill site or operation site to be directed in
such a manner so that they shine directly on public streets or adjacent or nearby property. Site
lighting shall be used only to promote drill site or operation site safety and shall adhere to the
requirements of town regulations related to lighting.
(2) The location and specification for proposed lighting shall be indicated on the site plan and
included in the well permit application.
(f) Noise management plan requirements.
(1) No well shall be drilled, redrilled, or any equipment operated at any location within the town's
corporate limits in such a manner so as to create any noise which causes the exterior noise level
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 589/665
anywhere within one hundred feet (100') of the boundary of the property line of a protected use area
or within 100 feet of a habitable structure, to exceed the ambient noise level:
(A) By more than ten decibels during fracturing operations.
(B) By more than five decibels during daytime hours or more than three decibels during
nighttime hours for all activities not addressed in subsection (1)(A) above.
(2) An operator shall not drill or redrill a well or operate any equipment in such a manner so as to
create pure tones where one-third octave band sound-pressure level in the land with the tone exceeds
the arithmetic average of the sound-pressure levels of two contiguous one-third octave bands by five
(5) dB for center frequencies of 500 hertz and above, and by eight (8) dB for center frequencies
between 160 and 400 hertz, and by fifteen (15) dB for center frequencies less than or equal to 125
hertz.
(3) An operator shall not drill or redrill a well or operate any equipment in such a manner so as to
create low-frequency outdoor noise levels that exceed the following decibel levels:
(A) 16 hertz octave band: 65 dB.
(B) 32 hertz octave band: 65 dB.
(C) 64 hertz octave band: 65 dB.
(4) The operator shall be responsible for establishing and reporting to the town the predrilling
ambient noise level prior to the issuance of a well permit. Once the drilling is complete, the operator
shall be required to establish a new ambient noise level prior to the installation of any new noise
generating equipment. In lieu of the foregoing, the town may elect to perform the required noise
testing and establish the ambient noise level.
(5) Adjustments to the noise standards as set forth above in subsection (f)(1) of this section may be
permitted in accordance with the following:
Permitted Increase (dBA) Duration of Increase
(minutes)*
5 15
10 5
15 1
20 <1
*Cumulative minutes during any one-hour period.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 590/665
(6) No workover or reworking operations shall be permitted during nighttime hours.
(7) If the proposed well is located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any habitable structure, the
operator must comply with these additional abatement measures:
(A) Exterior noise levels, including pure tone and low frequency data, shall be continuously
monitored to ensure compliance. This data shall also include an audio recording to help identify
the source of sound level “spikes” throughout the logging period. The continuous noise
monitoring equipment shall be capable of wireless transmission of real-time noise and audio
data. Access to this real-time data shall be made available to the inspector. The cost of all such
monitoring shall be borne by the operator. The noise readings shall also be submitted to the
inspector on a weekly basis in an electronic format or other format specified by the inspector.
The weekly report shall state whether the drill site is in compliance with the noise requirements.
If the report states that the drill site is not in compliance with the noise standards, then the
report shall state the measures that are being taken to return the drill site to compliance and the
timeframes for implementing these remedial measures.
(B) At a minimum, the operator shall install noise reduction blankets on the drill site
boundaries facing any habitable structure within one thousand feet (1,000'). The height of
boundary blankets shall at a minimum be 30 feet (30'). The height may be increased at the
discretion of the inspector in response to topographic necessity. In addition to the boundary
barriers, the operator must, at a minimum, install additional noise reduction blankets to mitigate
noise generated from the rig substructure, the rig floor area, brake drum housings, mud pumps,
diesel motors, and generators. The blankets shall be constructed of a fire retardant material
approved by the fire department.
(8) Acoustical blankets, sound walls, mufflers or other alternative methods as approved by the
town may be used to ensure compliance with this article. All soundproofing shall comply with
accepted industry standards and is subject to approval by the fire inspector. Noise mitigation
measures will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. The inspector may require the operator to use
noise reduction blankets that meet a standard of STC 30 or greater, if necessary.
(9) The sound level meter used in conducting noise evaluations shall meet the American National
Standard Institute's standard for sound meters or an instrument and the associated recording and
analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data.
(10) Concurrent with a permit application, the operator shall file a noise management plan,
prepared by a noise control engineer or other qualified person approved by the inspector, which shall
detail how the equipment used in the drilling, completion, transportation, or production of a well
complies with the maximum permissible ambient noise levels of this article. Violation of the noise
management plan shall be a violation of this article. The noise management plan must be approved
by the town and must comply with the following requirements:
(A) Identify operation noise impacts.
(B) Establishes the ambient noise level for both daytime and nighttime hours prior to and
after the installation of the noise-generation equipment.
(C) Detail how the impacts will be mitigated. In determining noise mitigation, specific site
characteristics shall be considered, including but not limited to the following:
(i) The location, type, nature and proximity of adjacent development.
(ii) Seasonal and prevailing weather patterns, including wind directions.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 591/665
(iii) Vegetative cover on or adjacent to the site.
(iv) Topography.
(v) Operation and site noise management measures which may include, but not be
limited to use of critical grade mufflers on generators and motors; use of structural noise
curtains, walls, or enclosures; and best management practices by limiting or eliminating
noisier operations, such as tripping, deliveries of pipe, casing and heavy loads, use of
horns for communication and operation of vehicle audible backup alarms during nighttime
hours.
(vi) Mitigation of pure tone and low tone frequency noise.
(g) Dust mitigation plan requirements.
(1) The operator must submit a dust mitigation plan detailing measures to be implemented to
mitigate and suppress dust generated at the drill site and the private vehicle access route.
(2) The operator shall conduct all drilling and production operations in such a manner as to
minimize dust, vibration or noxious odors, and in accordance with the best accepted practices
incident to drilling for the production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances.
(A) The operator shall construct and operate all equipment so that vibrations, dust, odor, or
other harmful or annoying substances or effect created by the operations carried on at any drill
site or from anything incident thereto will be minimized.
(B) Proven technological improvements in industry standards of drilling and production in
this area shall be adopted as they become available if capable of reducing factors of dust,
vibration, and odor. Brine water, sulphur water, or water in mixture with any type of
hydrocarbon may not be used for dust suppression.
(h) Waste management and site restoration plan requirements.
(1) The operator must submit a waste management plan that addresses human, solid and drilling
production waste. The drill site shall at all times be kept free of debris, pools of water or other
liquids, contaminated soil, weeds, brush, trash, or other waste material outside the drill site.
(A) Drilling mud, cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons, and all other field waste derived or resulting
from or connected with the drilling, reworking, or deepening of any well shall be discharged
into an above-ground self-contained tank. All disposals must be in accordance with the rules of
the railroad commission and any other applicable local, state or federal agency. Unless
otherwise directed by the railroad commission, waste materials shall be removed from the site
and transported to an off-site disposal facility not less often than one time every 30 days. Water
stored in on-site tanks shall be removed as necessary.
(B) After any spill, leak or malfunction, the operator shall remove or cause to be removed to
the satisfaction of the town all waste materials from any public or private property affected by
such spill, leak, or malfunction. Cleanup operations must begin immediately. The operator shall
be subject to criminal citation and a fine of up to $2,000.00 per violation for each day the
violation is permitted to continue.
(C) All waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as to comply with the air and water
pollution control regulations of the state, this article, and any other applicable town regulations.
(D) The operator shall remove the drilling rig from the site within 30 days of the completion
of all drilling activities indicated on the applicable well permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 592/665
(E) Within 30 days of the completion of the well, or within 30 days of completion of
reworking a well, as the case may be, or within such longer timeframe as determined
appropriate by the town, but not to exceed 90 days, the operator shall clean up and clear the
area around the well of all material and equipment, fill all holes and excavations, and grade the
land and return it to its original condition, including replanting of vegetation to match the
surrounding area.
(2) Bond for surface restoration.
(A) The operator shall restore surface locations of all dry wells and/or abandoned operations
as nearly as possible to its original condition. The operator shall submit a performance bond in
a form acceptable to the town to cover the costs of any clean up necessary.
(B) The amount of the performance bond shall be equal to $60,000.00; provided however, the
amount may be higher if the administrator determines that the estimated cost of the restoration
project, including labor and materials, will likely exceed that amount.
(C) After the site has been cleaned up and screened, the operator shall notify the town for a
final inspection. Prior to the final inspection, the operator must provide the town with
geographic coordinates of the well bore, using the North American Datum 1983 (NAD 83),
Texas State Plane - North Central Zone (4202), in U.S. feet.
(i) Emergency response plan requirements.
(1) The operator shall submit an emergency response plan with the gas or oil well permit
application. Said plan shall use existing guidelines established by the Railroad Commission, the
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, Texas Department of Transportation and the United
States Environmental Protection Agency. The emergency response plan shall be kept current with any
additions, modifications, and/or amendments concerning all construction related activities, gas and
oil production activities. Updated plans shall be submitted to the oil and gas inspector, fire chief, and
fire inspector within two (2) business days after any additions, modifications, or amendments are
made. A copy of the emergency response plan shall be kept on site. The emergency response plan
shall, at a minimum, provide for:
(A) Prompt and effective response to emergencies regarding:
(i) Leaks or releases that can impact public health, safety, and welfare.
(ii) Fire, explosions, loss of well control, or blow out at the well or in the vicinity of an
oil or gas well.
(iii) Natural disasters.
(B) Effective means to notify and communicate required and pertinent information to local
fire, police, and public officials during an emergency, including a detailed plan that should
address contacting town officials responsible for implementing town policy regarding
notification and evacuation of residents, where necessary.
(C) The availability of personnel, equipment, tools, and materials as necessary at the scene of
an emergency.
(D) Measures to be taken to reduce public exposure to injury and the probability of
accidental death or dismemberment.
(E) Fire department and HAZMAT response times.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 593/665
(F) Emergency shutdown of an oil or gas well and related site.
(G) The safe restoration of service and operations following an emergency or incident.
(H) A followup incident investigation to determine the cause of the incident and require the
implementation of corrective measures.
(2) The operator shall conduct a thorough testing of its evacuation plan on an annual basis
including performing “unplanned” evacuation scenarios, to ensure disaster preparedness. The
operator shall provide seven days written notice of the time and date of each test to the town. The fire
chief may observe the test and may require the inclusion of certain evacuation scenarios as a
component of the test. The operator shall then certify in writing to the town on an annual basis that a
test of the evacuation plan has been performed.
(j) Fire prevention plan requirements.
(1) The operator shall provide and maintain on the drill site and operation site at all times during
drilling and production operations all firefighting apparatus and supplies which are required by the
town, or which are required by any applicable federal, state or local law, at the operator's cost. The
operator shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of such equipment. Each well shall be
equipped with an automated valve that closes the well in the event of an abnormal change in
operating pressure. All wellheads shall contain an emergency shutoff valve to the well distribution
line. The operator shall paint these valves red and post signs to show they are shutoff valves.
(2) Each operator shall be required to provide training and instruction to the fire department
regarding well safety and emergency management protocol, and all information specific to the well
operation which is requested by the fire chief or the fire chiefs designee, or which is relevant to
emergency management activities at the site. Such fire department training must occur prior to the
operator conducting drilling operations under the operator's first well permit.
(k) Hazardous materials plan requirements. The operator shall file with the town a hazardous materials
management plan and shall update such plan by filing any additions, modifications, and/or amendments
regarding all construction related activities and oil and natural gas operations and production. The plan shall
include HAZMAT and fire department response times and updated hazardous materials plans and shall be
submitted to the oil and gas inspector, fire inspector and fire chief within two (2) business days of any material
change in the activities at the site from that approved in the well permit.
(l) Chemical and material storage requirements. The operator shall store all chemicals and/or hazardous
materials in such a manner as to prevent, contain, and facilitate rapid remediation and clean up of any accidental
spill, leak or discharge of a hazardous material. The operator shall maintain all current material safety data
sheets (MSDS's) for all hazardous and nonhazardous materials and chemicals on site. The MSDS shall indicate
all types, quantities, volumes, and concentration of all additives used in site preparation, drilling, completion,
and fracturing (or similar programs). The MSDS must be provided quarterly to the town, consistent with the
requirements of this article. The operator shall comply with all applicable federal and state regulatory
requirements for the proper labeling of containers. The operator shall take all appropriate pollution prevention
actions including but not limited to raising chemical and materials and bulk storage (e.g., placing such materials
on wooden pallets), installing and maintaining secondary containment systems, and providing adequate
protection from stormwater and weather elements. The operator shall only use appropriate green compounds as
approved by the town council as part of the submission requirements outlined in this article. The site shall not be
used for long-term storage of additives.
(m) Fire suppression. The operator shall provide and maintain in good working order all fire suppression and
prevention equipment required by any applicable federal, state, or local law, or the operator's emergency
response plan, at the operator's cost. The operator shall keep adequate foam fire suppressant equipment and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 594/665
supplies at each drill site, in addition to any fire suppressant equipment and supplies deemed necessary by the
fire inspector.
(n) Reporting requirements.
(1) Requirement to report emergencies.
(A) The operator shall within 48 hours notify the town of any incident resulting in product
loss from a hydrocarbon storage facility or pipeline facility, blowout, fire, explosion, incident
resulting in injury, death, or property damage, or any other significant incidents as defined by
the town.
(B) A written report, containing a brief summary of the incident, shall be submitted to the
town by 5:00 p.m. on the first business day following the incident.
(C) A followup report shall be submitted to the town within 24 hours following the incident.
The operator responsible for the followup incident report shall include the following
information:
(i) Operator/applicant name, phone number, addresses, and e-mail address.
(ii) Description of the incident, including, but not limited to, the time, date, location,
and cause of the event.
(iii) Duration of the incident, that is, when it began and when it terminated to the degree
that it no longer constituted a hazard to the health, safety, and well-being of persons or
property, regardless of the distance or separation from the place of incident.
(iv) How the incident was brought under control and/or remedied.
(v) A full and complete description of the type of intercompany investigation or other
investigation or inquiry that was made concerning the incident, the findings or results of
such inquiry or investigation, and the action taken as a result of the findings and inquiry
concerning the prevention of the existence of future hazards.
(vi) Signed and dated by the person responsible for such report.
(D) The operator shall provide a copy of any “incident reports” or written complaints
submitted to the Texas Railroad Commission within 24 hours after the operator has notice of
the existence of such reports or complaints.
(E) Beginning on December 31st, after each well is completed, and continuing on each
December 31st thereafter until the operator notifies the town that the well has been abandoned
and the site restored, the operator shall submit a written report to the town identifying any
changes to the information that was included in the application for the applicable permit that
have not been previously reported to the town.
(F) A quarterly extended gas analysis report must be provided to the town once completion or
fracturing begins. The report must be in a format and include data as specified by the town's gas
technical advisor.
(2) Periodic reporting requirements. The operator shall notify the town of any changes to the
following information within one business day after the change occurs.
(A) The name, address, and phone number of the operator.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 595/665
(B) The name, address, and 24-hour phone number of the person(s) with supervisory
authority over drilling or operations activities.
(C) The name, address, and phone number of the person designated to receive notices from
the town, which person shall be a resident of the state that can be served in person or by
registered or certified mail.
(D) The operator's emergency response plan.
(3) Notice of activities.
(A) Any person who intends to rework a well using a drilling rig, to fracture stimulate a well
after initial completion shall give written notice to the town at least 14 days before the activities
begin.
(B) Written notices must be provided, by the operator, to all residences within one thousand
feet (1,000') of a drill site or operation site, 24 hours prior to hydraulic fracturing of a wellhead.
(C) The notice shall identify where the activities will be conducted and shall describe the
activities in reasonable detail, including but not limited to the duration of the activities and the
time of day they will be conducted.
(D) The notice shall also provide the address and 24-hour phone number of the person
conducting the activities.
(E) The person conducting the activities will post a sign on the property giving the public
notice of the activities, including the name, address, and 24-hour phone number of the person
conducting the activities.
Sec. 14.04.037 Environmental standards
(a) Site erosion control, run-off, and groundwater protection standards.
(1) Erosion and stormwater control practices approved by the town shall be conducted for all gas
and oil wells. Compost berms that are at least 3-feet high and 4-feet wide, or equivalent erosion
devices, shall be installed so that all portions of the pad site that may drain offsite are contained.
(2) Damage resulting from sedimentation and/or erosion shall be repaired within 48 hours.
(3) Gas or oil wells may not have a target location or bottom-well hole location that is under the
floodway when the gas or oil well is drilled directionally from a location outside such areas.
(4) No oil or gas well drill sites shall be allowed on slopes greater than ten (10) percent.
(5) No person shall place, deposit or discharge or cause or permit to be placed, deposited or
discharged any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substance, refuse, wastewater,
brine, or hazardous substance from any production operation or the contents of any container used in
connection with any production operation in, into or upon any public right-of-way, storm drain, ditch
or sewer, sanitary drain or sewer, waterway or body of water, or any private property in the town.
(6) Organic solvents, such as trichloroethylene and carbon tetrachloride, shall not be used for
cleaning any element, structure, or component of the drilling rig, platform and/or associated
equipment, tools or pipes.
(7) Any wells drilled as part of a gas well and testing of adjacent wells shall meet the following
requirements:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 596/665
(A) No well permit will be issued for any well where the center of the well at the surface of
the ground is located within 1,000 feet of an existing freshwater well intended for domestic use.
(B) The operator shall, within 120 days of its completion date, equip each well with a
cathodic protection system to protect the production casing from external corrosion, unless the
town approves an alternative method of protecting the production casing from external
corrosion. The operator of a well shall provide the town with a “predrilling” and “post-drilling”
water analysis and flow rate from any existing freshwater well within two thousand feet (2,000')
of the well and any existing freshwater perennial or intermittent stream, pond, or wetland within
two thousand feet (2,000'). The analysis shall be performed by an independent inspector
approved by the town. Such water tests shall conform to the following testing requirements:
(i) Water samples must be collected and analyzed utilizing proper sampling and
laboratory protocol from a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or Texas Commission
on Environmental Quality approved laboratory.
(ii) Water samples shall be analyzed prior to any construction activity to document
baseline water quality data of the well. Continuous quarterly water testing shall begin
once construction of the site begins and shall continue until abandonment of all wells on
the pad site.
(iii) Parameters to be tested for, include, but are not limited to TDS, chlorides, VOC's,
TPH, TPH fractioned, SVOC's, HAP, methane, ethane, dissolved gases, and other target
compounds based on drilling and fracturing additives disclosed by the operator.
(C) If it is found that the freshwater well is no longer in use and without possibility of future
use or if the freshwater well owner objects to having the water well tested, the owner of the
freshwater well may waive the right to have the operator test the water.
(D) A copy of the determination by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality of the
depth of useable quality groundwater shall be provided to the town.
(E) After any spill, leak, or malfunction, the operator shall remove or cause to be removed all
waste materials from any public or private property affected by such spill, leak, or malfunction.
Cleanup operations shall begin within 48 hours.
(F) The drill site shall at all times be kept free of debris, pools of water or other liquids,
contaminated soil, weeds, brush, trash, or other waste material.
(G) The operator shall install drip pans and other containment devices underneath all tanks,
containers, pumps, lubricating oil systems, engines, fuel and chemical storage tanks, system
valves, connections, and any other areas or structures that could potentially leak, discharge or
spill hazardous liquids, semi-liquids or solid waste materials, including hazardous waste. A
secondary containment system shall be installed around all separators, tank batteries, and other
fluid containing equipment on the drill site.
(H) An operator must set and cement sufficient surface casing to protect all usable quality
water strata, as defined by state law. The operator shall notify the town in writing at least 96
hours prior to the scheduled time for setting and cementing surface casing and such work shall
not commence until the town has approved the proposed work in writing. In addition, the
following requirements shall apply:
(i) Centralizers must be used at an interval of one centralizer per 100 feet, or ten
centralizers per 1,000 feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 597/665
(ii) New surface casing is required.
(iii) Proper floating equipment shall be used.
(iv) Class “H” or class “C” cement with accelerators shall be used.
(v) The operator shall circulate cement to surface; if not, the operator shall cement with
one-inch tubing and top off.
(vi) The operator shall wait on cement a minimum of 12 hours prior to commencing
further drilling operations.
(vii) The operator shall test the blowout preventer before drilling out of surface casing
to 1,000 psi. If it fails the pressure test, isolation tools must be placed in the hole to locate
the leak and corrective measures must be implemented to repair the failure and ensure the
pressure integrity of the casing before conducting subsequent operations.
(b) Predrilling, post-drilling, and periodic soil sampling standards.
(1) Upon application for a well permit, soil sampling shall be conducted prior to the
commencement of any drilling activities at the proposed drill site to establish a baseline study of site
conditions. A minimum of one (1) soil sample shall be taken at the location of any proposed
equipment to be utilized at the site to document existing conditions at the drill site.
(2) A third-party consultant shall collect and analyze all “predrilling” and “post-drilling” soil
analysis. The cost of such fees and charges assessed by the third-party contractor shall be borne by
the operator.
(3) Soil samples must be collected and analyzed utilizing proper sampling and laboratory protocol
from a United States Environmental Protection Agency or Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality approved laboratory with a copy of the third-party analysis provided to the town.
(4) Post-drilling soil samples shall be collected and analyzed after the conclusion of drilling of
each well. Subsequent to the drilling of each well, periodic soil samples shall be taken to document
soil quality data at the drill site, as requested by the oil and gas inspector.
(5) When abandonment occurs pursuant to the requirements of the Texas Railroad Commission
and as referenced in this article, the operator so abandoning shall conduct post production soil
sampling when equipment is removed from the drill site to document that the final conditions are
within regulatory requirements.
(6) If it is found that the soil contains a prohibited amount (pursuant to state or federal law) of a
hazardous substance, the operator shall remediate the location within thirty (30) days and thereafter
soil sampling shall be collected and analyzed at such locations on the drill site as are necessary to
determine compliance.
(c) Air quality study requirements. The operator shall submit a predrilling ambient air study of the drill site
with its application for a well permit. The study shall be conducted by an air quality consultant experienced in
the sampling and monitoring of oil and gas upstream operations and shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Samples shall be taken at three locations specified by the gas inspector.
(2) The study shall be conducted using summa canisters and shall utilize the TO-15 analysis, as
written by the United States Environmental Agency and the D1946 analytical method.
(d) Emissions plan requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 598/665
(1) The operator shall submit a plan for controlling air contaminants. The plan shall include the
following information and meet the following requirements:
(A) A detailed site plan showing the location of each emission source.
(B) For each source, composition of emissions and expected maximum daily and hourly
emissions rate.
(C) For each source, detailed descriptions of the measures taken and equipment used to
reduce emissions below the levels listed in subsection (d)(2) of this section.
(2) Nuisance emissions.
(A) The emission of one or more of the following air contaminants which exceed the
concentration identified in the preambient air study and which result in a net ground level
concentration (GLC) in excess of the following concentrations at or beyond the setback
distance specified in this article or the setback in a plan approved by the town council are
determined to be and constitute a nuisance, at any time:
(i) Benzene: 170 µg/m3.
(ii) Ethyl benzene: 2000 µg/m3.
(iii) Formaldehyde: 15 µg/m3.
(iv) Toluene: 640 µg/m3.
(v) Xylene, m-: 180 µg/m3.
(vi) Xylene, o-: 1600 µg/m3.
(vii) Xylene, p-: 250 µg/m3.
(viii) Condensate and/or crude oil: 3,500 µg/m3.
(ix) Natural gas: 18,000 µg/m3.
(x) For any air contaminant or compound not listed above, the limit is the short term
ESL listed for the compound in the TCEQ ESL list published June 2010. For compounds
not published in the TCEQ ESL list, there is no established limit.
(B) The emission of one or more of the following air contaminants which exceed the
concentration identified in the preambient air study and which result in a net ground level
concentration (GLC) in excess of the following concentrations at or beyond the setback
distance specified in this article or the setback in a plan approved by the town council are
determined to be and constitute a nuisance when the average of three consecutive samples
exceeds the following concentrations:
(i) Benzene: 4.5 µg/m3.
(ii) Ethyl benzene: 1250 µg/m3.
(iii) Formaldehyde: 3.3 µg/m3.
(iv) Toluene: 640 µg/m3.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 599/665
(v) Xylene, m-: 180 µg/m3.
(vi) Xylene, o-: 180 µg/m3.
(vii) Xylene, p-: 180 µg/m3.
(viii) Condensate and/or crude oil: 350 µg/m3.
(ix) Natural gas: 1,800 µg/m3.
(x) For any air contaminant or compound not listed above, the lesser of the short term
ESL or long term ESL listed for the compound in the TCEQ ESL list published June
2010. For compounds not published in the TCEQ ESL list, there is no established limit.
(xi) Hydrogen sulfide (H2S): 0.08 ppm averaged over any 30-minute period.
(e) Monitoring requirements. Continuous air testing is required as soon as the first well is fractured or
completed and must be maintained continuously until the well site is abandoned. Testing and air monitoring
equipment used must be consistent with town-established methodology, as required by the applicable conditional
use permit. If requested, the operator may witness testing conducted by the town consultant. The operator shall
be responsible for the cost of all monitoring equipment. The location of the continuous monitoring equipment
will be determined by town consultant with the operator's representative present during installation. A gas
chromatograph or a similar air monitoring testing system approved by the town council is required. The operator
and/or town shall seek incorporation of all data generated into the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
air monitoring program.
(f) Air quality best management practices.
(1) All equipment at the operation site which has the potential to emit air contaminants must be
maintained in good working order and operated properly during operations.
(2) Each open-ended valve or line shall be equipped with a cap, blind flange, plug, or a second
valve to seal the line so that no leakage of emissions occurs. If equipped with a second valve, both
valves shall be closed except during sampling.
(3) Tank hatches and valves, which emit to the atmosphere, shall remain closed except for
sampling or planned maintenance activities.
(4) All pressure relief devices (PRD) shall be designed and operated to ensure that proper pressure
in the vessel is maintained and shall stay closed except in upset or malfunction conditions. If the PRD
does not automatically reset, it must be reset within 24 hours at a manned site and within one week if
located at an unmanned site.
(5) All seals and gaskets in VOC or H2S service shall be installed, checked, and properly
maintained to prevent leaking.
(6) The operator shall follow manufacturer's specifications and recommended programs for
maintenance of equipment. In the absence of manufacturer's recommended programs, each site shall
establish and maintain a program to replace, repair, and/or maintain equipment to keep them in good
working order. Replacement and repair of equipment shall follow these established programs.
(7) Damaged or leaking valves, connectors, pumps, compressors, and agitator seals found to be
emitting VOC's in excess of 10,000 ppmv as determined using a portable analyzer, found by AVO
inspection to be leaking (e.g., dripping process fluids), or found leaking using the alternative work
practice shall be tagged and replaced or repaired.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 600/665
(8) To the extent that good engineering practices will permit, new and reworked valves and piping
connections shall be located in a place that is reasonably accessible for leak-checking during
operations.
(g) Loading requirements. The operator shall comply with the following requirements during loading of trucks
and tanks:
(1) The operator shall maintain all tanks, valves, fittings, hatches, and other equipment in such a
way as to minimize the emissions of all volatile organic compounds.
(2) If vacuum trucks are used at the site, vacuum pumps and blowers shall not be operated on
trucks containing or vacuuming liquids with VOC true vapor pressure greater than 0.50 psi at 95F
unless the vacuum/blower exhaust is routed to a control device or a controlled recovery system.
Positive displacement pumps may be used.
(3) The operator shall not allow condensate to be loaded into a tank truck unless the tank truck has
passed a leak-tight test within the past 12 months.
(4) For each tank truck traveling to the well development or operation site, the operator shall
present the town a certification from an unrelated third party stating that the vessel has passed a leaktight
test within the past 12 months.
(5) When loading materials with a vapor pressure greater than or equal to 0.5 psia at maximum
loading temperature, the loading emissions shall be routed to a control device.
(6) The operator shall conduct loading operations at all loading/unloading facilities, without visible
liquid leaks or spills regardless of vapor pressure. The foregoing does not apply to momentary
dripping associated with the initial connection or disconnection of fittings.
(7) Sustained dripping from fittings during loading/unloading operations is not permitted.
(8) The operator shall report to the TCEQ and to the town any liquid spill that occurs during
loading/unloading activities that results in emissions that exceed a reportable quantity.
(9) The operator shall cause a visual inspection of all lines and connectors to be made prior to
hookup.
(10) The operator shall cause any lines and connectors that are visibly damaged to be removed
from service. Operations shall cease immediately upon detection of any liquid leaking from the lines
or connections.
(h) Tree preservation plan requirements. Operators must submit a tree preservation plan with their gas or oil
well permit in accordance with article 3.15: Natural Resource Management and Tree Protection of this Code of
Ordinances.
Sec. 14.04.038 Execution of well permits
(a) Well permit characteristics.
(1) Each executed well permit issued by the town shall state the following:
(A) The name of the well and its operator.
(B) The date on which the town issued each permit.
(C) The date by which drilling must commence.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 601/665
(D) That if drilling is commenced on the well covered by the permit before the permit
expires, the permit shall continue until the well covered by the permit is abandoned and the site
restored.
(E) By reference, the indemnity, insurance, and security requirements set forth in this article.
(F) That no drilling operations (including the construction of internal private access roads)
shall commence until the operator has provided such information.
(G) By reference, the requirement for periodic reports.
(H) By reference, the conditions of the applicable site plan, and/or conditional use permit.
(I) By reference, the information contained in the permit application.
(J) By reference, the applicable rules, and regulations of the railroad commission, including
the applicable “field rules.”
(K) The name, address, and phone number of the person designated to receive notices from
the town.
(L) By reference, all permits and fees required by the town.
(2) A decision to deny an application for a well permit shall be provided to the operator in writing,
including the reason for the decision. The operator may appeal any such denial to the town council.
(3) If an application for a well permit is denied, nothing herein contained shall prevent a new
application from being submitted to the town for the same well. A new application fee is not required
if the application is denied without prejudice. Applications denied with prejudice must be
accompanied by a new application fee upon reapplication.
(4) If the application for a well permit is approved and a permit is issued, the operator shall file
notice in the county real property records indicating the physical location of the permitted drill site
and the well/bore hole.
(5) A well permit shall automatically expire one year after the date of issuance of such permit if
drilling has not commenced on the well covered by the permit within such period, provided, however,
that the administrator may grant a one-year extension of time if existing conditions have not changed
and an application for extension is filed with the administrator prior to expiration of the initial permit.
If a well permit expires, the operator must file a new application for a new well permit as provided in
this division.
(b) Amendments to well permits.
(1) An operator must submit an application to the town's planning department to amend an existing
well permit in order to commence drilling from a new drill site that is not shown on (or incorporated
by reference as part of) the existing permit, to relocate a drill site or operation site that is shown on
(or incorporated by reference as part of) the existing permit, or to otherwise amend the existing
permit in any manner. The director of planning shall review the proposed amendment to determine if
an amendment to the conditional use permit shall be required. If the director of planning determines
that an amendment to the applicable conditional use permit is also required, the application for an
amended well permit shall be processed as a new well permit application and shall include all
application materials and the appropriate fee for new well permit applications set forth in the town's
fee schedule and an amendment to the applicable conditional use permit shall also be required.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 602/665
(2) Applications for amended well permits shall be in writing on forms provided by the town and
signed by the operator, and shall include the following:
(A) An application fee, which shall be nonrefundable regardless of the outcome of the
application.
(B) A description of the proposed amendments.
(3) Any changes to the information submitted with the application for the current well permit.
(4) Such additional information as is reasonably required by the town to demonstrate compliance
with the applicable conditional use permit and associated site plan and the provisions of this article.
(5) If, in the judgment of the town, the activities proposed by the amendment require an inspection,
an inspection fee in the amount set in the town's fee schedule shall be charged. In such event, the
operator must pay such inspection fee before the amended well permit will be processed further.
(c) Transfer of well permits. A well permit may be transferred upon written request by the operator with the
consent of the town upon compliance with the following conditions:
(1) If the transferee agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of the current well permit.
(2) If all information previously provided to the town as part of the current well permit application
is updated to reflect any changes.
(3) If the transferee provides the insurance and security required by this article and otherwise
complies with all applicable governmental ordinances and regulations.
(4) The insurance and security provided by the transferor shall be released if consent of the town to
such transfer, provided, however, that the transfer shall not relieve the transferor from any liability to
the town arising out of any activities conducted prior to the transfer, and the town may retain all or a
portion of any insurance and security if the town determines that any facts exist which would create
the likelihood of liability secured by such insurance or security for such prior activities.
(d) Phasing of drilling and production and well permit provisions. Unless specified differently in the
ordinance approving the conditional use permit (CUP), all drilling, and production activities shall conform to the
following schedule:
(1) Drilling.
(A) Drilling shall commence no later than one year after the approval date of the well permit
allowing the well. If no drilling has occurred within one year, the CUP shall automatically
expire.
(B) Once drilling has begun, the operator shall have five (5) years from the approval date of
the CUP allowing the gas well operator to drill all wells. No additional drilling may occur after
this point without the approval of the town council.
(2) Hydraulic fracturing. All hydraulic fracturing shall be completed within five (5) years from the
approval date of the CUP allowing the well. No additional hydraulic fracturing may occur after this
point without the approval of the town council.
(3) Production. If the provisions of subsections A and B above are met, the well operator shall
have five (5) years from the approval date of the CUP allowing the well to begin well production. If
no well production has begun within five years, the CUP shall automatically expire and the operator
shall be subject to abandonment provisions of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 603/665
(4) Any CUP authorized under this article shall only be granted to the person named on the original
application and may not be transferred to any other person without the approval of the town council.
Town council approval shall be required for any change in ownership of an entity named on the CUP
application for any CUP granted under this article.
(e) Abandonment of wells and pipelines.
(1) Within sixty (60) days after abandonment of a well or drill site, the operator shall plug the well
in accordance with railroad commission standards, clean the site, clear it of all material and
equipment, fill all holes and excavations, and grade the land and return it to its original condition
including replanting of vegetation to match the surrounding area. The operator shall cut and remove
all well casings to a depth of at least ten feet below the surface. Additionally, the operator shall mark
the exact location of plugged and abandoned wells with a steel marker not less than four inches in
diameter set in cement and extending at least four feet above mean ground level. The operator shall
weld, stamp or otherwise permanently engrave the operator's name, lease name, and well number and
location, into the marker's metal. A plugged and abandonment marker may not be removed without
the approval of the town council.
(2) Structures may be built no closer to an abandoned well than is permitted pursuant to state law,
including but not limited to the applicable rules and regulations of the railroad commission.
(3) Within sixty (60) days after abandonment of a pipeline, the pipeline operator shall purge and
plug the line in accordance with the rules and regulations of each governmental agency with
jurisdiction over the activity, including but not limited to the railroad commission, environmental
protection agency and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
(4) Abandonment of a drill site must be approved by the town and approval requires completion of
the following by the operator:
(A) The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from the drill site.
(B) All equipment, materials and other surface installations shall be removed from the drill
site.
(C) All concrete foundations, piping, wood, guy anchors, and other foreign materials
regardless of depth, except surface casing, shall be removed from the site.
(D) All holes and depressions shall be filled with clean, compactable soil.
(E) All waste, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the drill site.
(F) All other requirements of this article have been met, including but not limited to
restoration of the drill site.
(5) The operator shall request a final inspection of a well intended to be abandoned and furnish the
following information to the inspector:
(A) A copy of the W-3A “notice of intention to plug and abandon” and “W-3 plugging
record” forms on the same date these forms are submitted to the railroad commission.
(B) A notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the date
such work will be commenced. Abandonment may then be commenced on or subsequent to the
date so stated and shall take no longer than 45 days once commenced.
(6) All abandoned wells or drill sites shall meet the most current abandonment requirements of the
railroad commission and this article prior to the issuance of any building permit for development of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 604/665
the property.
(7) The director of planning shall indicate the location of each plugged and abandoned well on the
town's land use map.
(8) Abandonment of a drill site shall cause a drill site conditional use permit issued under this
article to expire. Abandonment of a well shall cause a well permit issued under this article to expire.
Sec. 14.04.039 Inspection and enforcement requirements
(a) Oil and gas inspector.
(1) The town engineer shall designate the inspector(s) who shall enforce the provisions of this
article. The inspector shall have the authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry out
the intent and purpose of this article and its particular provisions. Failure of any person to comply
with any such lawful order or directive shall constitute a violation of this article.
(2) The inspector and fire inspector shall have the authority to enter and inspect any premises
covered by the provisions of this article to determine compliance with the provisions of this article
and all applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or directives of the state. Failure of any person to
permit lawful access to the inspector or fire inspector shall constitute a violation of this article.
(3) The inspector shall conduct annual inspections of all permitted wells in the town to determine
compliance with this article and all regulations of the railroad commission.
(4) The inspector and/or town engineer shall have the authority to request and receive any records,
including any records sent to the railroad commission, logs and reports relating to the status or
condition of any permitted well related to the health, safety, and operations of the well. Failure of any
person to provide any such requested material shall be a violation of this article.
(b) Technical advisor. The town may from time to time employ a third-party technical advisor or engineer
who is experienced and educated in the oil and gas industry or the law as it pertains to oil and gas matters. The
function of such advisor(s) shall be:
(1) To advise, counsel, or represent the town on such matters relating to oil and gas operations
within the town as the town may want or require and the effect thereof, both present and future, on
the health, welfare, comfort, and safety of the citizens of the town. Any fees associated with the
employment of the technical advisor shall be borne by the operator.
(c) Permit fees and escrow requirements.
(1) As a condition to the issuance of the gas or oil well permit, payment of the applicable permit
fee shall be paid in full. Said permit fee shall be in accordance with the schedule of fees contained in
appendix A of this Code of Ordinances.
(2) If the application for a well permit is approved, prior to a permit being issued, the operator
shall deposit with the town the sum of $50,000.00 for each drill site containing a well permit
application approved. The funds shall be maintained by the town in an interest-bearing escrow
account from which the town may reimburse itself for the actual administrative expenses, consulting
fees, contracting fees or the funding of inspector position(s). All interest earned shall be credited to
the fund balance or refunded to the operator if and when the minimum balance is achieved. The town
shall invoice and notify the operator, in writing of any deduction from the application fund and
within 15 days of receipt thereof, the operator shall pay to the town for deposit into the fund the
amount necessary to return the balance to $50,000.00. If the operator fails to maintain the fund as
required by this section, such failure shall constitute a violation of this article, and the town may
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 605/665
suspend or revoke the well permit and the town may pursue all remedies provided in this article for
such violation. Upon completion of all drilling activities, final inspection and approval by the town of
a restored site, and fulfillment by the operator of all of operator's obligations under this article, the
town shall return any remaining account balance to the operator or the operator's approved assign.
(d) Remedies of the town.
(1) If an operator or the operator's officers, employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors, or
representatives fails to comply with the conditions of the applicable conditional use permit and
associated site plan or any requirement of a well permit (including any requirement incorporated by
reference as part of the permit), or any applicable provisions of this article or any other town
regulations, the town shall endeavor to give written notice to the operator specifying the nature of the
alleged failure and giving the operator a specified time to cure, taking into consideration the nature
and extent of the alleged failure, the extent of the efforts required to cure, and the potential impact on
the health, safety, and welfare of the community; provided, however, that if circumstances warrant
proceeding without notice, no notice will be sent. In any case, failure to give such notice shall not
prohibit the town from pursuing any available remedy.
(2) If the operator does not cure the alleged failure within the time specified by the town, the town
may notify the railroad commission and request that the railroad commission take appropriate action.
In addition, the town may pursue all other remedies allowed by law, including but not limited to any
or all of the following:
(A) The town may suspend the well permit until the alleged failure is cured.
(B) The town may revoke the well permit if the operator fails to initiate and diligently pursue
a cure.
(C) The town may seek recourse against the security required by provisions of this division.
(D) A criminal citation may be issued for violation of the conditional use permit, this article
or any other town regulation.
(e) Enforcement, right of entry. The administrator, fire inspector, and the inspector are authorized and directed
to enforce this article, the terms and conditions of any approved conditional use permit and the provisions of any
well permit. Whenever necessary to enforce the foregoing, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe
there has been a violation of any of the foregoing, administrator, fire inspector and/or the inspector may enter
upon any property covered by this article at any reasonable time to inspect or perform any duty or requirement
imposed by this article. If entry is refused, the town shall have recourse to pursue every remedy provided by law
and equity to gain entry.
Sec. 14.04.040 Insurance requirements
(a) The operator shall provide the insurance described below for each well for which a well permit is issued,
and shall maintain such insurance until the well is abandoned and the site restored. The operator must provide to
the town sufficient documentation that the operator's insurance complies with the minimum requirements and
coverage amounts of this section before the well permit may be issued.
(b) Each permit issued by the town under this article shall include the following language and regardless of
whether such language is actually included in the permit, it shall be deemed to be included therein and binding
on the operator as a condition of the permit:
“OPERATOR DOES HEREBY EXPRESSLY AND IRREVOCABLY RELEASE AND
DISCHARGE ALL CLAIMS, DEMANDS, ACTIONS, JUDGMENTS AND EXECUTIONS OF
ANY AND ALL KINDS WHICH IT OR ITS SUCCESSORS OR ASSIGNS EVER HAD, OR NOW
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 606/665
HAS OR MAY HAVE, OR CLAIMS TO HAVE, AGAINST THE TOWN OF FAIRVIEW, TEXAS,
ITS DEPARTMENTS, AGENTS, OFFICERS, SERVANTS, EMPLOYEES, SPONSORS OR
VOLUNTEERS, THE INSPECTOR, AND EACH OF THEIR RESPECTIVE HEIRS, PERSONAL
REPRESENTATIVES, SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS (THE TOWN OF FAIRVIEW, TEXAS
AND ALL OTHER FOREGOING PARTIES BEING HEREIN REFERRED TO COLLECTIVELY
AS THE “INDEMNIFIED PARTIES”) CREATED BY OR ARISING OUT OF PERSONAL
INJURIES, KNOWN OR UNKNOWN, OR INJURIES TO PROPERTY, REAL OR PERSONAL,
OR IN ANY WAY INCIDENTAL TO OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE PERFORMANCE OF
THE WORK PERFORMED BY THE OPERATOR UNDER A WELL PERMIT. OPERATOR
AGREES TO FULLY DEFEND, PROTECT, INDEMNIFY AND HOLD HARMLESS THE
INDEMNIFIED PARTIES FROM AND AGAINST EACH AND EVERY CLAIM, DEMAND
OR CAUSE OF ACTION AND ANY AND ALL LIABILITY, DAMAGES, OBLIGATIONS,
JUDGMENTS, LOSSES, FINES, PENALTIES, COSTS, FEES AND EXPENSES INCURRED
BY THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES CAUSED BY OR ARISING OUT OF, INCIDENTAL TO,
OR OTHERWISE IN CONNECTION WITH ANY WORK PERFORMED BY OPERATOR
UNDER A WELL PERMIT, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, PERSONAL
INJURIES AND DEATH IN CONNECTION THEREWITH WHICH MAY BE MADE OR
ASSERTED BY OPERATOR OR OPERATOR'S AGENTS, ASSIGNS OR ANY THIRD
PARTIES. OPERATOR AGREES TO FULLY DEFEND, PROTECT, INDEMNIFY AND
HOLD HARMLESS THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES FROM ANY CLAIMS, LIABILITIES
OR DAMAGES SUFFERED AS A RESULT OF CLAIMS, DEMANDS, COSTS OR
JUDGMENTS AGAINST THE INDEMNIFIED\PARTIES, CREATED BY OR ARISING
OUT OF THE ACTS OR OMISSIONS OF THE TOWN OF FAIRVIEW OR ANY OF THE
OTHER INDEMNIFIED PARTIES, OCCURRING ON THE DRILL SITE OR OPERATION
SITE IN THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF INSPECTING AND PERMITTING THE OIL AND
GAS WELLS, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO CLAIMS, LIABILITIES, AND
DAMAGES ARISING IN WHOLE OR IN PART FROM THE NEGLIGENCE OF ANY OF
THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES, INCLUDING THE SOLE NEGLIGENCE OF ANY
INDEMNIFIED PARTY, OCCURRING IN THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF PERMITTING
OR INSPECTING THE WELLS, DRILL SITES, PIPELINES, AND OTHER AREAS
INVOLVED IN OPERATOR'S ACTIVITIES. IT IS UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED THAT
THE INDEMNITY PROVIDED FOR IN THIS SECTION IS AN INDEMNITY EXTENDED
BY THE OPERATOR TO INDEMNIFY AND PROTECT THE TOWN OF FAIRVIEW,
TEXAS AND THE OTHER INDEMNIFIED PARTIES FROM THE CONSEQUENCES OF
THE NEGLIGENCE OF ANY OF THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES, WHETHER THAT
NEGLIGENCE IS THE SOLE OR A CONTRIBUTING CAUSE OF THE RESULTANT
INJURY, DEATH AND/OR DAMAGE. THE FOREGOING IS NOT INTENDED TO
REQUIRE THE OPERATOR TO INDEMNIFY THE INDEMNIFIED PARTIES FROM THE
INDEMNIFIED PARTIES' GROSS NEGLIGENCE OR INTENTIONAL HARM,
IRRESPECTIVE OF WHETHER THAT GROSS NEGLIGENCE OR INTENTIONAL
HARM IS THE SOLE OR A CONTRIBUTING CAUSE OF THE RESULTANT INJURY,
DEATH AND/OR DAMAGE.”
(c) General provisions regarding insurance.
(1) All policies shall be endorsed to read substantially as follows: “This policy will not be canceled
or nonrenewed without 30 days advanced written notice to the owner and the Town of Fairview,
Texas, except when this policy is being cancelled for nonpayment of premium, in which case ten days
advance written notice to both such parties is required.”
(2) Liability policies shall be written by carriers licensed to do business in the state and with
companies with at least an “A” rating issued by the A.M. Best Company.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 607/665
(3) Liability policies shall name as “additional insured” the town and the other indemnified parties
as defined in this article. Waivers of subrogation shall be provided in favor of all indemnified parties.
(4) The operator shall present to the town copies of the pertinent portion of the insurance policies
evidencing all coverage and endorsements required by this section before the issuance of the well
permit.
(5) Claims-made policies shall not be accepted except for excess policies and environmental
impairment (or seepage and pollution) policies.
(d) Required insurance coverage.
(1) Commercial or comprehensive general liability insurance.
(A) Bodily injury and property damage coverage shall be a minimum combined single limit
of $25,000,000.00 per occurrence with an annual general aggregate coverage of
$50,000,000.00. This coverage must include premises, operations, blowout, or explosion,
products, completed operations, blanket contractual liability, underground property damage,
underground reservoir (or resources) damage, broad form property damage, independent
contractor's protective liability, and personal injury.
(B) Underground reservoir (or resources) damage coverage shall be on an occurrence basis,
shall not be limited to sudden and accidental occurrences, shall not have a discovery or
reporting limitation and shall not exclude damage to water tables, formation, or strata.
(C) Environmental impairment (or seepage and pollution) coverage shall be either included
in the comprehensive general liability coverage or as separate coverage. Such coverage shall
not exclude damage to the lease site. If environmental impairment (or seepage and pollution)
coverage as written on a “claims-made” basis, the policy must provide that any retroactive date
applicable precedes the effective date of the issuance of the permit. Coverage shall apply to
sudden and accidental pollution conditions resulting from the escape or release of smoke,
vapors, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids, oil and gas, waste material, or other
irritants, contaminants, or pollutants. Such policy shall provide for a minimum combined single
limit coverage of $75,000,000.00 per occurrence. A discovery period for such peril shall not be
less than ten years after the occurrence.
(2) Automobile liability insurance. Minimum combined single limit of $20,000,000.00 per
occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. Such coverage shall include owned, nonowned
and hired vehicles.
(3) Worker's compensation insurance. In addition to the minimum statutory requirements, coverage
shall include employer's liability limits of at least $1,000,000.00 for each accident, $1,000,000.00 for
each employee, and $1,000,000.00 for occupational disease, and the insurer shall agree to waive
rights of subrogation against the town, its departments, agents, officers, servants, employees,
sponsors, and volunteers, the inspector, and each of their respective heirs, personal representatives,
successors and assigns, for any work performed for the town by the operator.
(4) Excess (or umbrella) liability insurance. Minimum limit of $50,000,000.00 providing excess
coverage for each of the perils insured by the preceding liability insurance policies.
(5) Control of well insurance.
(A) Minimum limit of $10,000,000.00 per occurrence, with a maximum deductible of
$250,000.00 per occurrence.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 608/665
(B) Policy shall cover the cost of controlling a well that is out of control, redrilling or
restoration expenses, and seepage and pollution damage. Damage to property in the operator's
care, custody and control with a sub-limit of $500,000.00 may be added.
(e) Security.
(1) The operator shall file with the town a cash bond in the amount of $200,000.00 covering each
pad site before the issuance of the well permit for the well.
(2) As to each well, the cash bond shall secure the obligations of the operator to:
(A) Comply with the road repair agreement and the insurance provisions set forth in this
article.
(B) Pay fines and penalties imposed upon the operator by the town for any breach of the well
permit, this article, or the zoning ordinance if the operator fails to pay such fines or penalties
within 15 days of the assessment of such fines or penalties.
(C) Comply with the conditions of the applicable conditional use permit.
(D) Comply with the performance obligations of this article including but not limited to the
screening requirements.
Sec. 14.04.041 Seismic survey permit requirements
(a) A separate seismic survey permit shall be required for all seismic surveys. The operator conducting the
seismic survey shall complete and submit a seismic survey application to the town containing, at a minimum, the
following information:
(1) Operator name, phone number, facsimile transmission number, address, and email address.
(2) If the operator is a corporation or other noncorporeal entity, the state of incorporation or
organization; or if the operator is a partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners.
(3) Location of seismic survey.
(4) Date and time the seismic survey will be conducted.
(5) Detailed explanation of the seismic survey method to be used on site.
(6) Date and time the seismic survey will be completed.
(7) Identification of all staging areas.
(8) Evidence or documentation that the activity will adhere to the requirements of town regulations
related to tree protection.
(b) Under no circumstances may explosive charges, including but not limited to the use of dynamite, be used
to conduct a seismic survey. In addition, the seismic survey activity shall be conducted in accordance with all
applicable town regulations.
(c) A fee in the amount set in the town's fee schedule must accompany each seismic survey permit application.
(d) No seismic activity shall be permitted on town-owned fee property without the express consent of, and
pursuant to the conditions established by, the town council.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 609/665
(e) No seismic activity shall be permitted within town owned rights-of-way or utility easements without first
entering into a license agreement with the town, prepared by the town engineer.
(f) Proof of insurance in the form of a standard commercial general liability insurance bond shall be required
to conduct seismic survey(s) within the corporate limits of the town. This coverage must include premises,
operation, products, completed operations, sudden or accidental pollution, blanket contractual liability, broad
form property damage, independent contractors' protective liability, and personal injury. This coverage shall be a
minimum combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence location for bodily injury
and property damage.
(g) A detailed map showing the locations of all vibration and geophone points.
(h) A road repair agreement obligating the seismic operator to fund the repair of any damage caused by the
operator to town infrastructure.
Sec. 14.04.042 No assumption of responsibility by town and no waiver of immunity
(a) Nothing in division 1 or division 2 of this article shall be construed as an assumption by the town of any
responsibility of an operator of a well not owned by the town, and no town officer, employee or agent shall have
authority to relieve an operator from their responsibility under division 1 or division 2 of this article or by any
other law or town regulation.
(b) Nothing in division 1 or division 2 of this article shall be construed as a waiver of immunity from suit or
from liability with respect to the town, its officials or employees and to the fullest possible extent all such
immunities and all other limitations on liability are retained.
Secs. 14.04.043–14.04.060 Reserved
Division 3. Pipeline Development Regulations
Part I. In General
Sec. 14.04.061 Purpose
It is the purpose of this division to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards, and regulations for
present and future operations related to transporting oil and gas and other substances produced in association
with oil and gas, within the corporate limits of the town to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the
public; minimize the potential impact to property and persons; provide for separation between residential uses
and incompatible pipeline uses; avoid unreasonable burdens on residential tracts of land caused by easements
and utility uses that prevent or hinder the full use and development of such residential tracts; protect the quality
of the environment; and encourage the safe and orderly transport of oil and gas resources.
Sec. 14.04.062 Definitions
The words and phrases used in this division are specifically defined in section 14.04.002 of this article. All
technical industry words or phrases related to the transportation of oil, gas, hydrocarbons, and other substances
produced in association with oil, gas, and other hydrocarbons not specifically defined shall have meanings
customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas pipeline industry.
Sec. 14.04.063 Exemption for franchised utility pipelines
Nothing contained in this division shall apply to a pipeline for which a franchise has been obtained from the
town.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 610/665
Sec. 14.04.064 Pipeline permit requirements
It shall be unlawful for any person, acting either for himself or as an agent, employee, independent contractor, or
servant of any other person, to commence to install, construct, reconstruct, rework, modify, replace, or operate a
pipeline or any section of a pipeline or to assist in the installation, construction, reconstruction, reworking,
modification, replacement, or operation of a pipeline, or install monitoring or recovery wells, unless the
appropriate pipeline permit has first been obtained permitting such activities. Applicants shall request a pipeline
permit in accordance with sections 14.04.031–14.04.033 of this article.
Secs. 14.04.065–14.04.090 Reserved
Part II. Regulated Pipelines
Sec. 14.04.091 General requirements and construction standards
The following regulations shall apply to all regulated pipelines:
(1) No regulated pipeline for the transportation of gas, oil, or hydrocarbons shall be constructed or
laid except on rights-of-way or easements owned by the owners or operators of wells or third-party
pipeline companies, or upon designated drilling tracts and upon rights-of-way or easements necessary
to connect future wells to present lines.
(2) In order to install, construct, maintain, repair, replace, modify, remove, or operate a regulated
pipeline, the pipeline operator must first obtain from the town an easement or license on, over, under,
along, or across any affected town streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other town property. Such easement
or license shall continue for as long as pipeline operations continue under any regulated pipeline
permit.
(3) The pipeline operator of any regulated pipeline shall:
(A) Not interfere with or damage existing utilities including but not limited to: water, sewer
or gas lines, storm drains, electric lines, or the facilities of public utilities located on, under, or
across the course of such right-of-way.
(B) Construct such pipeline or cause same to be constructed out of new pipe.
(C) Grade, level and restore the affected property to the same surface condition, as nearly
practicable, as existed before operations were first commenced.
(D) Backfill all trenches and compact such trenches to 95 percent standard density proctor in
eight-inch lifts and construct the regulated pipeline so as to maintain a minimum depth of eight
feet below the finished grade except in public rights-of-way, where minimum cover to the top
of the pipe shall be at least eight feet below the bottom of any adjacent roadside ditch. No
public roads may be crossed by open cut. During the backfill of any regulated pipeline
excavations, the pipeline operator shall bury “buried pipeline” warning tape one foot (1') above
any such pipeline to warn future excavators of the presence of a buried pipeline. The town may
require that sections of proposed regulated pipeline be constructed at deeper depths based upon
future town infrastructure needs. The administrator may also require that a proposed or existing
regulated pipeline be relocated should it conflict with the proposed alignment and depth of a
gravity dependent utility.
(E) Construct, repair, and/or maintain all regulated pipelines so as to meet or exceed the
applicable minimum criteria established by the statutory or regulatory requirements of the state
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 611/665
and federal governments for such pipeline.
(F) Design and construct all regulated pipelines in accordance with this part and the latest
standards mandated by the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) and railroad commission
for pipelines operating within a class 3 location in accordance with 49 CFR 192.111.
(G) Equip all regulated pipelines with an automated pressure monitoring system that detects
leaks and shuts off any line or any section of line that develops a leak.
(4) Upon approval of a pipeline permit, and prior to the issuance of such permit, the pipeline
operator shall deposit with the town, and shall maintain at all times during the continuation of
pipeline operations, a fund with the town containing a minimum running balance of $50,000.00 for
each regulated pipeline permit application approved. The funds shall be maintained by the town in an
interest bearing account from which the town shall reimburse itself for the actual administrative
expenses, consulting fees, contracting fees, or the funding of inspector position(s). All interest earned
shall be credited to the fund balance or refunded to the operator if and when the minimum balance is
achieved. The town shall invoice and notify the pipeline operator, in writing, of any deduction from
the application fund, and, within 15 days of receipt thereof, the pipeline operator shall pay to the
town, for deposit into the application fund, the amount necessary to return the balance to $50,000.00.
If the pipeline operator fails to maintain the fund as required by this section, such failure shall
constitute a violation of this article, and the administrator may suspend or revoke the regulated
pipeline permit and the town may pursue all remedies provided in this article for such violation. If the
pipeline subject to the pipeline permit is disconnected from all sources or supplies of gas, hazardous
liquids, and chemicals and capped or sealed at the ends and/or removed in accordance with the
provisions of this part, and any required site remediation completed, following final inspection and
approval by the town, and fulfillment by the pipeline operator of all of pipeline operator's obligations
under this article, the town shall return any remaining account balance to the operator or the
operator's approved assign.
(5) The pipeline operator shall give notice 96 hours prior to the commencement of pipeline
construction to all residents, owners or operators of habitable structures and protected use areas that
are located within 1,000 feet of the proposed centerline of the pipeline.
(6) Within 60 days after completion of pipeline construction the pipeline operator shall provide the
town with as-built or record drawings of the pipelines.
(7) A preconstruction conference with town staff shall be required prior to the commencement of
pipeline construction.
Sec. 14.04.092 Regulated pipeline permit application requirements
(a) At least 45 days prior to the scheduled commencement of the installation, construction, reconstruction,
reworking, modification, replacement, or operation of a new regulated pipeline, the pipeline operator shall
submit an application and pay a fee in the amount set in the town's fee schedule for a regulated pipeline permit to
the town.
(b) A regulated pipeline permit application shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Any applications for a new regulated pipeline or other activities regulated by this part shall be
submitted to the town on a form prescribed by the town.
(2) Each application for a regulated pipeline permit shall be accompanied by plans showing the
dimensions and locations of the regulated pipeline and related items or facilities within the subject
right-of-way or easement, as well as all proposed lift stations, pumps, or other service structures
related to such pipeline and the location, type and size of all existing utilities, drainage, right-of-way,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 612/665
and roadway improvements. The plans must additionally show the elevation and location of all
known public utilities within 15 feet of the centerline of the proposed pipeline. Any application that
fails to meet these requirements will be returned unified to the applicant.
(3) Within 30 days after the date of filing of said application and plans, the town shall send notice
to the applicant as to whether the application will be accepted for processing. If the application is
rejected, reasons for rejection of the application shall be provided in writing.
(c) The following information shall be provided in the application for a regulated pipeline permit:
(1) The name, business addresses and telephone numbers of the pipeline operator.
(2) The names, titles and telephone numbers of the following:
(A) The person signing the application on behalf of the pipeline operator.
(B) The person designated as the principal contact for the submittal.
(C) The person designated as the 24-hour emergency contact.
(3) The origin point and the destination of the proposed subject pipeline.
(4) A text description of the general location of the proposed subject pipeline.
(5) A description of the substance to be transported through the proposed subject pipeline.
(6) A copy of the substance material safety data sheet (MSDS).
(7) The maximum allowable operating pressure on the proposed subject pipeline, along with the
specified minimum yield strength (SMYS) of the pipe, its pressure class, and design calculations in
accordance with 49 CFR 192.105, assuming a class 3 or better location.
(8) The normal operating pressure range of the proposed subject pipeline, not to exceed the
maximum allowable operating pressure as designated above.
(9) Engineering plans, drawings, and/or maps with summarized specifications showing the
horizontal location, covering depths, and location of shutoff valves of the proposed subject pipeline.
To the extent that information can be obtained, drawings shall show the location of other pipelines
and utilities that will be crossed or paralleled within 15 feet of the proposed subject pipeline right-ofway.
(10) A description of the consideration given to matters of public safety and the avoidance, as far
as practicable, of existing habitable structures and congregated areas.
(11) Detailed cross section drawings for all public street right-of-way and easement crossings.
(12) Methods to be used to prevent both internal and external corrosion.
(13) A binder or certificates of all bonds and insurance as required under this division.
(14) To the extent not otherwise expressly stated in this section: all information and materials
applicable to a pipeline required to be submitted for a permit under section 14.04.032 of this article;
and a site plan as required under section 14.04.033 of this article containing all information
applicable to a pipeline.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 613/665
(15) All application materials required pursuant to the town's tree preservation
ordinance/regulation, as amended, including a tree survey measured from the outer edge of any
improvements, construction areas, development, equipment, materials, temporary roads, access
easements and/or built structures, extending 25 feet, without regard to intervening structures or
objects.
(16) A proposed alignment strip map showing name and address of all affected property owners.
(17) All required application and permit fees.
Sec. 14.04.093 Permit review process and procedures
(a) No regulated pipeline permit shall be approved or issued if the proposed activities do not fully conform to
all provisions of this article and all other applicable town ordinances, state and federal law. No regulated pipeline
permit may be issued unless and until a conditional use permit is approved by the town council for the well or
wells within the town intended to be served by such pipeline.
(b) All requirements for a regulated pipeline permit as provided in this part must be completed by the pipeline
operator prior to any regulated pipeline permit being considered as being administratively complete. Any
application submitted that is determined to be administratively incomplete shall be returned to the pipeline
operator with no action taken by the town.
(c) Within 30 days after the date of presentation of said application and plans, the administrator shall send
notice to the applicant as to whether the application will be accepted for filing and the total charge due. If the
application is rejected as incomplete, the administrator shall provide the reasons for rejection of the application
in writing.
(d) After the filing of an administratively complete application, a meeting between the applicant and town
staff may be conducted to seek resolution of any substantive, nonresolvable technical issues.
(e) Any change in service of a pipeline not previously addressed by this part to gas, hazardous liquid, or
chemical service as a regulated pipeline must be reviewed in accordance with the new pipeline review procedure
outlined herein, as if it were a new regulated pipeline.
(f) If construction of a regulated pipeline has not commenced within six months of the date of issuance of the
regulated pipeline permit, or if the regulated pipeline has not been completed and the surface restored within one
year, the regulated pipeline permit shall expire. If the regulated pipeline permit and construction of the subject
pipeline has commenced but has not yet been completed, the pipeline operator shall immediately cease
construction but shall complete any site remediation required by this part or other applicable law, regulation or
ordinance.
Sec. 14.04.094 Pipeline information reporting requirements
(a) Each pipeline operator subject to this part shall provide to the town the names, mailing addresses, and
telephone numbers of at least two primary persons, officers, or contacts available on a 24-hour basis and at least
two alternative persons, officers, or contacts to be reached in the event the primary contacts are unavailable who:
(1) Can initiate appropriate actions to respond to an emergency.
(2) Have access to information on the location of the closest shutoff valve to any specific point in
the town.
(3) Can furnish the common name of the material then being carried by the pipeline. Any change
in the above-referenced contact information must be provided to the town by contacting the town
prior to such change.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 614/665
(b) Every pipeline operator subject to this part shall be required to present to the town a safety report and file
with the town an annual verified safety report in letter form on or before June 30th of each year to cover a
reporting period of June 1st through May 31st. Said written safety report shall contain the following information:
(1) A statement that the pipeline has no outstanding safety violations as determined in an
inspection or audit by either the railroad commission and/or the U.S. Department of Transportation
with regard to any pipeline operating within the town. Alternatively, if there are any safety violations
as determined by the railroad commission and/or the U.S. Department of Transportation that have not
been corrected, these shall be described to the town with an action plan to correct the safety
violations. Said action plan shall include a timeline for corrective action and the individual or firm
responsible for each action.
(2) Evidence that the pipeline operator has current liability insurance as required by this part.
(3) A statement that the pipeline information specified in subsection (a) of this section is correct.
Alternatively, in the event that the required information on file with the town is no longer correct,
updated or corrected information shall be submitted within five days of the change and the updated
information shall be submitted with the annual safety report.
(4) If the pipeline operator has no reporting responsibility to the railroad commission or the U.S.
Department of Transportation and is otherwise exempt from the safety regulations of either of such
agencies, the following documents pertaining to the preceding reporting period of June 1st through
May 31st:
(A) Copies of internal reports of responses to pipeline emergencies, as pipeline emergency is
defined in this article.
(B) Current operations and maintenance logs.
(C) Current emergency action plan.
(5) A log of all the maintenance and monitoring activities conducted on all lines subject to this
division for the reporting period shall be made available upon request by the town.
(6) The pipeline operator subject to this part shall submit the annual safety report with respect to
all pipelines subject to the ordinances of the town. The safety report and verification shall be
executed by an officer or a person who is authorized to sign such safety report letter and make
verification.
(c) The actual administrative costs incurred by the town in reviewing the annual safety letter shall be billed
directly to the pipeline operator's fund balance established pursuant to this part.
(d) Each pipeline operator subject to this part shall file a copy of all initial or followup reports provided to the
U.S. Department of Transportation or the railroad commission on unsafe pipeline conditions, pipeline
emergencies or pipeline incidents within the town concurrently with the town. In addition, such pipeline operator
shall file any initial or followup reports filed with state and federal environmental regulatory agencies pertaining
to pipeline releases within the town concurrently with the town.
(e) Upon written request, each pipeline operator subject to this part shall make available during normal
business hours and at the pipeline operator's local office, documents for review that are required for submittal to
or to be maintained on file for the U.S. Department of Transportation and the railroad commission, including but
not limited to the following:
(1) Operations and maintenance records.
(2) Employee training records.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 615/665
(3) Annual inspection reports.
(4) Repair records.
(5) Operating records.
(6) Insurance records.
Sec. 14.04.095 Pipeline markers
(a) In accordance with U.S. Department of Transportation and railroad commission requirements, each
pipeline operator subject to this part shall place and maintain permanent line markers as close as practical over
the regulated pipeline(s) at each crossing of a public street, utility easement and railroad. Marker(s) shall also be
maintained along each regulated pipeline that is located above ground in an area accessible to the public. The
markers shall be of permanent type construction and contain labeling identifying the:
(1) Pipeline operator.
(2) Twenty-four-hour contact telephone number.
(3) A general description of the product transported in the pipeline; i.e., natural gas, oil, petroleum.
(b) No person shall tamper with, deface, damage, or remove any pipeline marker, except the pipeline operator.
(c) Upon written request of the owner of real property on which a habitable structure is located and through
which a regulated pipeline traverses, the pipeline operator shall install temporary pipeline markers or flagging to
reduce the possibility of pipeline damage or interference, in accordance with this division.
(d) The material, design, color, size, and content of each line marker shall be subject to town council approval
prior to installation.
Sec. 14.04.096 One call system
A pipeline operator that transports gas, oil, liquids, or hydrocarbons through a regulated pipeline located in the
town shall be a member in good standing with the one call system or other approved excavation monitoring
system as required by state law. The pipeline operator that transports gas, oil, liquids, or hydrocarbons through a
regulated pipeline subject to this part shall contract for service with the selected underground utility coordinating
system for a minimum of five years unless there is an agreement to change to an alternate system between the
town and the pipeline operator. Said pipeline operator shall maintain such services without interruption for the
life of the regulated pipeline permit. The selected underground utility coordinating system may be different than
the one used by the town for other underground utility services.
Sec. 14.04.097 Inactive and idled pipelines
(a) The following regulations shall apply to inactive pipelines:
(1) A pipeline operator subject to this part shall maintain and keep current all reporting records
specified in this part on all pipelines, regardless of whether such pipelines are inactive or idled.
(2) A pipeline operator subject to this part shall purge any inactive pipelines of gas, hazardous
liquids, and chemicals, and physically isolate such pipeline if such action does not adversely affect
the pipeline operator's right-of-way easement and does not prevent the pipeline operator from
maintaining the physical integrity of the pipeline. A pipeline operator subject to this part shall
maintain any inactive pipelines to prevent deterioration.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 616/665
(3) If a regulated pipeline is physically isolated as provided herein, a pipeline operator subject to
this part shall include a detailed, written description of the means used to physically isolate the
inactive pipeline along with the information required to be provided to the town under section
14.04.094 of this article.
(b) The following regulations shall apply to idled pipelines:
(1) If a regulated pipeline is idled, a pipeline operator subject to this part shall make an entry to the
required reporting records as required in this part that the pipeline has been idled.
(2) If a regulated pipeline is idled, a pipeline operator subject to this part shall purge and
disconnect such pipeline from all sources or supplies of gas, hazardous liquids, and chemicals, and
cap or seal such pipeline at the ends.
(3) Reactivation of idled regulated pipelines shall require notification to the town pursuant to the
standards and requirements specified in this part. Reactivation shall require pressure testing for
integrity and compliance with railroad commission and/or U.S. Department of Transportation
regulations.
Sec. 14.04.098 Emergency response plans and emergency incident reporting
(a) Each pipeline operator subject to this part shall maintain written procedures to minimize the hazards
resulting from an emergency. These procedures shall at a minimum provide for the following:
(1) Prompt and effective response to emergencies, including but not limited to the following:
(A) Leaks or releases that can impact public health, safety, or welfare.
(B) Fire or explosions at or in the vicinity of a pipeline or pipeline easement.
(C) Natural disasters.
(2) Effective means to notify and communicate required and pertinent information to local fire,
police, and public officials during an emergency.
(3) The availability of personnel, equipment, tools, and materials as necessary at the scene of an
emergency.
(4) Measures to be taken to reduce public exposure to injury and probability of accidental death or
dismemberment.
(5) Emergency shut down and pressure reduction of a pipeline.
(6) The safe restoration of service following an emergency or incident.
(7) A followup incident investigation to determine the cause of the incident and require the
implementation of corrective measures.
(b) Each pipeline operator subject to this part shall meet annually with the inspector and fire inspector to
review emergency response plans. These reviews shall be in accord with U.S. Department of Transportation and
railroad commission requirements and the pipeline operator will do the following:
(1) Furnish or update a copy of the emergency response plan described in subsection (a) of this
section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 617/665
(2) Review the responsibilities of each governmental organization in response to an emergency or
incident.
(3) Review the capabilities of the pipeline operator to respond to an emergency or incident.
(4) Identify the types of emergencies or incidents that will result in or require contacting the town.
(5) Plan mutual activities that the town and the pipeline operator can engage in to minimize risks
associated with pipeline operation.
(6) The town shall provide the pipeline operator with a list of additional contacts that shall be made
in the event of a pipeline emergency or incident. The town will inform the pipeline operator of the
emergency response groups that will be contacted through 911.
(c) Upon discovery of a pipeline emergency or incident, any affected pipeline operator subject to this part
shall as soon as practical communicate to the town the following information:
(1) A general description of the emergency or incident.
(2) The location of the emergency or incident.
(3) The name and telephone number of the person reporting the emergency or incident.
(4) The name of the pipeline operator.
(5) Whether or not any hazardous material is involved and identification of the hazardous material
so involved.
(6) Any other information as requested by the emergency dispatcher or other such official at the
time of reporting the emergency or incident.
(d) Upon discovery of a pipeline emergency or incident, a pipeline operator subject to this part shall contact
any other emergency response groups that are necessary that may not be activated through the county 911
system.
(e) Upon discovery of a pipeline emergency or incident, a pipeline operator subject to this part shall contact
the fire department immediately after the discovery of any pipeline emergency.
(f) Notwithstanding any provision in this division, each pipeline operator subject to this part shall equip and
maintain any pipeline containing natural gas which contains hydrogen sulfide in concentrations of more than 100
parts per 1,000,000,000 with an audible alarm system that will provide an alarm to the general public in the
event of a leak from any pipeline, gathering, or flow line subject to this division. Said audible alarm system shall
be of a type and design approved by the town.
(g) Within two years of the effective date of the pipeline permit and every two years thereafter, each pipeline
operator subject to this part shall conduct an on-site, emergency drill that includes, but shall not be limited to, the
personnel operating the pipeline, local law enforcement personnel and officials of the town.
(h) Notwithstanding the foregoing, a pipeline operator subject to this part shall report all incidents involving
well safety or integrity that do not rise to the level of a pipeline emergency to the town by completing an
incident report on forms prepared by the town. Incident reports must be filed by the pipeline operator within 24
hours of discovering the incident.
Sec. 14.04.099 Pipeline repairs and maintenance
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 618/665
(a) All repairs and maintenance of regulated pipelines are to be performed in accordance with U.S.
Department of Transportation and railroad commission mechanical integrity requirements.
(b) If nonemergency repairs necessitate excavation of a regulated pipeline, the pipeline operator shall send
notification to occupants of business establishments and residential dwellings located within 500 feet from the
centerline of the pipeline to be excavated at least ten days prior to commencing such repairs.
(c) If aboveground nonemergency repairs that are not routine maintenance are required, the pipeline operator
shall send notification to occupants of businesses and residential dwellings located within 500 feet from the
centerline of the pipeline section to be repaired at least ten days prior to commencing such repairs.
(d) The notice required in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be sent by U.S. regular mail, postage
prepaid mailed at least ten days prior to commencing any nonemergency repair; provided, however, that the
pipeline operator may use hand delivery notice as an alternative, at the pipeline operator's discretion.
(e) Inspection of the interior of all regulated pipelines shall comply with U.S. Department of Transportation
and railroad commission rules.
Sec. 14.04.100 No assumption of responsibility by town and no waiver of immunity
(a) Nothing in this part shall be construed as an assumption by the town of any responsibility of a pipeline
operator of a regulated pipeline not owned by the town, and no town officer, employee, or agent shall have
authority to relieve a pipeline operator from their responsibility under this part or by any other law, ordinance, or
resolution.
(b) Nothing in this part shall be construed as a waiver of immunity from suit or from liability with respect to
the town, its officials, or employees and to the fullest possible extent all such immunities and all other
limitations on liability are retained.
Sec. 14.04.101 Protection and painting of structures
A pipeline operator subject to this part shall keep protected and painted all pipeline risers and all appurtenances
related to regulated pipeline construction and operations which are composed of materials which are generally
protected or painted. Such operator shall repaint all such items at sufficiently frequent intervals to maintain same
in good condition. It shall be a violation of this article for any pipeline operator subject to this part to permit any
pipeline riser and/or appurtenances related to pipeline construction and operations to be in a state of disrepair or
to have chipped, peeling, or unpainted portions thereof.
Sec. 14.04.102 No implied grant of easement for street and right-of-way use
(a) In the event a regulated pipeline is placed within any public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the
town, the pipeline operator shall comply with the right-of-way use regulations as provided in this code. Nothing
in this part grants permission for the use of any street, right-of-way, or property of the town, and any such use
shall be subject to the town at its sole discretion.
(b) To the extent that the provisions of this part conflict with the town's right-of-way use
ordinance/regulations, this part shall control.
Sec. 14.04.103 Violations
(a) Any pipeline operator subject to this part, who shall have failed to comply with this division, shall be
deemed to be maintaining a nuisance and the town may take such measures to remedy such nuisance, including
but not limited to revocation of the pipeline operator's pipeline permit.
(b) It shall be a violation of this part for a person to knowingly make a misrepresentation of any information
to be reported pursuant to this division. It shall also be a violation of this part if the person makes such
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 619/665
misrepresentation as a result of failure to exercise such due diligence of investigation or inquiry, as would a
reasonably prudent pipeline operator conducting business in the jurisdiction of the town.
(c) Each violation of any section, subsection, or part of this part shall be a separate offense. Each day of
ongoing violation shall be a separate offense, and shall carry with it a fine of not less than $1,000.00 per day and
not more than $2,000.00 per day. If fines are not paid within 30 days of issuance, the well permit may be
suspended or revoked by the town.
(d) The town shall be entitled to injunctive relief or any other appropriate relief in a court of appropriate
jurisdiction to prevent violation of or to compel compliance with this part.
Sec. 14.04.104 Bond and insurance required
(a) In the event that a pipeline permit is issued for a regulated pipeline or other operations under this part, no
actual operation shall be commenced until the pipeline operator files with the town secretary a bond and a
certificate of insurance as follows:
(1) No person shall begin the construction or operation of any regulated pipeline until such person
has obtained a valid permit and filed with the town secretary a duly executed bond executed by the
pipeline operator as principal with an A.M. Best “A” rated surety company that is acceptable to the
town and is licensed to conduct business in the state as surety, payable to the town and the policy
shall name the town as an additional insured and such surety company shall maintain an A.M. Best
“A” rating for the policy period. Said bond shall include conditions that the pipeline operator, its
heirs, assigns and successors will do the following:
(A) Comply with the terms and conditions of the application and this part in the construction,
operation and maintenance of the pipeline and related structure(s).
(B) Restore all streets and sidewalks and all other public places and all public utilities that
may be injured or damaged in the operation to their former condition.
(C) Remove all litter, machinery, buildings, trash and waste used, accumulated or allowed in
the construction of any pipeline within ten days of the completion of said construction.
(D) Remove all litter, machinery, buildings, trash and waste used, accumulated or allowed in
the operation of any pipeline within ten days of the completion of said operations.
(2) Such bond shall be in the sum of $5,000,000.00 and before the pipeline permit shall be issued,
the bond must be approved by the town and filed with the town secretary. Such bond shall become
effective upon the granting of the pipeline permit and shall remain in full force and effect until all
work under the terms of such pipeline permit has been completed. Such bond may later be amended
to include other pipelines, under provisions of other applications or other permits.
(3) In addition to the bond required in subsection (a)(1) above of this section, each person desiring
to construct a regulated pipeline or to conduct any other work under the provisions of this part shall
be required to carry public liability insurance with a carrier rated “A” or better by A.M. Best in a
minimum amount of $2,000,000.00 for one person and $10,000,000.00 for one accident and property
damage insurance in the amount of $20,000,000.00 for one accident, which shall remain in full force
and effect and be carried so long as such pipeline is operated. A certificate of insurance shall be
furnished annually by the permittee or the subsequent pipeline operator showing that such insurance
is and continues in effect.
(4) Each pipeline operator subject to this part shall provide and maintain in full force and effect
during the term of its permit insurance with the following minimum limits:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 620/665
(A) Worker's compensation at statutory limits.
(B) Employer's liability, including bodily injury by accident and by disease, for
$1,000,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence and a 12-month aggregate policy limit of
$1,000,000.00.
(C) Commercial general liability coverage, including blanket contractual liability, products
and completed operations, personal injury, bodily injury, broad form property damage,
operations hazard, pollution, explosion, collapse, and underground hazards for $25,000,000.00
per occurrence and a 12-month aggregate policy limit of $50,000,000.00.
(D) Automobile liability insurance (for automobiles used by the pipeline operator in the
course of its performance under the pipeline permit, including employer's nonownership and
hired auto coverage) for $20,000,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence.
(b) The town may adjust the above minimum liability limits every five years during the term of the pipeline
permit, or sooner as determined by town council, to compensate for the effects of inflation and with the objective
to reestablish the value of coverage required as of the effective date of this division.
(c) Each policy or an endorsement thereto, except those for worker's compensation and employer's liability,
shall name the town and its officers, officials, employees, successors, and assigns as additional insured parties,
but limited to risks indemnified pursuant to this division. If any such policy is written as “claims-made”
coverage and the town is required to be carried as an additional insured, then the pipeline operator subject to this
part shall purchase policy period extensions so as to provide coverage to the town for a period of at least two
years after the last date that the pipeline permit is in effect. No deductible shall exceed ten percent of the
minimum limits of liability or one percent of the consolidated net worth of such pipeline operator and its
permitted affiliates, whichever is greater.
(d) Each pipeline operator subject to this part shall assume and bear any claims or losses to the extent of
deductible amounts and waives any claim it may ever have for the same against the town and its officers,
officials, employees, successors, and assigns in respect of any covered event.
(e) All such policies and certificates shall contain an agreement that the insurer shall notify the town in writing
not less than 30 days before any material change, reduction in coverage or cancellation of any policy. Each
pipeline operator subject to this part shall give written notice to the town within five days of the date upon which
total claims by any party against such pipeline operator reduce the aggregate amount of coverage below the
amounts required by the regulated pipeline permit.
(f) Each policy must contain an endorsement to the effect that the insurer waives any claim or right in the
nature of subrogation to recover against the town, its officers, officials, employees, successors, and assigns.
(g) Each policy must contain an endorsement that such policy is primary insurance to any other insurance
available to the town as an additional insured with respect to claims arising thereunder.
(h) The town council may modify the requirements of this section, as it deems appropriate, in order to account
for the risk and possible threat to the public health, safety, and general welfare posed by the operation of
pipelines within the town.
Sec. 14.04.105 Termination of permit
Any violation of the provisions of any or all sections of this part shall be grounds for the termination of any
regulated pipeline permit. The termination of any regulated pipeline permit shall require the immediate cessation
of all operations subject to such pipeline permit and shall require the pipeline operator subject to this part to
reapply for a new pipeline permit in full accordance with the provisions of this part.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 621/665
Secs. 14.04.106–14.04.120 Reserved
Part III. Unregulated Pipelines
Sec. 14.04.121 General requirements and minimum design standards
(a) The provisions of this part shall govern all unregulated pipelines as defined in this article.
(b) The following requirements shall apply to all unregulated pipelines:
(1) No unregulated pipeline for the transportation of gas, oil, or hydrocarbons from wells to be
drilled shall be constructed or laid except on rights-of-way or easements owned by the owners or
operators of wells or third-party pipeline companies, or upon designated drilling tracts and upon
rights-of-way or easements necessary to connect future wells to present lines.
(2) In order to install, construct, maintain, repair, replace, modify, remove, or operate an
unregulated pipeline, the pipeline operator must first obtain from the town an easement on, over,
under, along or across the town streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other town property. Such easement
shall continue for so long as pipeline operations continue under any unregulated pipeline permit.
(c) The pipeline operator of any unregulated pipeline shall do the following:
(1) Not interfere with or damage existing utilities including but not limited to: water, sewer or gas
lines, storm drains, electric lines, or the facilities of public utilities located on, under, or across the
course of such right-of-way.
(2) Grade, level, and restore the affected property to the same surface condition, as nearly
practicable, as existed before operations were first commenced.
(3) Upon completion of pipeline construction the pipeline operator shall provide the town with asbuilt
or record drawings of the pipelines within 60 days. Accuracy of the record drawings shall meet
a survey level of one foot to 50,000 feet. The scale of the record drawings shall be a minimum of one
inch to 40 feet. The drawings shall also be supplied in a DFF digital file format.
Sec. 14.04.122 Unregulated pipeline permit application requirements
(a) At least 45 days prior to the scheduled commencement of the installation, construction, reconstruction,
reworking, modification, replacement, or operation of a new unregulated pipeline, the pipeline operator shall
submit an application and pay a fee in the amount set in the town's fee schedule for a unregulated pipeline permit
to the town.
(b) An unregulated pipeline permit application shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Any applications for a new unregulated pipeline or other activities regulated by this part shall
be submitted to the town on a form prescribed by the town.
(2) Each application for a unregulated pipeline permit shall be accompanied by two paper sets and
one electronic set of plans showing the dimensions and locations of the unregulated pipeline and
related items or facilities within the subject right-of-way or easement, as well as all proposed lift
stations, pumps, or other service structures related to such pipeline and the location, type and size of
all existing utilities, drainage, right-of-way, and roadway improvements. The plans must additionally
show the elevation and location of all known public utilities within 15 feet of the centerline of the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 622/665
proposed pipeline. Any application that fails to meet these requirements will be returned as
incomplete to the applicant.
(3) Within 30 days after the date of filing of said application and plans, the administrator shall send
notice to the pipeline operator as to whether the application will be accepted for processing. If the
application is returned as incomplete, the administrator shall provide notice to the pipeline operator
of the deficiencies.
(c) The following information shall be provided in the application for a unregulated pipeline permit:
(1) The name, business addresses and telephone numbers of the pipeline operator.
(2) The names, titles and telephone numbers of the following:
(A) The person signing the application on behalf of the pipeline operator.
(B) The person designated as the principal contact for the submittal.
(C) The person designated as the 24-hour emergency contact.
(3) The origin point and the destination of the proposed subject pipeline.
(4) A text description of the general location of the proposed subject pipeline.
(5) A description of the substance to be transported through the proposed subject pipeline.
(6) A copy of the substance material safety data sheet (MSDS).
(7) The maximum allowable operating pressure on the proposed subject pipeline, along with the
specified minimum yield strength (SMYS) of the pipe, its pressure class and design calculations in
accordance with 49 CFR 192.105, assuming a class 3 or better location.
(8) The normal operating pressure range of the proposed subject pipeline.
(9) Engineering plans, drawings and/or maps with summarized specifications showing the
horizontal location, covering depths, and location of shutoff valves of the proposed subject pipeline.
(The location of shutoff valves must be known in order for emergency responders to clear area for
access valves.) To the extent that information can be obtained, drawings shall show the location of
other pipelines and utilities that will be crossed or paralleled within 15 feet of the proposed subject
pipeline right-of-way.
(10) Detailed cross section drawings for all public street right-of-way and easement crossings.
(11) A proposed alignment strip map showing name and address of all affected property owners.
(12) To the extent not otherwise expressly stated in this section: all information and materials
applicable to a pipeline required to be submitted for a permit under section 14.04.032 of this article;
and a site plan as required under section 14.04.033 of this article containing all information
applicable to a pipeline.
(13) All required application and permit fees.
Sec. 14.04.123 Permit approval process and procedures
If the administrator determines that the unregulated pipeline permit application is administratively complete,
then the administrator shall issue the unregulated pipeline permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 623/665
Sec. 14.04.124 Pipeline information reporting requirements
(a) Each pipeline operator subject to this part shall provide to the inspector, the fire inspector, and the police
chief the names, mailing addresses and telephone numbers of at least two primary persons, officers or contacts
available on a 24-hour basis and at least two alternative persons, officers or contacts to be reached in the event
that the primary contacts are unavailable who:
(1) Can initiate appropriate actions to respond to an emergency.
(2) Have access to information on the location of the closest shutoff valve to any specific point in
the town.
(3) Can furnish the common name of the material then being carried by the pipeline. Any change
in the above information must be provided to the town by contacting the inspector prior to such
change.
(b) Each pipeline operator subject to this part shall file a copy of all initial or followup reports provided to the
U.S. Department of Transportation or the railroad commission on unsafe pipeline conditions, pipeline
emergencies or pipeline incidents within the town concurrently with the town. In addition, such pipeline operator
shall file any initial or followup reports filed with state and federal environmental regulatory agencies pertaining
to pipeline releases within the town concurrently with the town.
(c) Upon written request, each pipeline operator subject to this part shall make available during normal
business hours and at the pipeline operator's local office, documents for review that are required for submittal to
or to be maintained on file for the U.S. Department of Transportation and the railroad commission, including but
not limited to the following:
(1) Operations and maintenance records.
(2) Employee training records.
(3) Annual inspection reports.
(4) Repair records.
(5) Operating records.
(6) Insurance records.
Sec. 14.04.125 No assumption of responsibility by town
Nothing in this part shall be construed as an assumption by the town of any responsibility of a pipeline operator
of an unregulated pipeline not owned by the town, and no town officer, employee, or agent shall have authority
to relieve a pipeline operator from their responsibility under this part or by any other law, ordinance or
resolution.
Sec. 14.04.126 No implied grant of easement for street and right-of-way use
(a) In the event an unregulated pipeline is placed within any public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the
town, the pipeline operator shall comply with the right-of-way use regulations as provided in this code. Nothing
in this part grants permission for the use of any street, way or property of the town, and any such use shall be
subject to the town at its sole discretion.
(b) To the extent that the provisions of this part conflict with the town's right-of-way use
ordinance/regulations, this part shall control.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 624/665
Sec. 14.04.127 Violations
(a) Any pipeline operator subject to this part, who shall have failed to comply with this division, shall be
deemed to be maintaining a nuisance and the town may take such measures to remedy such nuisance, including
but not limited to revocation of the pipeline operator's pipeline permit.
(b) It shall be a violation of this part for a person to knowingly make a misrepresentation of any information
to be reported pursuant to this division. It shall also be a violation of this part if the person makes such
misrepresentation as a result of failure to exercise such due diligence of investigation or inquiry, as would a
reasonably prudent pipeline operator conducting business in the jurisdiction of the town.
(c) The town shall be entitled to injunctive relief or any other appropriate relief in a court of appropriate
jurisdiction to prevent violation of or to compel compliance with this part.
Sec. 14.04.128 Location of unregulated pipelines
(a) A pipeline operator of an unregulated pipeline shall comply with the conditions established in this section
governing mapping, inventorying, locating, or relocating of unregulated pipelines within private residential areas
within the boundaries of the municipality.
(b) All new or relocated unregulated pipelines within private residential areas shall be located within existing
pipeline corridors within the town, unless the pipeline operator of the unregulated pipeline is able to demonstrate
to the town council, pursuant to a variance request under section 14.04.004 of this article, that such alignment is
infeasible. In addition to the criteria set forth in section 14.04.004 of this article, the town council shall consider
the following criteria when determining the feasibility of locating the new or relocated unregulated pipeline in
established pipeline corridors in the town:
(1) The availability and cost of established pipeline corridor space.
(2) The availability and cost of right-of-way to and from the established pipeline corridor.
(3) Technical, environmental, safety, efficiency, and cost issues related to building, operating and
maintaining both the portion of the unregulated pipeline that would be located in the established
pipeline corridor and the lengths of unregulated pipeline required to gain access to and from the
established pipeline corridor.
(4) Any delays in right-of-way acquisition or construction of unregulated pipeline that may result
from routing through an established pipeline corridor.
(5) The availability of an alternative right-of-way to the pipeline operator.
(c) Where the town council determines it is not feasible for a new or relocated unregulated pipeline to be
located within an established pipeline corridor within private residential areas, the unregulated pipeline must:
(1) For platted property, be located within mandatory front, side yard or rear setback areas.
(2) For unplatted property, be contiguous and adjacent to the property boundaries of fee parcels or
existing easements to avoid unnecessary fragmentation of land and avoid diagonal routes that would
create unusable slivers of land.
(3) Avoid areas of unique recreational or aesthetic importance, environmentally sensitive areas, and
areas of historical or cultural significance.
(4) Avoid conflict with the location and opening of planned future streets and laying of planned
water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer lines incident to future private residential area development.
The ultimate location of an unregulated pipeline that is infeasible of being located or relocated within
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 625/665
an established pipeline corridor within the town shall be established by the town council during the
variance procedure pursuant to section 14.04.004 of this article, taking into account the requirements
of this subsection (c).
(d) The burden of establishing that a pipeline is an unregulated pipeline as defined in this article shall be on
the pipeline operator. If a pipeline operator asserts that a pipeline is an unregulated pipeline as defined in this
article, the pipeline operator shall file a notice so providing with the administrator with the permit application
required by this article, accompanied by facts and documentation sufficient to establish such status. The
administrator shall review such notice and documentation and, with the assistance of the town attorney, shall
determine whether such pipeline is an unregulated pipeline as defined in this article. If the administrator
determines that such pipeline is a regulated pipeline, as opposed to an unregulated pipeline, it shall be so treated;
provided, however, that the pipeline operator may appeal such determination as provided in this article.
Sec. 14.04.129 Subdivision of property burdened by pipeline
(a) When one or more residential lots in a proposed subdivision are crossed or come by or come within 100
feet of any existing oil or gas pipeline or pipeline easement, the subdivider shall, prior to and as a condition of
town approval of the subdivision, execute the following waiver and hold harmless agreement, which shall be
duly acknowledged in the manner provided by law, and which shall thereafter be recorded in the appropriate
deed or other permanent county records:
“[Subdivider Name], by and through its duly undersigned and authorized officer, does hereby state
that it fully realizes that it is applying for a permit from the Town of Fairview to build within 100 feet
of an existing oil or gas pipeline or pipeline easement, and that the Town of Fairview considers
building near such pipeline or pipeline easement to have certain inherent dangers, including but not
limited to explosion and release of noxious, toxic and flammable substances. For the aforementioned
reasons [Subdivider Name] hereby RELEASES AND AGREES TO FOREVER DEFEND,
PROTECT, INDEMNIFY AND HOLD HARMLESS THE TOWN OF FAIRVIEW, TEXAS, ITS
OFFICERS, OFFICIALS, EMPLOYEES, SUCCESSORS, AND ASSIGNS FROM ALL
LIABILITY IN ANY WAY ARISING FROM THE BUILDING, USE OR HABITATION OF
[STRUCTURE DESCRIBED IN THE SAID PERMIT].”
(b) In all cases in which one or more residential lots in a proposed subdivision are crossed or come by or come
within 100 feet of any existing oil or gas pipeline or pipeline easement, the subdivider shall provide a note on the
face of the development plan and record plat stating that the subdivision is crossed or is located within 100 feet
of an existing oil or gas pipeline, and indicate the location of such pipeline on the face of the development plan
and record plat.
Sec. 14.04.130 Waiver/hold harmless agreement required for issuance of building permit
(a) Any person, firm or corporation wishing to obtain a building permit for the erection, construction,
reconstruction or expansion of any structure, of which any portion of such erection, construction, reconstruction
or expansion would occur within 100 feet of an existing oil or gas pipeline or pipeline easement shall, prior to
and as a condition of the issuance of such building permit, execute the following waiver and hold harmless
agreement, which shall be duly acknowledged in the manner provided by law and which shall thereafter be
notarized and recorded in the appropriate deed or other permanent county records:
“I, [Applicant's Name], do hereby state, on my oath, that I fully realize I am applying for a permit
from the Town of Fairview to build within 100 feet of an existing oil or gas pipeline easement; that I
am fully aware of the dangers inherent in building near such pipeline or easement, including but not
limited to explosion and release of noxious, toxic and flammable substances; and, further, that I DO
HEREBY RELEASE AND AGREE TO FOREVER DEFEND, PROTECT, INDEMNIFY AND
HOLD HARMLESS THE TOWN OF FAIRVIEW, TEXAS, ITS OFFICERS, OFFICIALS,
EMPLOYEES, SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS FROM ALL LIABILITY IN ANY WAY ARISING
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 626/665
FROM THE BUILDING, USE OR HABITATION OF THE STRUCTURE DESCRIBED IN THE
SAID PERMIT.”
(b) Prior to beginning any excavation, trenching or digging using powered equipment or hand tools that may
damage a pipeline, any person within the town shall be required to contact the one call system and any other
appropriate underground utility coordinating systems and determine if there are any pipelines or public utilities
in the vicinity of the proposed activities.
(c) If physical contact is made with a pipeline during any excavation, trenching or digging, the pipeline
operator must be notified by the person or agency making the physical contact with the pipeline for any
necessary pipeline inspection or repair.
(Ordinance 2011-12-6D, sec. 2.03 adopted 12/6/11)
CHAPTER 15
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE 15.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 15.01.001 Title
This chapter shall be known as the town public right-of-way management ordinance.
Sec. 15.01.002 Adoption of implementation guidelines and design manual
The town adopts by reference “Implementing Local Government Code chapter 284,” as published by the Texas Coalition
of Cities for Utility Issues, June 12, 2017 (“implementation guidelines”). The town also adopts by reference the “Town of
Fairview Design Manual for the Installation of Network Nodes and Node Support Poles” pursuant to Tex. Loc. Gov. Code,
chapter 284” (as amended)(“design manual”). References to the implementation guidelines and design manual shall be
interpreted to correspond to the version adopted by the town at the time of the relevant event. Copies of these documents
shall be maintained on file with the town secretary.
Sec. 15.01.003 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
Antenna, microwave reflector and antenna support structure.
(1) Antenna or antennae. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services, including directional antennas
(such as panels, wireless cable and dishes) and omni-directional antennas (such as whips), but not
including satellite earth stations, and including without limitation microwave reflectors. This term
does not include network nodes or micro network nodes.
(2) Antenna support structure. Any tower, mast, tripod, box frame, pole (other than a pole as
defined in this section) or other structure utilized for the purpose of supporting one or more antennae
or microwave reflectors, including without limitation structures that have a primary or secondary use
in addition to supporting one or more antennae or microwave reflectors.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 627/665
(3) Microwave reflector. An apparatus constructed of solid, open mesh, bar-configured, or
perforated materials of any shape or configuration that is used to receive or transmit microwave
signals from a terrestrial or orbitally located transmitter or transmitter relay. Microwave reflectors are
also commonly referred to as satellite receive only earth stations (T.V.R.O.S.), or satellite dishes.
Collocate and collocation. The installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network
nodes or other telecommunications equipment in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a tower or pole, or the process of
adding such equipment to an existing tower or pole.
Construction. Any work performed above the surface, on the surface or beneath the surface of a public right-of-way,
including, but not limited to, installing, servicing, repairing, upgrading, or modifying any facility(ies) in, above or under
the surface of the public right-of-way, and restoring the surface and subsurface of the public right-of-way subject to the
provisions of section 15.02.011. The word “construction” does not include the installation of facilities necessary to initiate
service to a customer's property, or the repair or maintenance of existing facilities unless such installation, repair or
maintenance requires the breaking of pavement, excavation or boring.
Construction security. Any of the following forms of security provided at the owner's option:
(1) Individual project or performance bond;
(2) Cash deposit;
(3) Security of a form listed or approved under state statutes; or
(4) Letter of credit, in a form acceptable by the town.
Decorative pole. A streetlight pole specifically designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no
appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or
special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to this code.
Department. The public works department of the town.
Design district. An area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by town code, and for which the town maintains and
enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis.
Director. The director of the public works department of the town or his or her designee, or another person authorized by
the town manager to act as the director.
Driveway. A vehicular access way designed and intended to serve as access from a public roadway to a lot or parcel of
land adjacent to the public roadway.
Emergency. A condition that:
(1) Poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or an immediate and significant loss of
property; or
(2) Requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order to restore service to a customer.
Facility or facilities. Shall include, but not be limited to, any and all cables, pipelines, poles (other than poles as defined
in this section), transmitters, receivers, splice boxes, tracks, tunnels, utilities, vaults, and other appurtenances or tangible
things owned, leased, operated, or licensed by an owner or owners, that are located or are proposed to be located in a
public right-of-way.
Historic district. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under municipal, state, or federal law.
LGC. The Texas Local Government Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 628/665
Macro tower. A guyed or self-supported pole or monopole greater than the height parameters prescribed by this code or
applicable state or federal law.
Major thoroughfares. United States Highway (US) 75, Texas State Hwy 5, and any other freeways designated as such on
the town's comprehensive plan, and all roadways having four or more lanes.
Micro network node. A network node that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12
inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches.
Municipal authorization. The grant issued by the town and accepted by an individual owner to use the public rights-ofway
in accordance with the ordinances of the town, a franchise agreement, a license, or under operation of state law which
provides a specific grant of authority to use the rights-of-way.
Municipally owned utility pole. A utility pole owned or operated by a municipally owned utility, as defined by the Texas
Utilities Code, section 11.003, which is located in a public right-of-way.
Municipal park. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated by municipal code as a public park for the purpose of
recreational activity. For purposes of this chapter, all town-owned property used for park purposes and any other property
labeled, described, dedicated, or designated for park purposes on a plat recorded in the county property records are deemed
to be designated as municipal parks by this code, so long as such property has been designated by the town as park
property for use by the general public, including but not limited to access easements, trails and sidewalks connecting such
parks. Municipal parks include, but are not limited to, the following: The Village Green Park; The Meadows Park;
Veterans Park; Cypress Park; Roadrunner Trail; Coyote Park; Creekside Park; Monarch Park; Beaver Run Park; Parkside
Trail and Open Space; and Remington Park Trail Connector.
Network node. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a
communications network. The term:
(1) Includes:
(A) Equipment associated with wireless communications;
(B) A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and
(C) Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a
particular collocation;
(2) Does not include:
(A) An electric generator;
(B) A pole; or
(C) A macro tower.
Network provider.
(1) A wireless service provider; or
(2) A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or
installs on behalf of a wireless service provider:
(A) Network nodes; or
(B) Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a
network node.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 629/665
Node support pole. A pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node.
Owner. Any person who owns any facility or facilities that are installed or are proposed to be installed or maintained in
the public right-of-way. Included within this definition are any and all of owner's contractors, subcontractors, agents or
authorized representatives. A network provider or a wireless service provider may also be an owner for purposes of this
chapter.
Permit or construction permit. A written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way or collocation on a service
pole required from the town before a network provider or person may perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a
project over which the town has regulatory authority.
Person. Any natural or corporate person, business association or other business entity including, but not limited to, a
partnership, a sole proprietorship, a political subdivision (excluding the town), a public or private agency of any kind, a
utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity.
Pole. A service pole, municipally owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole. This general term shall be
construed to exclude decorative poles.
Private easement. An easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their
successors and assigns.
Public right-of-way rate. An annual rental charge paid by a network provider or other person to a municipality related to
the construction, maintenance, or operation of network nodes or other facilities within a town right-of-way.
Right(s)-of-way or public right(s)-of-way. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public
sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the town has an interest. It includes but is not necessarily limited to
interests in land that is acquired by, dedicated to, or claimed by the town in fee simple, by easement, or by prescriptive
right and that is expressly or impliedly available, accepted or used in fact or by operation of law as a public roadway,
highway, street, sidewalk, alley, or for drainage or utility purposes. The term applies regardless of whether the public rightof-
way is paved or unpaved. The term does not include a private easement or airwaves above the public right-of-way with
regard to wireless telecommunications.
Restore or restoration. The process by which a public right-of-way is returned to a condition that is equal to or better
than the condition that existed before construction.
Service pole. A pole, other than a municipally owned utility pole or decorative pole, owned or operated by a municipality
and located in a public right-of-way, including:
(1) A pole that supports traffic-control functions;
(2) A structure for signage;
(3) A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and
(4) A pole or similar structure owned or operated by the town and supporting only network nodes.
Town. The town of Fairview, Texas, or its designated agent of the town.
Transport facility. Each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a
network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for the network nodes.
Utility pole. A pole that provides:
(1) Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or
(2) Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by Texas Utilities Code, section 51.002.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 630/665
Utility structure. Equipment and physical support used in providing public utility service, but excluding network nodes
and all poles defined in this chapter.
Wireless service. Any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of wi-fi, whether at a
fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node.
Wireless service provider. A person or entity that provides wireless service to the public.
ARTICLE 15.02 CONSTRUCTION IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Sec. 15.02.001 Right-of-way occupancy
(a) Any person, prior to constructing facilities in, on or over the public rights-of-way, must first obtain
separate municipal authorization.
(b) This chapter does not constitute or create authority to place, reconstruct, or alter facilities in, on or over the
rights-of-way nor to engage in construction, excavation, encroachments, or work activity within or upon any
public right-of-way, and said authority must be obtained in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
(c) Any person with a current, unexpired franchise, municipal authorization, license or other authorization
from the town or state to use the public right-of-way that is in effect at the time this chapter takes effect, shall
continue to operate under and comply with that grant, and in the event this article conflicts with existing
authorization, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
(d) Regardless of any prior existing unexpired franchise, municipal authorization, license or other
authorization from the town or state to use the public right-of-way, an owner shall be required to obtain a permit
prior to performing any construction within a public right-of-way, save and except for work exempted by LGC
section 284.157 (as amended). However, prior to beginning any work so exempted, the owner must provide
advance written notice to the town of no less than 15 calendar days. Replacement or upgrade of poles by
network providers requires advance approval of the pole's owner. All size limitations provided in this chapter or
other law remain applicable even to work exempted under LGC section 284.157.
Sec. 15.02.002 Registration
(a) In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, all owners of facilities in the right-of-way will
register with the town. Registration and permits will be issued in the name of the person who owns or will own
the facilities. Registration must be renewed on or before September 30th of each year. If a registration is not
renewed, and subject to 60 calendar days notification to the owner, the facilities of the owner will be deemed to
have been abandoned. When any information provided for the registration changes, the owner will inform the
town of the change no more than 30 days after the date the change is made. Registration shall include:
(1) The name, address(es) and telephone number(s) of the owner;
(2) The names, address(es) and telephone number(s) of the contact person(s) for the owner;
(3) The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of any contractor(s) or subcontractor(s) who
will be working in the right-of-way on behalf of the owner. If the names of contractors and
subcontractors are not available at the time of registration, they must be submitted to the town prior
to permit issuance;
(4) Proof of insurance and bonds as required in section 15.02.016;
(5) The name(s) and telephone number(s) of an emergency contact who shall be available 24 hours
a day;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 631/665
(6) The source of the owner's municipal authorization (e.g., franchise, state law, etc.). If the owner
is a certificated telecommunications provider, the certificate number issued by the Texas Public
Utility Commission; and
(7) The owner's two-year projections of plans for the construction of facilities in the town at the
time of registration renewal.
(b) Registration shall be a prerequisite to issuance of a construction permit. Each owner shall update and keep
current the registration with the town at all times.
(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the installation or collocation of network nodes in a
public right-of-way shall not require any registration or permit which is not expressly authorized by LGC,
chapter 284 (as amended).
Sec. 15.02.003 Construction permits
(a) General.
(1) An owner shall not perform any construction or installation of facilities in the public right-ofway
without first obtaining a construction permit, except as provided herein. Network providers must
file at least one permit application for every 30 (thirty) network nodes to be located in public right-ofway
and receive corresponding permits for the installation or collocation of those network nodes. In
the discretion of the director, an owner who is not a network provider may be required to apply for
and receive multiple permit applications for construction which will involve more than one work site.
(2) Emergency construction related to existing facilities may be undertaken without first obtaining
a permit; however, the department shall be notified in writing within two business days of any
construction related to an emergency response; including a reasonably detailed description of the
nature of the emergency and the work performed in the right-of-way. An updated map of any
facilities that were relocated, if applicable, shall be provided to the department within 90 days.
(3) A permit is not required under this subsection (a) if the activity in the public right-of-way
consists exclusively of:
(A) A residential service connection on the same side of the public right-of-way, if the
connection does not require a pavement cut; or
(B) The replacement of a single damaged pole.
(4) Unless the director has issued prior approval, the owner or contractor shall not close any traffic
lanes or otherwise impede traffic on major thoroughfares during the morning or evening rush hours
on weekdays during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. or 3:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. Any closure of a
traffic lane for more than four hours during any nonpeak traffic period shall also require a permit
unless waived by the director.
(5) All construction in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit for the facilities. The
director shall be provided access to the work and to such further information as he or she may
reasonably require to ensure compliance with the permit.
(6) A copy of the construction permit and approved construction plans shall be maintained at the
construction site and made available for inspection by the director at all times when construction
work is occurring.
(7) All construction work authorized by permit must be completed in the time specified in the
construction permit, but in the case of permits granted to network providers, installation must begin
no later than six months after final approval and must be diligently pursued to completion. Failure to
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 632/665
begin construction within said six-month period results in expiration of the permit. If the work cannot
be completed in the specified time period, the owner may request a reasonable extension of the time
period from the director. The director will use his/her best efforts to approve or disapprove a request
for extension of a permit as soon as possible. If the request for the extension is made prior to the
expiration of the permit, work may continue while the request is pending.
(8) Construction, excavation, or work area. No owner or contractor shall perform construction,
excavation, or work in an area larger or at a location different than that specified in the permit or
permit application. If, after construction, excavation, or work is commenced under an approved
permit it becomes necessary to perform construction, excavation, or work in a larger or different area
than originally requested under the application, the owner or contractor shall notify the director
immediately and, within 24 hours, shall file a supplementary application for the additional
construction, excavation, or work.
(9) Applicants are solely responsible for obtaining any and all necessary permits or other approvals
from other applicable regulatory authorities, including but not limited to the Texas Public Utility
Commission and the Texas Department of Transportation. The town's issuance of a permit is not a
substitute for approval by other regulatory authorities and does not constitute any representation by
the town that the proposed construction would meet the requirements established by other authorities.
A copy of any permit or approval issued by federal or state authorities for work in federal or state
rights-of-way located in the town shall be provided, if requested by the department.
(10) If state or federal law addresses the same issue as any part of this right-of-way management
chapter, the regulation which creates the greatest limitations on construction activity shall control
unless otherwise agreed in writing.
(11) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, approvals provided by the town shall not
constitute or be deemed to be a release of the responsibility and liability of owner, or owner's officers,
agents, servants or employees, owner's engineer, or said engineer's employees, officers or agents for
the accuracy and competency of their design and specifications. Further, any such approvals shall not
be deemed to be an assumption of such responsibility and liability by the town or the town's officers,
agents, servants or employees, for any defect in the design and specifications prepared by owner or
owner's officers, agents, servants or employees, owner's engineer, or said engineer's officers, agents,
servants or employees.
(b) Collocation of network nodes on service poles.
(1) Any owner who seeks to collocate network nodes on service poles must first enter into a
suitable nondiscriminatory collocation agreement with the town, which shall include insurance and
bonding requirements, and provisions for the removal of the owner's equipment at no expense to the
town in the event of contract breach, widening or other construction in the right-of-way,
abandonment of the equipment, owner dissolution or bankruptcy, or similar occurrences.
(2) Prior to entering an agreement with the town under this subsection, owner shall supply to the
town a certified report from an engineer licensed in the state which verifies that the proposed
collocation will not impede any function of the service poles at issue, or any function of other
equipment collocated on said service poles, and will not in any way endanger the public. The expense
of said report shall be born solely by the owner.
(3) Owners of network nodes on service poles shall pay to the town an annual fee for each pole as
set forth in the town's fee schedule. Terms for the timing of payment shall be included in the
collocation agreement.
(c) Other modifications and pole attachments.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 633/665
(1) Any desired modification from the technical specifications of an existing permit requires a new
permit application or amendment to a pending permit application. For purposes of this provision,
“modification” shall include but not be limited to a change in pole height, addition of equipment
which increases overall pole/structure height, rerouting or adding new underground connections to an
above-ground installation, rerouting or adding new above-grade lines, or addition of any equipment
which adds additional or upgraded functions to an existing facility (e.g., adding telecom equipment to
an electric pole).
(2) Any person or entity seeking to install additional equipment of any kind to an existing pole
owned by another entity must obtain a permit before commencing with the work.
(3) See additional requirements of pole-attachment agreements under section 15.02.004(j).
Sec. 15.02.004 Permit application
(a) The permit shall state to whom it is issued, location of work, location of facilities, dates and times work is
to take place and any other conditions set out by the director. Except for network providers (see section
15.02.003(a)(7)), if the owner fails to act upon any permit within 90 calendar days of issuance, the permit shall
become invalid, and the owner will be required to obtain another permit. No permit shall be transferable.
(b) The permit will be in the name of the person who will own the facilities to be constructed. The permit
application must be completed and signed by an authorized representative of the owner of the facilities to be
constructed.
(c) Permit applications shall be considered incomplete until all applicable fees are tendered to the town in
accordance with the town's fee schedule.
(d) Any person requesting a permit will provide the director with documentation in the format specified by the
department, at the time of the permit application submittal, including:
(1) The proposed location and route of all facilities to be constructed or installed and the owner's
plan for right-of-way construction;
(2) Three sets of engineering plans, including plan and profile, which will be on a reasonable scale
acceptable to the department, unless waived by the director. When required by the Texas Engineering
Practice Act, as amended, the plans must be sealed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in
the state;
(3) Detail of the location of all rights-of-way (including utility easements) that the owner plans to
use;
(4) Detail of existing utilities located in the right-of-way, including the town's utilities, in
relationship to owner's proposed facilities/route;
(5) Detail of what owner proposes to construct including size of facilities, services to be provided
by the facilities, materials used, and other detail such as pipe size, total structure height, number of
ducts, valves, etc.;
(6) Detail of plans to remove and replace asphalt or concrete in streets, and details for restoration
within public right-of-way;
(7) Drawings of any bores, trenches, handholes, manholes, switch gear, transformers, pedestals,
etc. including depth and elevation located in public right-of-way;
(8) Typical details of manholes and/or handholes owner plans to use or access;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 634/665
(9) Complete legend of drawings submitted by owner, which may be provided by reference to
previously submitted documents acceptable to the town;
(10) The construction methods to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures,
and facilities within or adjacent to the right-of-way, and the dates and times work will occur, all of
which (methods, dates, times, etc.) are subject to approval of the director, and to include an erosion
control plan at the request of the director;
(11) For network nodes, a certificate that all network nodes to be installed comply with the
applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, and certification that the
proposed network node will be placed into active commercial service by or for a network provider
not later than the 60th day after the date the construction and final testing of the network node is
completed, and other information required by the town related to the provider's use of the right-ofway
under LGC, chapter 284 (as amended), to ensure compliance with said chapter; and
(12) Proof of insurance and bonds as required by section 15.02.016.
(e) A request for a permit must be submitted at least 15 business days before the proposed commencement of
work identified in the request, unless waived in writing by the director.
(f) (1) Requests for permits will be approved or disapproved by the director within the following
timeframes:
(A) Network nodes: 30 days to determine completeness; 60 days to approve or deny.
(B) Node support poles: 30 days to determine completeness; 150 days to approve or deny.
(C) Transfer facilities: 10 days to determine completeness; 21 days to approve or deny.
(2) If not acted on within timeframe for approval or denial is listed above, the permit shall be
deemed approved if required by state law. Any completeness reviews of applications for uses of
right-of-way not listed above will be performed within 30 days, and the town shall act to approve or
deny complete applications within 150 days, unless shorter timeframes for review are provided under
state or federal law.
(3) If an application is determined to be incomplete, the applicant may resubmit a completed or
cured application within 30 days without payment of a new application fee. If an application is
determined to be incomplete, the town shall specifically identify the missing information in a written
notification to the applicant. The director will consider all information submitted by the applicant
including a review of the availability of space in the right-of-way based on the applicant's proposed
route and location.
(4) If a complete application is denied, the town shall document the basis for the denial, including
specific applicable code provisions or other municipal rules, regulations, or other law on which the
denial was based. The town shall send the documentation by electronic mail to the applicant on or
before the date the town denies the application. If an applicant cures the deficiencies identified in the
denial documentation and resubmits within 30 days of the denial, the town shall approve or deny the
completed revised application no later than 90 days after receipt of the completed revised application,
and may charge the applicant an additional application fee for its actual costs incurred.
(5) Review of revised applications shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial
documentation. Failure to submit a completed or cured application within 30 days will cause any
subsequent submission to be treated as a new application.
(g) The department or the owner can request a pre-construction meeting with the construction contractor.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 635/665
(h) No person receiving a permit shall authorize or otherwise allow any equipment, device, or other feature
not depicted in the permit application submittal to be erected, installed, attached, collocated, or otherwise affixed
to any materials placed in a right-of-way. Allowing such activity is unlawful, constitutes a public nuisance, and
constitutes a violation of this chapter for each day the improper installation remains. An owner must take action
to remove an installation exceeding the scope of the permit within 48 hours of receiving notice of a violation of
this section from the town, or the town may remove the improper installation at the owner's expense.
(i) Submission of an application for a permit constitutes the owner's acceptance of responsibility for
monitoring the facilities which are the subject of the respective permit, and agreement that any future transfer of
ownership of facilities in any right-of-way is strictly limited to the exact specifications of an approved permit,
and further that the owner originally listed on an approved permit is responsible for all costs of town abatement
of any improperly installed equipment or failure to timely conform as needed for public improvements, except as
may be specifically provided for in this chapter or applicable franchise agreement.
(j) Owner shall provide the town a copy of any related pole attachment contract (or any other arrangement for
collocation on or within owner's facilities) as part of the owner's permit application. Said contract must include,
as a binding term, a provision requiring the owner or the collocating entity to move all of its equipment to a new
permitted location within 30 days after notice that relocation is necessary. Said contract must also provide that if
it is necessary to remove or relocate any facilities and the collocating entity fails to move its equipment within
30 days after receiving notice of the need to move, the collocating party authorizes both the permit applicant (or
pole owner, as applicable) and the town to transfer or remove the equipment at the permit applicant's expense
and fully indemnifies and holds harmless the town (and its officers, employees, contractors, and other agents)
from all liability to the same degree as described by Texas Utilities Code sec. 252.006(c) (as amended).
Submission of an unexecuted or nonconforming contract shall result in denial of the permit application.
(k) Supplementation. Any person receiving a permit under this section shall have an ongoing duty to promptly
provide written notice to the town of any proposed or anticipated change to the application details previously
supplied to the town, including but not limited to providing notice to the town of any proposal for collocation of
any other party's equipment on previously permitted facilities. Work under a proposed modification to a permit
cannot commence unless all relevant information is supplied to the town at least 15 days in advance, unless
otherwise waived in writing by the director.
Sec. 15.02.005 Design standards for network providers
(a) Each new, modified, or replacement utility pole or node support pole installed in a public right-of-way
must be within the scope of an approved permit and constructed in compliance with the design manual adopted
by the town. The design manual adopted by the town on the date the permit application is filed shall control
work corresponding to that permit, if approved. The town's design manual is incorporated by reference and
maintained in the office of the town secretary.
(b) A new, modified, or replacement utility pole or node support pole must not exceed the lesser of:
(1) 10 feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole located within 500 linear feet of the new
pole in the same public right-of-way; or
(2) 55 feet above ground level.
(c) A network provider may not install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way without the town's
discretionary, nondiscriminatory, and written consent if the public right-of-way is in a municipal park or is
adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is:
(1) Not more than 50 feet wide; and
(2) Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land
that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 636/665
(d) If a network provider is installing a network node or node support pole in a public right-of-way described
by subsection (c) above, then it must comply with all private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in
the area that apply to its facilities.
(e) Historic or design districts. A network provider must obtain advance written approval from the town
before collocating new network nodes or installing new node support poles in any area of the town zoned or
otherwise designated as a historic district or as a design district if the district has or requires decorative poles.
(1) The following areas have been zoned or designated as historic or design districts in the town.
Other areas not listed here may also be zoned or designated as historic or design districts. A complete
list of such districts is on file with the town secretary.
(A) Commercial planned development district (CPDD).
(B) All areas within 300 linear feet of a decorative pole approved by the town.
(2) The town requires reasonable design and/or concealment measures for new network nodes or
new node support poles in any historic or design district with decorative poles as a condition of
approval. Network providers must comply with the design and aesthetic standards of the district and
explore the feasibility of using camouflage measures to improve the aesthetics of the new network
nodes, new node support poles, or related ground equipment, or any portion of the nodes, poles, or
equipment, to minimize the impact on to the aesthetics in a historic district or on a design district's
decorative poles. To the extent that network nodes or node support poles in any historic or design
district cannot be sufficiently concealed or camouflaged (as assessed by the director), such
installations shall be aesthetically tailored to match existing streetlight poles in the vicinity as closely
as reasonably possible.
(3) No provision of this subsection (e) shall be construed as a limitation on the town's authority to
enforce historic preservation zoning regulations consistent with the preservation of local zoning
authority under state or federal law.
(f) Limitations on the size of network nodes.
(1) Network nodes must conform to the following conditions:
(A) Each antenna that does not have exposed elements and is attached to an existing structure
or pole:
(i) Must be located inside an enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume;
(ii) May not exceed a height of three feet above the existing structure or pole; and
(iii) May not protrude from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole by
more than two feet;
(B) If an antenna has exposed elements and is attached to an existing structure or pole, the
antenna and all of the antenna's exposed elements:
(i) Must fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more than six cubic feet;
(ii) May not exceed a height of three feet above the existing structure or pole; and
(iii) May not protrude from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole by
more than two feet;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 637/665
(C) The cumulative size of other wireless equipment associated with the network node
attached to an existing structure or pole may not:
(i) Be more than 28 cubic feet in volume; or
(ii) Protrude from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole by more than
two feet;
(D) Ground-based enclosures, separate from the pole, may not be higher than three feet six
inches from grade, wider than three feet six inches, or deeper than three feet six inches; and
(E) Pole-mounted enclosures may not be taller than five feet.
(2) The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in a calculation of
equipment volume under subsection (1):
(A) Electric meters;
(B) Concealment elements;
(C) Telecommunications demarcation boxes;
(D) Grounding equipment;
(E) Power transfer switches;
(F) Cut-off switches; and
(G) Vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
(3) Equipment attached to node support poles may not protrude from the outer edge of the node
support pole by more than two feet.
(4) Equipment attached to a utility pole must be installed in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code, subject to applicable codes, and the utility pole owner's construction
standards.
(5) A network provider may construct, modify, or maintain in a public right-of-way a network node
or node support pole that exceeds the height or distance limitations prescribed by this chapter only if
the town approves the construction, modification, or maintenance subject to all applicable zoning or
land use regulations and all applicable codes.
(g) Network providers must ensure that the vertical height of an equipment cabinet installed as part of a
network node does not exceed the height limitation prescribed by this section, subject to approval of the pole's
owner if applicable.
(h) Undergrounding. Network providers must comply with all undergrounding requirements imposed by town
ordinance, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that
prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way without first obtaining zoning or land use
approval. Such requirements or restrictions shall not prohibit a network provider from replacing an existing
structure, subject to compliance with other applicable regulations.
Sec. 15.02.006 Construction standards
(a) All construction shall be in conformance with all town codes and applicable local, state and federal laws.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 638/665
(b) Construction of network nodes and node support poles shall be conducted in a manner which does not:
(1) Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way, except as
permitted by town ordinance;
(2) Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers;
(3) Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes;
(4) Violate or conflict with the town's right-of-way design specifications; or
(5) Violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. section 12101 et seq.
(as amended)).
(c) The department must be notified two business days in advance that construction is ready to proceed by
either the owner, its contractor or authorized representative. At the time of notification, the owner will inform
the department of the number (or other information) assigned from the appropriate one-call notification center.
“Notification center” means the same as in Texas Utilities Code ch. 251, or its successor. The name, address and
phone numbers of the contractor or subcontractor who will perform the actual construction, including the name
and telephone number of an individual with the contractor who will be available at all times during construction.
Such information shall be required prior to the commencement of any work.
(d) Public notification.
(1) For any closure of a traffic lane or blocking of a sidewalk or alley lasting six days or less, the
permittee shall conspicuously mark its vehicles with the permittee's name and telephone number.
(2) For projects scheduled to last more than seven calendar days, a three feet by three feet
informational sign stating the identity of the person doing the work, a local telephone number and
owner's identity shall be placed at the location where construction is to occur 48 hours prior to the
beginning of work in the right-of-way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire
time the work is occurring. The informational sign will be posted on the public right-of-way 100 feet
before the construction location commences, unless other posting arrangements are approved or
required by the director.
(3) When projects last more than seven calendar days, the owner shall also provide written
notification to all adjacent property occupants 48 hours prior to the beginning of construction.
Informational fliers shall include the person doing the work, a local telephone number, owner's
identity, and proposed schedule.
(4) Owner shall provide the notice in subsection (c) above to record owners and occupants (if
applicable) of all properties abutting the same public right-of-way within 300 linear feet of any area
where facilities are to be relocated or removed prior initiating such work.
(e) Erosion control measures (e.g. silt fence) and advance warning signs, markers, cones and barricades must
be in place before work begins.
(f) Lane closures on major thoroughfares will be limited to one lane between 9:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. unless
the director grants prior approval. Arrow boards will be required for lane closures on all arterials and collectors,
with all barricades, advanced warning signs and 36-inch reflector cones placed according to the Texas Manual
on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices. Owner shall provide a traffic-control plan for all work in the public rightsof-
way for town review and approval, and except for emergency work, no work shall commence prior to town
approval of the traffic-control plan.
(g) Without affecting the legal relationship between the owner and their contractor, owners are responsible for
the workmanship of, and any damages caused by, their contractors or subcontractors. A responsible
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 639/665
representative of the owner will be available to the department at all times during construction.
(h) Owner shall be responsible for stormwater management, erosion control and excavation safety measures
that comply with town, state and federal guidelines. Requirements shall include, but not be limited to,
construction fencing around any excavation that will be left overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until
reasonable vegetation is established, barricade fencing around open holes, and high erosion areas will require
wire backed silt fencing. Upon request, owner may be required to furnish documentation submitted or received
from federal or state government.
(i) Owner or contractor or subcontractor will notify the department immediately of any damage to other
utilities, either town or privately owned.
(j) It is the town's policy not to cut streets or sidewalks; however, except in case of emergency when a street or
sidewalk cut is required, prior approval must be obtained from the department and all requirements of the
department shall be followed in all street and sidewalk cuts. Repair of all street and sidewalk removals must be
made promptly to avoid safety hazards to vehicle and pedestrian traffic, and shall be in accordance with town
standard specifications and details for restoration within public rights-of-way.
(k) Installation of facilities must not interfere with town utilities, in particular gravity dependent facilities.
Facilities shall not be located over, or within three feet, horizontally or vertically, of any water or sanitary sewer
mains, unless approved by the director.
(l) New facilities must be installed to a minimum depth required by state and federal codes and standards.
(m) All directional boring shall have a locator place bore marks and depths while the bore is in progress.
Locator shall place a mark at each stem with a paint dot and depth at least every other stem.
(n) Town reserves the right to require directional boring to occur deeper than existing water, sewer or storm
sewer mains, whether longitudinally or transverse boring is requested. In any circumstance, town reserves the
right to require open cut installation of new utilities in close proximity to water, sewer or storm sewer mains to
assure the protection of the town's water, sewer and storm drainage system. Town reserves the right to require
dry bores under roads if depths are less than 5 feet under pavement.
(o) Hours of operation for nonemergency work. Construction may not start earlier than 7:00 a.m. on weekdays
nor continued after dark without prior permission from the town. Construction on Saturday may not start before
7:00 a.m. and must be approved by the director by noon on the Thursday prior to the proposed Saturday. Work
on Sunday is prohibited without special permission by the town manager or his/her designee. An after-hours fee
must be paid to the town prior to Saturday work, if town inspection is required. The Saturday inspection fee
must be paid prior to noon on Thursday prior to the Saturday in which the work is to be performed. Construction
work on recognized town holidays is prohibited. The additional fees described in this section are not applicable
to installation or collocation of network nodes.
(p) Persons working in public rights-of-way are responsible for obtaining line locates from all affected utilities
or others with facilities in the right-of-way prior to any excavation. Use of a geographic information system or
the plans of records does not satisfy this requirement.
(q) The owner of any facilities located within public rights-of-way is required to mark the location of such
facilities when requested by the town. Location and marking of said facilities shall occur within six hours of an
emergency request, and within three days of a nonemergency request.
(r) Owner will be responsible for verifying the location, both horizontal and vertical, of all facilities. When
required by the department, owner shall verify locations by pot holing, hand digging, or other methods approved
by the department prior to any excavation or boring.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 640/665
(s) Placement of all manholes and/or handholes must be approved in advance by the department. Handholes or
manholes will not be located in sidewalks, unless approved by the director.
(t) Locate flags shall not be removed from a location while facilities are being constructed.
(u) When construction requires pumping of water or mud, the water or mud shall be contained in accordance
with federal and state law and the directives of the department.
(v) A person shall perform operations, excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way in
accordance with all applicable town requirements, including the obligation to use trenchless technology
whenever commercially economical and practical and consistent with obligations on other similar users of the
public right-of-way. The town shall waive the requirements of trenchless technology if it determines that the
field conditions warrant the waiver, based upon information provided to the town by the person. All excavations
and other construction in the public rights-of-way shall be conducted so as to minimize interference with the use
of public and private property. A person shall follow all reasonable construction directions given by the town in
order to minimize any such interference.
(w) All construction shall conform to the town tree preservation standards.
(x) Excavation safety. On construction projects in which excavation will exceed a depth of five feet, the
agency must have detailed plans and specifications for excavation safety systems. The term “excavation”
includes trenches, structural features, or any construction that has earthen excavation subject to collapse. The
excavation safety plan shall be designed in conformance with state law and Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) standards and regulations.
(y) Confined space. On construction projects that involve entry into a “confined space” or “permit-required
confined space” as said terms are defined under 29 CFR sec. 1910.146(b), as amended, the owner shall comply
with all related town regulations and applicable state and federal law.
(z) To the extent permitted under state law and/or an applicable tariff from the Texas Public Utility
Commission and where it is technologically feasible, it is preferred that all facilities be installed underground.
Any claim that underground installation is not technologically feasible is subject to denial by the director unless
the permit application is accompanied by a suitable report prepared by a civil engineer licensed in the state,
which said report individually addresses the conditions that prevent the feasibility of underground installation on
each site where above-ground installation is proposed. Cost of installation must not be the sole factor used to
support a claim that underground installation is not feasible.
Sec. 15.02.007 As-built plans
(a) Right-of-way users will provide the director with “as-built plans” within 90 days of completion of
facilities in the right-of-way. The plans shall be provided to the town with as much detail and accuracy as
required by the director. All the requirements specified for the plans submitted for the initial permit, as set forth
in section 15.02.004(d) shall be submitted and updated in the as-built plans. Users that have facilities in the
right-of-way existing as of the date of this chapter who have not provided as built plans shall provide 1/4 of the
information concerning facilities in town right-of-way within one year after the passage of this chapter and 1/4
each six months thereafter. The detail and accuracy will concern issues such as location, size of facilities,
materials used, and any other health, safety and welfare concerns. Submittal of as-built plans shall be in digital
format compatible with town hardware and software or shall be subject to a conversion fee, except that a
conversion fee shall not be charged when the plans depict only installation or collocation of network nodes.
Owner shall include one set of plans in a paper format.
(b) If as-built plans submitted under this section include information expressly designated by the owner as a
trade secret or other confidential information protected from disclosure by state law, the director may not
disclose that information to the public without the consent of the owner, unless otherwise compelled by a
decision of the attorney general pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act, Texas Government Code chapter
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 641/665
552, as amended, or by a court having jurisdiction of the matter pursuant to applicable law. This subsection may
not be construed to authorize an owner to designate all matters in its as-built plans as confidential or as trade
secrets.
(c) The requirements set forth in subsection (a), above, or portions of said requirements, may be waived by the
director for good cause.
Sec. 15.02.008 Conformance with public improvements
(a) Whenever by reasons of widening or straightening of streets, sidewalks, water or sewer line projects, or
any other town project, it shall be deemed necessary by the governing body of the town to remove, alter, change,
adapt, or conform an owner's underground, above ground, or overhead facilities within the right-of-way to
another part of the right-of-way, such alterations shall be made by the owner of the facilities at the owner's
expense (unless provided otherwise by state law, a franchise, a license or a municipal authorization until that
grant expires or is otherwise terminated). The owner shall be responsible for conforming its facilities within
mutually agreed upon time limits. If no time limits can be agreed upon, the time limit shall be 90 days from the
day the town secures any additional right-of-way and transmits final plans and notice to make the alterations.
The owner of facilities shall be responsible for any direct costs associated with project delays associated with
failure to conform facilities within the mutually agreed upon time limits. Reimbursement for all costs provided
for by this subsection shall be made within 30 calendar days. Responsibility for the costs required to remove,
alter, change, adapt, or conform facilities (“modify” herein) is not affected by any transfer of ownership of some
or all of the facilities from the original owner to any other person, unless the original owner establishes to the
town's satisfaction that (1) the transfer of ownership of the facilities at issue was completed no less than 30 days
prior to receipt of notice to modify the facilities and (2) responsibility for the costs of removal, relocation,
modification, and similar costs was disclosed to and accepted by the new owner, who also provided the town
with suitable documentation of all necessary bonds and insurance verifications prior to the receipt of notice to
modify the facilities. Any attempted transfer of facility ownership (whether by sale, gift, abandonment,
quitclaim, or any other device) which does not comply with the requirements of this section shall be ineffective
to relieve the original owner of financial responsibility for the costs to modify the facilities, and the town may
use any means to recover its costs or ensure the prompt completion of the necessary work to modify the
facilities, including but not limited to making claims against bonds, issuing fines, pursuing liens, or any other
lawful means.
(b) An owner may trim trees in or over the public rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use and
maintenance of its facilities, subject to any town regulations related to tree preservation. All tree trimming shall
be performed in accordance with standards promulgated by the National Arborist Association and the
International Society of Arborculture. Should the owner, its contractor or agent, fail to remove such trimmings
within 24 hours, the town may remove the trimmings or have them removed, and upon receipt of a bill from the
town, the owner shall promptly reimburse the town for all costs incurred within 30 calendar days.
(c) An owner shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses or
other bulky structures. The owner shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities within 15 working
days of receiving a copy of a permit issued by the town. The expense of these temporary rearrangements shall be
paid by the party or parties requesting and benefiting from the temporary rearrangements. The owner may
require prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting the temporary move.
Sec. 15.02.009 Improperly installed facilities
(a) Any owner doing work in the town right-of-way shall properly install, repair, upgrade and maintain
facilities.
(b) Facilities shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded or maintained if:
(1) The installation, repair, upgrade or maintenance endangers people or property;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 642/665
(2) The facilities do not meet the applicable town codes;
(3) The facilities are not capable of being located using standard practices; or
(4) The facilities are not located in the proper place at the time of construction in accordance with
the directions provided by the department or the plans approved by the department.
Sec. 15.02.010 Location of utility structures
(a) Utility structures not exceeding 20 cubic feet are allowed in the right-of-way or utility easements, subject
to available room and located as approved by the director. The placement of utility structures larger than 20
cubic feet, but not exceeding 30 cubic feet will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis by the director. Such
structures shall not encroach within a sidewalk area, including a vertical clearance of 7.5 feet above the sidewalk
or within the sight visibility area.
(b) Utility structures larger than 30 cubic feet shall be located as close as practical to the back of a public or
private utility easement and subject to available room and located as approved by the director.
(c) Above-ground facilities such as pedestals, switching boxes and similar facilities shall be located no less
than three feet from the edge of an alley or the back of street curbs and such that they do not create a physical or
visual barrier to vehicles leaving or entering roads, driveways or alleys. Such facilities shall not be located in
front of residential lots in a manner that creates an unreasonable visual or aesthetic impairment (as determined
by the director) for the property owner.
(d) The owner's identity and telephone number shall be placed on all utility structures placed in the rights-ofway.
(e) Except to the extent limited by Texas Local Government Code chapter 284 or other applicable law,
antenna, microwave reflector and antenna support structures and any part or component thereof are prohibited in
public rights-of-way without the express approval of the town council by resolution or ordinance of a franchise
agreement or license. Approval of any such facility, franchise agreement, or license is at the sole discretion of
the town council.
(f) In areas where utilities are already present in a right-of-way, all facilities are to be installed on the same
side of the roadway as existing facilities, unless it is established to the director that the conformance to that
requirement is not feasible. If pre-existing utility installations are underground in the vicinity of proposed
construction, all new facilities must also be underground unless otherwise provided by an applicable tariff of the
Texas Public Utility Commission. Applications for above ground and underground construction may be subject
to different requirements, even as applied to facilities designed to provide similar services.
(g) Underground facilities shall not be removed without the advance written consent of the town, which shall
not be unreasonably withheld. This restriction is applicable even when the owner's franchise or other municipal
authorization to occupy a public right-of-way has expired or been otherwise terminated, and also applies when
underground facilities are being abandoned.
Sec. 15.02.011 Restoration of property
(a) Owners shall restore property affected by construction of facilities to a condition that is equal to or better
than the condition of the property prior to the performance of the work. Owners shall submit photographs and/or
a video of the construction area at the time of the issuance of the permit. Restoration must be approved by the
department.
(b) Restoration must be made within ten working days of completion of trench backfill for a length of 300
feet, or within the limits of one town block, unless otherwise approved by the director. If restoration is not
satisfactory and performed in a timely manner, after written notice, then all work in progress (except that related
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 643/665
to the problem), including all work previously permitted but not complete, may be halted at town direction and a
hold may be placed on any future permits until all restoration is complete. Restoration of grass with new sod
shall be watered by utility owner for the first 30 days, unless a watering agreement is made with land owner (in
the case of utility easements outside of the right-of-way) and is submitted to the town with land owner's
signature. Restoration of trees to be replaced will be warrantied for the first year by the owner.
(c) Upon failure of an owner to perform such restoration, and five days after written notice has been given to
the owner by the town, and in the event restoration has not been initiated during such five-day period, the town
may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way as may have been disturbed by the owner, its contractors or
agents. Upon receipt of an invoice from the town, the owner will reimburse the town for the costs so incurred
within 30 calendar days from the date of the town invoice.
(d) If the town determines that the failure of an owner to properly repair or restore the public rights-of-way
constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the town may undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts, after
emergency notice has been provided, to the extent reasonable under the circumstances. Upon receipt of an
invoice from the town, the owner shall promptly reimburse the town for the costs incurred by the town within 30
calendar days from the date of the town invoice. If payment is not received within the 30 calendar days, the town
shall initiate a claim for compensation with the appropriate bonding company.
(e) Should the town reasonably determine, within two years from the date of the completion of the repair
work, that the surface, base, irrigation system or landscape treatment requires additional restoration work to
meet the standards of subsection (a), an owner shall perform such additional restoration work to the satisfaction
of the town, subject to all town remedies as provided herein or available at law or in equity.
(f) Restoration must be to the reasonable satisfaction of the department. The restoration shall include, but not
be limited to:
(1) Replacing all ground cover with the type of ground cover damaged during work to a condition
equal to or better either by sodding or seeding, planting of shrubs or trees, or as directed by the
department;
(2) Adjusting of all manholes and handholes, as required;
(3) Backfilling all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes shall be completed daily, unless
other safety requirements are approved by the department. Holes with only vertical walls shall be
covered and secured to prevent entry. If bore pits, trenches or other holes are left open for the
continuation of work, they shall be fenced and barricaded to secure the work site as approved by the
department;
(4) Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines;
(5) Restoration of excavation site to town specifications;
(6) Restoration of all paving, sidewalks, landscaping, ground cover, trees, shrubs and irrigation
systems;
(7) Removal of all locate flags during the cleanup process by the owner or his/her contractor at the
completion of the work.
Sec. 15.02.012 Revocation or denial of permit
If any of the provisions of this chapter are not followed, a permit may be revoked by the director or his/her designee. If a
person has not followed the terms and conditions of this chapter in work done pursuant to a prior permit, new permits may
be denied or additional terms required. Revocation shall be effective upon the expiration of 15 days after written notice of
the violation(s), unless cured during that period, except for violations which pose a threat to public safety or health, for
which the revocation will be immediate upon delivery of written notice.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 644/665
Sec. 15.02.013 Ownership
No equipment, fixtures, or other personal property erected or placed in public rights-of-way by any person other than the
town will become or be considered by the town as being affixed to, or a part of, the public rights-of-way. All portions of
said personal property constructed, modified, erected, or placed by a person other than the town on, across, over, or
beneath the public rights-of-way will remain the property of its original owner unless and until an appropriate written
dedication of property is delivered to the town and a corresponding written acceptance is issued. The owner of nontown
property located in the public rights-of-way may direct the removal of the property at any time, subject to any prior
notification requirements imposed by this article or other law and scheduling restrictions relating to work taking place in
the public rights-of-way.
Sec. 15.02.014 Appeals
(a) Applicability. Appeals may be filed pursuant to this section for decisions of the director related to the
denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit. However, the appeal process provided by this section shall not be
available for criminal violations of this chapter.
(b) Appeal to town manager. A permittee may appeal decisions referred to in subsection (a) above by filing a
written appeal with the town manager within seven working days of receipt of denial, suspension, or revocation
of the permit. An appeal filed pursuant to this section shall specifically state the basis for the aggrieved party's
challenge to the town's authority under this chapter, including but not limited to citations to all statutes,
regulations, decisions, rulings, and other law or legal authority upon which a permittee relies.
(c) Issuance of decision by town manager. Decisions of the town manager shall be issued within five business
days of receipt of the written appeal. Decisions of the town manager shall be final.
Sec. 15.02.015 Indemnity
(a) Each owner placing facilities in the public rights-of-way shall promptly defend, indemnify and hold the
town harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses or expenses:
(1) For the repair, replacement, or restoration of town's property, equipment, materials, structures
and facilities which are damaged, destroyed or found to be defective as a result of the owner's acts or
omissions; and
(2) From and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments for:
(A) Damage to or loss of the property of any person or third party (including, but not limited
to the town's and owner's respective agents, officers, employees and any third parties); and/or
(B) Death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any
person (including, but not limited to the agents) arising out of, incident to, concerning or
resulting from the negligent or willful act or omissions of the owner, its agents, employees,
and/or subcontractors, in the performance of activities governed under this chapter.
(b) This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability resulting from the negligent or willful acts of the
town, its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors.
(c) The provisions of this indemnity are solely for the benefit of the town and are not intended to create or
grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person.
(d) A permit is automatically revoked if ownership of the facilities is transferred to any person under terms
which do not subject the new owner(s) to the indemnity and hold harmless requirements of this chapter.
Sec. 15.02.016 Insurance requirements
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 645/665
(a) General.
(1) An owner must provide acceptable proof of insurance in the total amount required by this
section for permits for construction within public rights-of-way, or make other provisions acceptable
to the director.
(2) The coverage must be on an “occurrence” basis and must include coverage for personal injury,
contractual liability, premises liability, medical damages, underground, explosion and collapse
hazards.
(3) The owner shall file the required original certificate of insurance prior to the issuance of a
permit. The certificate shall state the policy number; name of the insurance company; name and
address of the agent or authorized representative of the insurance company; name, address and
telephone number of insured; policy expiration date; and specific coverage amounts.
(4) Owner shall file an annual surety bond, which will be valid for one full year, from a surety
company authorized to do business in the state in the amount equal to the estimated amount of the
cost to restore the right-of-way for the work anticipated to be done in that year, in the event the owner
leaves a jobsite in the right-of-way unfinished, incomplete or unsafe. Owner may make other
provisions, in lieu of a bond, as acceptable to the director.
(5) Owner shall file a maintenance bond for 25% of the cost of restoring the right-of-way for the
preceding year. Said bond shall be in force for two years. Owner may make other provisions, in lieu
of a bond, as acceptable to the director.
(6) The above requirements in subsections (1)–(5) may be met by utilities with a current franchise,
license or municipal authorization if their current franchise, license or municipal authorization
adequately provides for insurance or bonds and provides an indemnity in favor of the town.
(7) The town will accept certificates of self insurance issued by the state or letters written by the
agency in those instances where the state does not issue such certificates, which provide the same or
better coverage as required herein. However, certificates of self insurance must be approved in
advance by the town attorney.
(8) An insurer has no right of recovery against the town. The required insurance policies shall
protect the agency or public infrastructure contractor and include the town as an additional insured.
The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies.
(9) Each policy must include a provision that requires the insurance company to notify the town in
writing at least 30 days before canceling or failing to renew the policy or before reducing policy
limits or coverages.
(b) Insurance requirements.
(1) Owners. Each owner applying for a permit shall obtain, maintain, and provide proof of each of
the following types of insurance and coverage limits:
(A) Commercial general liability on an occurrence form with minimum limits of
$5,000,000.00 per occurrence and $10,000,000.00 aggregate. This coverage shall include the
following:
(i) Products/completed operations to be maintained for one year;
(ii) Personal and advertising injury;
(iii) Owners and contractors protective liability; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 646/665
(iv) Explosion, collapse, or underground (XCU) hazards.
(B) Automobile liability coverage with a minimum policy limit of $1,000,000.00 combined
single limit. This coverage shall include all owned, hired and nonowned automobiles.
(C) Workers compensation and employers liability coverage. Statutory coverage limits for
coverage A and $500,000.00 coverage B employer's liability is required.
(2) Contractors and subcontractors. Each contractor and subcontractor applying for a permit shall
obtain, maintain, and provide proof of insurance for the same types of insurance coverages outlined
in subsection (b)(1)(A) above; however, the policy limits under the general liability insurance shall
be $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 aggregate. All other coverage provisions
outlined in subsection (b)(1)(A) above shall apply.
(c) An owner or contractor that has registered and filed proof of insurance under in accordance this chapter is
not required to furnish separate proof of insurance under this section when obtaining a permit but must comply
with all other requirements of this section.
(d) A permit is automatically revoked if any owner transfers ownership of any facilities to any person who
does not have insurance coverage meeting or exceeding all of the requirements detailed above, including without
limitation those relating to naming the town as an additional insured, without express prior written approval
from the town.
Sec. 15.02.017 Driveways and other private improvements
(a) The requirements and regulations in this section apply to driveways and other private improvements
constructed in the public right-of-way for the benefit of the adjacent property.
(b) Driveways.
(1) A permit shall be required to construct a driveway or to reconstruct, alter, or repair any
driveway approach or other related improvement located within a public right-of-way.
(2) Application for such permit shall be made by the owner of the adjacent property, who shall
represent all parties in interest.
(3) The permit application shall be in writing on a form provided by the town and shall include a
site plan showing in sufficient detail the nature of the work proposed in the application including
location, width, and related dimension of the proposed driveway and related improvements.
(4) The construction, alteration, or repair of a driveway shall conform to the applicable
construction standards and other related development regulations adopted by the town. The director
may apply other design and construction criteria as deemed necessary.
(5) The applicant shall furnish all materials necessary for the construction of the driveway and
appurtenances authorized by a permit issued under this section. All materials shall be of satisfactory
quality, and shall be subject to inspection and approval of the town.
(c) Other private improvements in public rights-of-way.
(1) A permit is required to construct or make private improvements in the public right-of-way for
the benefit of the adjacent property. A permit shall only be issued where such private improvements
are specifically authorized by the laws and regulations of the town.
(2) Permits under this section may be issued and are required for the following private
improvements within a public right-of-way:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 647/665
(A) To plant or replace landscaping that has been authorized to be placed within the public
right-of-way.
(B) To install or replace outdoor irrigation systems.
(3) Permits are not required to plant or replace turf grass, or to repair an outdoor irrigation system
located within a public right-of-way.
(4) Application for such permit shall be made by the owner of the adjacent property, who shall
represent all parties in interest. The permit application shall be in writing on a form provided by the
town and shall include a site plan showing in sufficient detail the nature of the work proposed in the
application including location, width, and related dimension of the proposed improvements.
(5) The following private improvements are prohibited in public rights-of-way:
(A) Planting any tree, shrub or other plant, except for turf grass and other plants authorized
by a landscape plan approved by the town.
(B) Any other private improvement not specifically authorized by the laws and regulations of
the town.
(d) Maintenance and repair.
(1) The owner of the adjacent property shall be responsible for the perpetual maintenance and
repair of driveways and other private improvements constructed in the public right-of-way for the
benefit of the adjacent property.
(2) If the town determines that the failure of an adjacent property owner to properly repair or
maintain a driveway or other private improvement within a public right-of-way constitutes a safety
hazard to the public, the town may undertake repairs and restoration efforts, after notice has been
provided to the adjacent property owner, to the extent reasonable under the circumstances. Upon
receipt of an invoice from the town, the owner of the adjacent property shall promptly reimburse the
town for the costs incurred by the town within 30 calendar days from the date of the town invoice. If
payment is not received within the 30 calendar days, the town may file a lien against the adjacent
property, or take any other action allowed in law or in equity.
(e) The requirements in section 15.02.011, restoration of property, and town standard specifications and
details for restoration within public rights-of-way apply to all work performed in connection with a permit
authorized by this section, and any other work related to improvements constructed in the public right-of-way.
Sec. 15.02.018 Cost participation agreements
In accordance with any applicable state law or tariffs of the Texas Public Utility Commission, permit applicants may enter
into agreements with the town and/or third parties to distribute or offset the costs of nonstandard facility installations (i.e.,
certain underground installations) which may be required under this chapter. Such agreements shall always be in writing,
signed by all parties to be bound, filed with the town, and are subject to approval by vote of the town council if the town is
a necessary party.
Sec. 15.02.019 Exemptions
(a) All utility companies which have a valid franchise agreement with the town shall be exempt from the
right-of-way construction permit fee listed in the town's fee schedule.
(b) The town is exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
(Ordinance 2017-15 adopted 08/21/17)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 648/665
APPENDIX A
FEE SCHEDULE
ARTICLE A1.000 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. A1.001 Penalty
(a) Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating articles A2.000 through A4.000 of this fee
schedule shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not
exceeding $200.00. Each continuing day's violation under this fee schedule shall constitute a separate offense.
The penal provisions imposed under this section shall not preclude the town from filing suit to enjoin the
violation. The town retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law.
(b) Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of article A5.000 shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon final conviction thereof fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00. Each day any such
violation shall be allowed shall constitute a separate violation and be punishable hereunder.
(1998 Code, sec. 40.99)
ARTICLE A2.000 BUILDING PERMIT FEES
Sec. A2.001 Residential building permits
Residential building permit fees based on square footage:
(1) New residential dwellings and attached structures (including apartments, duplexes and condos).
(A) Base fee.
1,000 or less $500.00
1,001 to 1,250 $625.00
1,251 to 1,500 $750.00
1,501 to 1,750 $875.00
1,751 to 2,000 $1,000.00
2,001 to 2,250 $1,125.00
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 649/665
2,251 to 2,500 $1,250.00
2,501 to 3,000 $1,500.00
3,001 to 3,500 $1,750.00
3,501 to 4,000 $2,000.00
4,001 to 4,500 $2,250.00
4,501 or more $2,250.00 (+ $0.50 per/sq. ft. in excess of
4,500)
(1998 Code, sec. 40.01(A))
(B) Reinspection fee for red tag.
(i) $50.00 for the first reinspection and increasing in $25.00 increments for each
reinspection of the same items thereafter (i.e. $50.00, $75.00, $100.00……).
(ii) All red tags must be paid before a certificate of occupancy is issued.
(Ordinance 2016-28 adopted 10/11/16)
(C) Plan review fees.
(i) Remodel and detached accessory buildings plans (barns, stables, garages, cabanas,
storage, pools, spa): $75.00.
(ii) Residential plans: $300.00.
(1998 Code, sec. 40.01(A))
(iii) Attached structures plan review fee (including apartments, duplexes, townhomes
and condos) shall be 10% of the cost of the building permit fee. (Ordinance 2016-28
adopted 10/11/16)
Note: The plan review fee must be paid before they are reviewed and permits are
issued and is nonrefundable. (1998 Code, sec. 40.01(A))
(2) Remodeling, additions, alterations, repairs, and fire damage permit fee.
Plan review $75.00
Minimum fee $100.00
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 650/665
150' and over + $0.65/sq. ft.
With concrete pad + $25.00
With electricity + $25.00
With running water + $25.00
With septic hookup + $50.00
(1998 Code, sec. 40.01(A); Ordinance 2016-28 adopted 10/11/16)
(3) Detached accessory buildings (barns, stables, garages, cabanas, storage).
0–250 sq. ft. $100.00
Over 250 sq. ft.
$100.00 + $0.25 per sq. ft. over 250 sq. ft.
With concrete floor + $25.00
With running water + $25.00
With electricity + $25.00
(4) Other fees.
(A) Certificate of occupancy: $75.00.
(B) Lawn sprinkler: $200.00.
(C) Septic:
(i) Residential plan review: $75.00.
(ii) Nonresidential review: $100.00.
(iii) Single-family: $335.00.
(iv) Non-single-family: $475.00.
(1998 Code, sec. 40.01(A))
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 651/665
(v) $50.00 for the first reinspection and increasing in $25.00 increments for each
reinspection of the same items thereafter (i.e. $50.00, $75.00, $100.00…).
(vi) All red tags must be paid before a certificate of occupancy is issued.
(D) Fire plan permit/review/inspections:
Minimum fee $150.00
0–100,000 SF $0.035/SF
100,001–300,000 SF $3,500.00 plus $0.017/SF over 100,000 SF
> 300,000 SF $6,900.00 plus $0.01/SF over 300,000
One/two dwelling townhomes $150.00, plus square footage
(E) Reserved.
(Ordinance 2016-28 adopted 10/11/16)
(F) Temporary building permit: $110.00.
(G) Craftsmen registration: $50.00.
(H) Renewal registration: $25.00.
(1998 Code, sec. 40.01(A))
Sec. A2.002 Commercial building fees
(a) New construction and remodels:
Minimum fee $1,200.00
1–10,000 SF $0.60/SF
10,001–50,000 SF $6,000.00 + $0.50/SF over 10,000 SF
>50,000 SF $26,000.00 + $0.45/SFover 50,000 SF
(b) Commercial plan reviews: 10% of the cost of the building permit fee.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 652/665
(c) Fire plan permit/review/inspections:
Minimum fee $150.00
0–10,000 SF $0.35/SF
100,001–300,000 SF $3,500.00 + $0.17/SF over 100,000 SF
>300,000 SF $6,900.00 + $0.01/SF over 300, 000 SF
One/two dwelling townhomes $150.00 plus square footage shown above
(Ordinance 2016-28 adopted 10/11/16)
ARTICLE A3.000 MISCELLANEOUS FEES
Amended plat single-family residential: $750.00 + $25.00 per lot.
Amended plat nonresidential, including multifamily: $750.00 + $25.00 per acre.
Annexation request (voluntary): $300.00 + $15.00 per acre.
Animal registration, application fees paid to SPCA:
(1) Spayed or neutered: $5.00.
(2) Unspayed or unneutered: $10.00.
Application fee: $25.00.
Billboard annual permit: $950.00.
Board of adjustment - variance: $300.00.
Burn permit: $20.00.
Charge for copies: $0.15 per page.
Complaint inspection: $0.00.
Concept Plan Review: $750.00 + $15.00 per acre.
Concession permit: $100.00.
Conditional use permit (CUP)/special use permit (SUP) request or extension: $400.00.
Construction inspection: $200.00.
Developer's packet: $140.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 653/665
Development agreement application: $1,500.00.
Development plan amendment (CPDD only): $300.00.
Development plan review (CPDD only): $800.00.
Development plan amendment (PC district only): $250.00, plus any notification costs.
Development plan review: $600.00 + $15.00 per acre.
Driveway approach: $50.00.
Emergency fees:
Base Rate Mileage Supplies Oxygen
ALS2 - emergency $950.00 $15.00 $300.00 $90.00
ALS - emergency $900.00 $15.00 $300.00 $90.00
BLS - emergency $850.00 $15.00 $250.00 $90.00
Non-transport fee $100.00
Engineering development review fee: 3.5% of the value of public improvements, to be paid prior to installation
of the public improvements.
Facilities agreement: No fees.
Farmers' market temporary food establishment permit: $50.00.
Final plat for single-family residential: $750.00 + $25.00 per lot.
Final plat for non-residential including multi-family: $750.00 + $25.00 per acre.
Fire department; emergency vehicles: $400.00 per hour.
Food establishment inspection/reinspections in excess of two per year (each): $100.00.
(1) Single-event permit: $50.00.
(2) Multiple-event permit: $100.00.
(3) Farmers' market permit: $50.00.
Food establishment permit (two inspections per year): $400.00.
Government entity: $0.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 654/665
Homeowner's association document review: $700.00.
Limited food establishment: $100.00.
Major warrant request (outside of DP or RP review – CPDD only): $400.00.
Minor warrant request (outside of DP or RP review – CPDD only): $100.00.
Massage establishments, annual license fee: $100.00.
Minor plat: $350.00.
Miscellaneous permit: $75.00.
Mobile food permit: $500.00.
Nonprofit: $0.00.
Nonsufficient funds checks: $35.00.
Plan review: $300.00.
Planned center (PC)/planned development (PD) request: $750.00 + $15.00 per acre.
Preliminary plat: $300 + $15.00/acre.
Recyclables, residential pickups, monthly fee: $3.25 per month.
Regulating plan amendment (CPDD only): $200.00
Regulating plan review (CPDD only): $400.00.
Reinspection (if fail): $100.00.
Reinstating permit (if temporarily suspended): $200.00.
Final plat for single-family residential: $750.00 + $25.00 per lot.
Final plat for non-residential including multi-family: $750.00 + $25.00 per acre.
Sewage disposal work, private: $150.00.
Site/landscape plan review: $600.00 + $15.00 per acre.
Major Amendment: $350.00 + $15.00 per acre.
Minor Amendment: $300.00.
Site and concept plan amendment review: $250.00.
Site plan: $1,150.00 + $3.00 per notification.
Solicitation application fees and bond:
(1) $50.00 application fee for each original solicitor or applicant;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 655/665
(A) $35.00 application fee for every person soliciting on behalf of or as agent for original
solicitor or applicant;
(B) $15.00 fee for every identification card issued.
(2) $5,000.00 bond for each individual engaging in solicitation activities requiring cash deposits or
taking orders on delivery purchases (COD) or who requires a contract of agreement to finance the
sale of any goods, services or merchandise for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the
future.
Spa (separate from pool): $50.00.
Swimming pools, with or without spa: $125.00.
Temporary permit (14-day max): $100.00.
Temporary use permit (greater than 14 days): $200.00.
Temporary use permit request or extension: $300.00.
Tree removal permit fee: $175.00 or actual cost, whichever is greater.
Vacating plat: $300.00.
Variance application to allow dogs on outside patio of food establishments: $0.00.
Variance request – zoning board of adjustments: $300.00.
Water heater installation: $30.00.
Zoning change request (base zoning): $500.00 + $15.00 per acre.
Zoning verification letter: $25.00 per letter.
Zoning withdrawal: Refund of 50% of fee if prior to public hearing mail-out. Otherwise, no refund.
(1998 Code, sec. 40.01(C); Ordinance 2009-5-5B adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 2009-10-13D adopted 10/13/09;
Ordinance 2010-4-6C, sec. 2.02, adopted 4/6/10; Ordinance 2011-9-22B, sec. 2, adopted 9/22/11; Ordinance
2014-9-2A adopted 9/2/14; Ordinance 2014-9-11D adopted 9/11/14; Ordinance 2014-30 adopted 10/7/14;
Ordinance 2015-2 adopted 2/3/15; Ordinance 2016-28 adopted 10/11/16)
ARTICLE A4.000 UTILITY RATES AND CHARGES
Sec. A4.001 Water service
(a) Residential.
First 2,000 gallons $21.41
2,001–10,000 gallons $4.67 per 1,000 gallons
10,001–20,000 gallons $5.83 per 1,000 gallons
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 656/665
20,001–30,000 gallons $7.29 per 1,000 gallons
30,001–40,000 gallons $8.03 per 1,000 gallons
40,001–50,000 gallons $8.82 per 1,000 gallons
Over 50,000 gallons (previous rate + surcharge) $11.71 per 1,000 gallons
(b) Special.
First 2,000 gallons $21.41
2,001–10,000 gallons $4.67 per 1,000 gallons
10,001–20,000 gallons $5.83 per 1,000 gallons
20,001–30,000 gallons $7.29 per 1,000 gallons
30,001–40,000 gallons $8.03 per 1,000 gallons
Over 40,000 gallons $8.82 per 1,000 gallons
(c) Commercial.
First 1,000 gallons $25.68
1,001–30,000 gallons $5.84 per 1,000 gallons
30,001–40,000 gallons $7.42 per 1,000 gallons
Over 40,000 gallons (previous rate + surcharge) $11.71 per 1,000 gallons
(Ordinance 2017-21 adopted 9/5/17)
(d) Reserved.
(e) Hydromulch (or other detachable water meters). $70.09 minimum per job plus commercial rate per gallon.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 657/665
(Ordinance 2014-9-2G, sec. 1, adopted 9/2/14)
(f) Rereads. If a customer complains of the reading for water supplied, and demands a reread, the town will
reread the meter. If it is found that the initial reading was correct, the customer shall pay a minimum charge of
$10.00.
(g) Meter test for accuracy. If a customer complains of the charges for water supplied, and demands that the
meter on their premises be tested, the town will remove and test the meter. If it is found that the meter does not
register in error more than 2% fast, the customer shall pay a minimum charge of $35.00 for a 3/4-inch meter and
$75.00 for a one-inch meter and $100.00 for a two-inch meter, and larger meters will be billed at cost.
(h) Reconnection charge. If service requires disconnection for nonpayment, the customer shall pay a charge of
$35.00 during regular business hours as posted at town hall, and $100.00 during nonbusiness hours, in addition
to the entire bill, to resume service to the account.
(1998 Code, sec. 40.01(D))
(i) Penalty.
(1) Utility payment. A penalty of 10% or $10.00, whichever is greater, shall be assessed on any
utility bill not paid within 15 days after its bill date.
(2) Fire hydrant reporting. Fire hydrant unreported readings will result in a $100.00 nonrefundable
charge.
(j) Deposits.
(1) Generally.
(A) Residential water: $150.00 (or letter of credit from previous municipal utility provider
indicating two consecutive years of no late or delinquent payments).
(B) Residential water and sewer: $200.00 (or letter of credit from previous municipal utility
provider indicating two consecutive years of no late or delinquent payments).
(C) Fire hydrant meter: $1,500.00.
(D) Nonresidential - water only: $125.00.
(E) Commercial - water/sewer: $500.00.
(F) Unincorporated commercial - water/sewer: $650.00.
(2) Habitual delinquency. In the event of three or more delinquent bills in a 12-month period, a
deposit of 1/6 the customer's yearly average may be required in addition to the regular deposit
requirement.
(Ordinance 2016-17 adopted 9/6/16)
(k) Water taps. For each new connection to the waterworks system, any customer shall make proper
application to the town [and shall pay] a tapping fee equal to the cost of materials and labor in making an initial
connection from the water main to the property line and of installation of the meter, meter box, fittings, and the
like, which shall constitute a basis for tapping service fees. Tap fees shall be follows:
3/4-inch meter $875.00 ($375.00 + $500.00 deposit)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 658/665
1-inch meter $1,075.00 ($575.00 + $500.00 deposit)
2-inch meter $2,000.00 ($1,500.00 + $500.00 deposit)
(Only one deposit required per residential address.)
(1998 Code, sec. 40.01(D))
As a minimum, each customer shall be required to pay an amount equal to the total cost to the town for
materials, labor, and all other expenses incurred in the installation of a water meter and for tapping services,
even if the amount is in excess of the basic rates described above. (Ordinance 2007-9-4E adopted 9/4/07)
(l) Radio read fee. For each new connection to the waterworks system, each new meter will be charged a
minimum fee of $275.00 for radio read.
(m) Transfer fee. A minimum fee of $25.00 shall be charged to any customer setting up water service.
(1998 Code, sec. 40.01(D))
(n) High use water conservation surcharge. Residential water connections that use more than 50,000 gallons
of water in any one month shall be assessed a surcharge of $2.89 for every 1,000 gallons over 50,000, which has
been included in the rates identified above, except for special class (no surcharge applied). Commercial water
connections that use more than 40,000 gallons of water in any one month shall be assessed a surcharge of $4.29
for every 1,000 gallons over 40,000, which has been included in the rates identified above. (Ordinance 2017-21
adopted 9/5/17)
(o) Flushing new water lines.
(1) First flushing prior to test: $200.00.
(2) Each subsequent flushing after failed test: $500.00.
(Ordinance 2006-013, sec. 1, adopted 6/15/06)
(p) Water adjustments. The town will not provide a water adjustment unless an accidental leak causes an
increase of at least $100.00 over the customer's average monthly bill. The customer, in addition to the average
monthly bill, will pay the current NTMWD rate plus 50%. The customer must provide evidence that the leak
was repaired prior to an adjustment being made. An adjustment may be made only for a period that does not
exceed two consecutive months and only one leak adjustment per calendar year shall be allowed. Adjustment
request is by written application with utility billing within thirty (30) days of the repair. The customer must
provide evidence that the leak was repaired by a contractor or receipts for repair parts and/or affidavit verifying
that the customer repaired the leak themselves with purchased parts or parts on-hand. Adjustments must be
considered if the leak occurred less than 90 days or three consecutive months from repair or from the billing date
of the high consumption bill statement, whichever occurred last. (Ordinance 2016-18 adopted 9/6/16)
Sec. A4.002 Sanitary sewer rates
(a) Residential users.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 659/665
(1) Single family: $22.24 per month for up to 1,000 gallons of water, plus $3.71 for each 1,000
gallons of water used, up to a maximum of 12,000 gallons. Water usage shall be based on the average
number of gallons of water used per month during the three months from the previous December
15th to March 15th, or other appropriate billing period that most closely coincides with the previous
three winter months. Customers who do not have a three-month winter average upon which to base
an estimated sanitary usage shall be assessed on the actual number of gallons of water metered
monthly.
(2) Without town water service: $64.04.
(b) Commercial users. $33.09 per month for up to 1,000 gallons of water metered plus $3.71 for each 1,000
gallons of water used.
(Ordinance 2017-21 adopted 9/5/17)
Sec. A4.003 Drainage charges
The following schedule of drainage charges is hereby levied against all real properties within the town subject to
drainage charges under subchapter C of chapter 402 of the Texas Local Government Code:
Land Use Description Monthly Charge
Single-family home $5.75 per dwelling unit
Duplex $5.75 per dwelling unit
Manufactured home, mobile homes, camper and/or
recreational vehicle
$5.75 per dwelling unit
Apartment and/or other MF residential $5.75 per dwelling unit
Retail/office/commercial $1.10/1,000 sq. ft. of impervious surface
Industrial $1.10/1,000 sq. ft. of impervious surface
(Ordinance 2011-9-22B, sec. 1, adopted 9/22/11)
ARTICLE A5.000 LICENSING AND REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS
Sec. A5.001 Plumbers
Except for work by a person on his or her own residence, no plumbing work shall be performed in the town
except by or under the supervision of a person currently registered with the town. Registration shall only be
available to a master plumber licensed by the state under V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 1301. Such
registration shall be valid for one year. Registration shall be available upon payment of a $50.00 fee and the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 660/665
furnishing of a copy of the applicant's state license to the building official. The renewal charge after initial
registration shall be $25.00. (1998 Code, sec. 40.02)
Sec. A5.002 Sprinkler system or irrigation work
Except for work by a person on his or her own residence, no sprinkler system or irrigation work shall be
performed in the town except by or under the supervision of a person currently registered with the town.
Registration shall only be available to a person holding a current license for such work from the state. Such
registration shall be valid for one year. Registration shall be available upon payment of a fee of $50.00 and the
furnishing of a copy of such person's state license to the building official. The renewal charge after initial
registration shall be $25.00. (1998 Code, sec. 40.03)
Sec. A5.003 Air conditioning and refrigeration contractors
No person shall engage in the business of air conditioning or refrigeration contracting in the town unless he
holds a current license from the state pursuant to V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 1302 and is currently
registered with the town. Registration is valid for one year and is available upon payment of a fee of $50.00 and
upon furnishing of a copy of the state license to the building official. The renewal charge after initial registration
shall be $25.00. (1998 Code, sec. 40.04)
Sec. A5.004 Electricians
No person shall perform electrical work as defined in the electrical code of the town unless such person holds a
current valid license to perform such work issued by the state and is currently registered with the town.
Registration shall be valid for one year and is available upon payment of a fee of $50.00 upon furnishing a copy
of a current state license to the building official. Such registration may be renewed annually for $25.00. (1998
Code, sec. 40.05)
Sec. A5.005 Residential specialists
No person shall engage in the business of performing residential inspections required under the provisions of a
code of the town as a residential specialist unless and until such person shall furnish a copy of the state license
for such person to the building official and pay a fee of $50.00. The renewal charge after initial registration shall
be $25.00. (1998 Code, sec. 40.06)
ARTICLE A6.000 OIL AND GAS DRILLING AND PRODUCTION FEES
Sec. A6.001 Conditional use permit fee
Drilling and production site conditional use permit: $10,000.00 per pad site + $3.00 per notification.
Sec. A6.002 Well permit fees
(a) Well permit: $10,000.00 per well + $3.00 per notification.
(b) Annual well inspection: $5,000.00 per well, annually.
(c) Amended well permit: $7,500.00 per well + $3.00 per notification.
(d) Amended well permit inspection fee: $2,000.00 per well.
(e) Permit transfer fee: $1,000.00 per well permit.
Sec. A6.003 Pipeline permit fees
(a) Regulated pipeline permit: $5,000.00 per regulated pipeline.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 661/665
(b) Unregulated pipeline permit: $3,000.00 per unregulated pipeline.
Sec. A6.004 Other fees
(a) Seismic survey permit: $500.00 per survey.
(b) Oil and gas insurance requirements review fee: $1,500.00.
(c) Revolving account for each drilling and production site: $50,000.00 minimum balance.
(d) Appeal and takings determination application fees: $1,000.00 per request + $3.00 per notification.
(e) Road damage fees shall be assessed based on the conditions of the road repair agreement previously
executed by the town and the applicant.
(Ordinance 2011-12-6D, sec. 2.04, adopted 12/6/11)
ARTICLE A7.000 PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY FEES AND RATES
See chapter 15 for definitions of the terms below. The town shall not issue any refunds of fees tendered for any equipment
covered by Texas Local Government Code chapter 284 which has been removed.
Sec. A7.001 Construction application fee (related to network nodes and associated facilities)
(a) Network nodes and transport facilities. The lesser of:
(1) Actual cost to the town; or
(2) $500.00 for an application including up to 5 network nodes, and $250.00 for each additional
network node per application.
(b) Node support poles. The lesser of the actual cost to the town, or $1,000.00 per application for each pole.
Sec. A7.002 Annual pole attachment rate (related to network nodes and associated facilities)
Rate calculated at time of application by town staff in accordance with Tex. Util. Code sec. 54.204.
Sec. A7.003 Annual public right-of-way rate (related to network nodes and associated facilities)
(a) Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, payments of annual rates for a calendar year shall be tendered to
the town on or before September 30th of that calendar year. Payments of annual rates for facilities installed or
constructed on or after October 1st of a calendar year shall be tendered to the town no later than September 30th
of the following calendar year.
(b) Network nodes and transport facilities. $250.00 multiplied by the number of network nodes installed in the
public right-of-way in the town's corporate limits. In the discretion of the town council, the town may charge a
network provider a lower rate or fee if the lower rate or fee is nondiscriminatory, related to the use of the public
right-of-way, and not a prohibited gift of public property.
(c) Node support poles. No separate rate independent of the network node rate above.
Sec. A7.004 Monthly public right-of-way rate (related to network nodes and associated facilities)
(a) Transport facilities installed by a network provider. $28.00 multiplied by the number of the network
provider's network nodes in the public right-of-way for which the installed transport facilities provide backhaul.
This rate is in addition to the annual public right-of-way rate applicable to the transport facility under section
A7.003, if any. This rate shall apply unless and until the time the network provider's payment of other municipal
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 662/665
fees to the town exceeds its monthly aggregate per-node compensation to the municipality (e.g., under LGC,
chapter 283 or Texas Utilities Code, chapter 66).
(b) Transport facilities installed by nonnetwork provider. The base rate supplied by town staff at the time of
application, multiplied by the number of network nodes in the public right-of-way for which the owner's
transport facilities provide backhaul. Persons building or installing network nodes, or node support poles (or any
other structure) that supports, or is capable of supporting, a network node, under a contractual arrangement with
a wireless service provider shall be subject to the rate applicable to network providers above.
Sec. A7.005 Annual service pole collocation rate (related to network nodes and associated facilities)
Network nodes. $20.00 per service pole per year.
Sec. A7.006 Other public right-of-way improvement fees (not related to network nodes and associated facilities)
(a) Except for those persons holding an existing franchise agreement or other contract with the town as of the
effective date of this article that authorizes the use of the town's public rights-of-way or those persons whose
fees for the use of the town's public rights-of-way are established by applicable federal or state law rule,
regulation or tariff (including without limitation fees related to network nodes, poles and associated facilities
governed under chapter 15), persons using the town's public rights-of-way shall be charged the following fees as
applicable:
(b) The application fee for a permit to use the public right-of-way is $500.00.
(c) Except as set forth in subsection (d), annual fees are determined and payable as follows:
(1) The annual fee (due on the anniversary date of the issuance of a permit if the improvements
that are the subject of the permit are still in the public right-of-way) for a permit to use a public rightof-
way for the following uses is:
(2) Fee for encroachment of historically significant structures (as determined by town) into public
right-of-way: $350.00.
(3) Fee for newspaper racks placed in the public right-of-way: $25.00 each.
(4) Fee for railroad crossing: Not less than $250.00 per track crossing the public right-of-way or an
amount determined by the town engineer or his/her designee and established in this article granting
the franchise. The fee will not be assessed for a railroad crossing where the railroad crossing existed
before the public right-of-way was established.
(5) Fee for landscaping and appurtenant irrigation systems: $350.00.
(6) Fee for awnings: $50.00.
(7) Fee for curb cuts (other than driveway approaches, see article A3.000)*: $75.00.
* A permit fee is not required if: (1) the permit is being issued in connection with the construction of a new residential or
nonresidential building; or (2) the work described in the permit is included in another permit issued concurrently to the
applicant.
(d) The annual fee for use of the public right-of-way for uses other than those listed in subsection (b), above,
is $350.00 or as calculated in accordance with one of the following formulas, whichever is greater:
(1) Fee for use of public right-of-way, including but not limited to sidewalk vendors (where
allowed): Area × market value × 85 percent × 12 percent.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 663/665
(2) Fee for subsurface use only: Area × market value × 30 percent × 12 percent.
(3) Fee for air rights only: Area × market value × 85 percent × 85 percent × 12 percent.
(4) Fee for commercial parking (if permitted by town): 50 percent of gross receipts.
(e) As used in this article, and unless otherwise determined by the town council, the “market value” of the area
permitted or licensed shall be based on the per square foot appraised value, as determined by the central
appraisal district, of a fee simple interest in a useable tract of abutting property.
(f) The town engineer of other designee of the town manager shall, not less than biannually, review the market
value of licensed areas for which fees are based upon market value. If it is determined that the market value of a
licensed area has decreased, the town shall notify the licensee/franchisee in writing that the annual fee has been
decreased. If it is determined that the market value of a licensed area has increased, the town shall notify the
licensee/franchisee in writing that the annual fee has been increased. If the licensee/franchisee is unwilling to
accept the increased fee, the licensee/franchisee may terminate the license/franchise and receive any refund due
for the prepaid portion of the current year's fee. All increases/decreases in licensee/franchise fees made pursuant
to this section shall be reported to the town council before taking effect.
(g) It shall be presumed for purposes of this article and the formulas contained herein that a linear foot of
right-of-way usage equates to a square foot of area in the right-of-way.
(Ordinance 2017-29 adopted 12/5/17)
ARTICLE A8.000 PUBLIC INFORMATION REQUESTS
For any public information request:
(1) Exceeding 50 pages in length;
(2) Requiring the provision of documents from two or more separate buildings that are not
physically connected with each other; or
(3) Requiring the provision of documents from a remote storage facility the following charges may
be applied:
(A) Labor charge. $15.00/hour, unless otherwise provided for by an exemption from the
Texas Attorney General.
(B) Programming labor charge. $28.50/hour for programming services by town employees; if
the services cannot be performed in-house, the charge shall be the actual cost of obtaining third
party services for programming or manipulating data.
(C) Overhead charges. 20% of any labor charge associated with any given public information
request.
(D) Personnel charge. The actual cost to the town of personnel time expended while
responding to a public information request, to include all compensation (including benefits)
received by said employee, reduced to an hourly rate.
(4) Nonstandard copies.
(A) Diskette: $1.00;
(B) Magnetic tape: Actual cost;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 664/665
(C) Data cartridge: Actual cost;
(D) Tape cartridge: Actual cost;
(E) Rewritable CD (CD-RW): $1.00;
(F) Nonrewritable CD (CD-R): $1.00;
(G) Digital videodisc (DVD): $3.00;
(H) JAZ drive: Actual cost;
(I) Other electronic media: Actual cost;
(J) VHS videocassette: $2.50;
(K) Audio cassette: $1.00;
(L) Oversized copy (e.g., 11 inches by 17 inches, greenbar, bluebar, not including maps and
photographs using specialty paper): $0.50; and/or
(M) Specialty paper (e.g.: Mylar, blueprint, blueline, map, photographic): Actual cost.
(N) Charges for nonstandard copies of oversized copies are applicable to all public
information requests, regardless of the number of pages or the time involved in the response to
the public information request.
(5) Microfiche and microfilm charge.
(A) If the town already has information that exists on microfiche or microfilm and has copies
available for sale or distribution, the charge for a copy must not exceed the cost of its
reproduction. If no copies of the requested microfiche or microfilm are available and the
information on the microfiche or microfilm can be released in its entirety, the town shall make a
copy of the microfiche or microfilm. The charge for a copy shall not exceed the cost of its
reproduction.
(B) If only a master copy of information in microfilm is maintained, the charge is $0.10 per
page for standard paper copies, plus any applicable labor and overhead charges for more than
50 copies.
(6) Remote document retrieval. If the town has a contract with a commercial records storage
company, whereby the private company charges a fee to locate, retrieve, deliver, and return to storage
the needed record(s), no additional labor charge shall be factored in for time spent locating
documents at the storage location by the private company's personnel. If after delivery to the town,
the boxes must still be searched for records that are responsive to the request, a labor charge is
allowed according to subsection (3)(A) of this section.
(7) Computer resource charge.
(A) Mainframe: $10.00 per CPU minute;
(B) Midsize: $1.50 per CPU minute;
(C) Client/server system: $2.20 per clock hour;
(D) PC or LAN: $1.00 per clock hour.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 665/665
(8) Miscellaneous supplies. The actual cost of miscellaneous supplies, such as labels, boxes, and
other supplies used to produce the requested information, may be added to the total charge for public
information.
(9) Postal and shipping charges. The town may add any related postal or shipping expenses which
are necessary to transmit the reproduced information to the requestor.
(10) Miscellaneous charges. If the town accepts payment by credit card for copies of public
information, and it is charged a “transaction fee” by the credit card company, it may recover that fee
from the requestor.
(Ordinance 2017-27 adopted 12/5/17)
Cross reference–Article 1.15, section 1.15.009.