CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF FLORESVILLE, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
  
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Cecelia (Cissy) Gonzalez-Dippel 
Mayor 
____________ 
David Johns, Place #1 
Nick Nissen, Place #2 
Juan Ortiz, Place #3 
Gerard J. Jimenez, Place #4 
Gloria Morales Cantu, Place #5 
City Council 
____________ 
Henrietta Turner 
City Manager 
____________ 
Sylvia Rodriguez 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Monica Cordova 
City Secretary  
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Floresville, Texas. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1996 Code, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1996 Code, as supplemented, and any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged by subject, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a point. The figure before the point refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the point refers to the position of the section within the chapter. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney, and Kellyn Wilcox, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mindy Riley, Development Director, Monica Cordova, City Secretary, Henrietta Turner, City Manager, and Chris Hugg, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Floresville, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and indexes. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Floresville, Texas. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Floresville, Texas. 2018.  
PART I - CHARTER OF THE CITY OF FLORESVILLE, TEXAS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Charter was adopted November 10, 2004, and certified by Ordinance 218. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original referendum. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of capitalization, headings, catchlines, numerical representation and citation to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Constitution reference— Charter to be consistent with constitution and general laws, art. XI, § 5. 
State Law reference— Home rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 9. 
 
SECTION I. - INCORPORATION 
 
Sec. 1.01. - Incorporation. 
The inhabitants of the City of Floresville, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by law, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the City of Floresville, hereinafter referred to as the city.  
Sec. 1.02. - Form of government. 
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as council manager government. Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution, the statutes of this state and by this Charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as the city council which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and appoint the city manager, who in turn shall be held responsible to the city council for the execution of the laws and the administration of the government of the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner were not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance, the state constitution, or the statutes of the state. 
State Law reference— Form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.021.  
Sec. 1.03. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries and limits of said city shall be shown by metes and bounds and plat description on file in the office of the county clerk, together with such additions as may be hereafter adopted by the city council, or as provided for by law. 
State Law reference— Municipal boundaries, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 41.  
Sec. 1.04. - Extension of boundaries. 
The boundaries of the city may be enlarged and extended by the annexation of additional territory, irrespective of size and configuration, in any of the methods hereinafter designated. all proposed unilateral annexations shall be in compliance with the city's comprehensive plan. See section VIII. 
State Law reference— Municipal annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 43.  
Sec. 1.05. - Service plan. 
A.  Public hearing on service plan. Before publication of notice of first hearing to annex additional territory unilaterally, the city shall prepare a service plan in accordance with state law. The service plan must provide for extension of full municipal services (services funded in whole or in part by municipal taxes and provided by the municipality with its full purpose boundaries) to the area to be annexed, by any of the methods by which it extends the services to any other area of the municipality. The proposed service plan must be made available for public inspection and explained at the hearings. The plan may be amended through negotiation but provision of any service may not be deleted. 
B.  Elements of service plan. 
(1)  If the city provides the following services in the current incorporated area, the service plan will include those services in the annexed area on the effective date of the annexation; 
(2)  Police protection; fire protection, emergency medical services, solid waste collection, operation and maintenance of water and waste water facilities not in the service area of another utility, operation and maintenance of roads and streets, including road and street lighting; operation and maintenance of parks, playgrounds, and swimming pools, and operation and maintenance of any other publicly owned facility, building or service. 
C.  Capital improvements and construction. The service plan must also include a time period under which the city will initiate the acquisition or construction of capital improvements necessary for providing municipal services adequate to serve the area. The city shall extend water and access to wastewater service to any annexed area not within the service area of another water or wastewater utility. The capital improvements must begin within two years after the date of the annexation and shall be substantially completed within a reasonable amount of time. The construction of the facilities must be accomplished in a continuous process and shall be complete as soon as reasonably possible, consistent with generally accepted local engineering and architectural standards and practices. 
D.  Level of services. The service plan may not provide fewer services or lower levels of services in the area than were in existence in the area immediately preceding the date of the annexation, or that are otherwise available in other parts of the municipality with land uses, population densities and topography similar to those reasonably contemplated or projected in the area. 
E.  Contractual obligation. After the service plan is approved by the adoption of the annexation ordinance, the plan becomes a contractual obligation. It may be amended only after hearings and a finding that the plan is unworkable or obsolete, due to changed conditions or subsequent occurrences. An amended service plan must provide for services that are comparable to, or better than, those established in the service plan before amendment. 
State Law reference— Provision of services to annexed area, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.056.  
Sec. 1.06. - Detachment or contraction of boundaries. 
Whenever there exists within the corporate limits of the city any territory not suitable or necessary for city purposes, the city council may, upon a petition signed by a majority of the qualified voters residing in such territory if the same be inhabited, or without any such petition if same be uninhabited on its own initiative, by ordinance duly passed, discontinue said territory as a part of said city; said petition and ordinance shall specify accurately the metes and bounds of the territory sought to be eliminated from the city and shall contain a plat designating such territory so that the same can be definitely ascertained; and when said ordinance has been duly passed, the same shall be entered upon the minutes and records of the city and the public records of the county and from and after the entry of such ordinance, said territory shall cease to be a part of said city, but said territory shall still be liable for its pro rata share of any debts incurred while said area was a part of said city, and the city shall continue to levy, assess, and collect taxes on the property within said territory to pay the indebtedness incurred while said area was a part of the city as though the same had not been excluded from the boundaries of the city. 
State Law reference— Disannexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.141 et seq.  
SECTION II. - POWERS OF THE CITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— General powers of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 51; authority of local self-government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.072. 
 
Sec. 2.01. - General powers of the city. 
The city shall have all the powers now or hereafter granted to municipal corporations by the constitutions and laws of the state, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted; and, except as prohibited by the constitution of this state or restricted by this Charter, the city shall and may exercise all municipal functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby, or appropriate to exercise of such powers, it is intended that the city shall have, and may exercise, all powers of local self-government, and all powers enumerated in state law.  
Sec. 2.02. - General power adopted. 
The enumeration of the particular powers in this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive but in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the city shall have and may exercise all power of local self-government and all other powers which, under the constitution and laws of the state, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate.  
Sec. 2.03. - Powers of the city. 
The city shall have perpetual succession as a body politic and corporate; may use a seal; may sue and may enter into contracts for any public purpose; may acquire and hold, in fee simple or any lesser estate or in trust, by gift, deed, bequest, right of eminent domain, purchase, lease, exchange, or otherwise, and may alienate, any character of property, real or personal, within and without the city limits.  
Sec. 2.04. - Street powers. 
The city shall have the power to lay out, establish, open, alter, widen, lower, extend, grade, abandon, discontinue, abolish, close, care for, pave, supervise, maintain and improve streets, alleys, rights-of-way, sidewalks, squares, parks, public places and bridges and regulate the use thereof and require the removal from streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other public property or places all obstructions and encroachments of every nature or character upon any of said streets, public property and sidewalks. 
State Law reference— Municipal streets, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 311 et seq.  
Sec. 2.05. - Street improvement. 
The city shall have exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction in, upon, and over and under the public streets, avenues, rights-of-way, alleys and highways of the city, and may provide for the improvement thereof by paving, repair, raising, grading, draining, or otherwise. The city shall have the power and authority to make assessments against abutting owners for all or part of street, drainage, curb and gutter improvements. 
State Law reference— Street improvements and assessments, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 313.  
Sec. 2.06. - Public utilities. 
The city shall have the power to provide for a water and sanitary sewer system, and to require property owners to connect their premises with such water and sewer system; to provide for fixing penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer connections; to provide rules and regulations for the collection of charges for the use of the water and sanitary sewer system. 
State Law reference— Municipal water and utilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 551 et seq.  
Sec. 2.07. - Electrical. 
The city council shall have the power to provide for an electrical system, which may be owned or operated independently by the city or in conjunction with other municipal corporations, and to require residential and business owners whose buildings use electricity to connect their premises with such electrical system; to provide for fixing penalties for failure to make electrical connections; to provide rules and regulations for the collection of charges for use of the electrical system. 
State Law reference— Municipal water and utilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 551 et seq.  
Sec. 2.08. - Garbage disposal. 
The city council shall have the power to provide for the handling and disposition of all garbage, trash and rubbish within the city, and shall further have the right to fix charges and compensation to be charged by the city for the removal of garbage, trash and rubbish and provide rules and regulations for the collection of such charges or compensation. 
State Law reference— Solid waste, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 361 et seq.  
Sec. 2.09. - Safety and sanitary enforcement. 
The city council shall have the right to provide for the inspection and regulation of the sanitary condition and safety of all premises be it vacant or occupied lots, manufactured homes, substandard or abandoned houses or buildings within the city limits, for the removal of garbage, refuse, and unsanitary vegetation; it shall have the right to fix charges for such removal, provide regulations for the collection of such charges, and provide for establishing a lien against any property for any expense incurred by the city in enforcing this provision; and further to provide for the making and enforcing of all proper and reasonable regulations for the health and sanitation of said city and its inhabitants. 
State Law reference— Sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 341 et seq.  
Sec. 2.10. - Lands and other properties. 
The city may acquire lands and other properties, within or without its corporation limits, for any city purpose in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, device, lease, lease-purchase or condemnation. The city may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as its interest may require and as provided by law. 
State Law reference— Municipal acquisition, sale or lease of property, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 251 et seq.  
Sec. 2.11. - Public parks and playgrounds. 
The city shall have exclusive control over all city parks and municipal playgrounds, and the right to control, regulate the parks and playgrounds, and remove all obstructions and prevent all encroachments thereupon. 
State Law reference— Parks and other recreational and cultural resources, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 306 et seq.  
Sec. 2.12. - Public library. 
The city shall have the right to establish and maintain a public library within the city and cooperate with any person, firm, association, corporation or political subdivision of the state, under such terms as the city council may prescribe for the establishment or maintenance of such public library. 
State Law reference— Libraries and archives, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 441.  
Sec. 2.13. - Airport. 
The city shall have the right to operate an airport facility, either by itself or in conjunction with another governmental entity, as authorized by state law. Voter approval is necessary if it is built or operated with city funds. 
State Law reference— County and municipal airports, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 22.  
Sec. 2.14. - Cemeteries. 
The city shall have the power to regulate burial grounds, cemeteries and crematories owned by any person, firm, corporation or association now or hereafter established and to condemn and close any such when health may demand; to purchase, establish, own, regulate and maintain one or more cemeteries, as provided by state law. 
State Law reference— Cemeteries, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 711 et seq.  
Sec. 2.15. - Sales of electricity, water and sewer services. 
The city council shall have the power and authority to sell and distribute electricity, either independently or in conjunction with other municipal corporations pursuant to any joint venture, and water and to sell and provide for sewer services and any other utilities to any person, firm or corporation outside the limits of the city, and to permit them to connect with said systems under contract with the city, under such terms and conditions as may appear to be for the best interests of the city; provided the charges fixed for such services outside the city limits shall be reasonable when considered in the light of all circumstances, to be determined by the city council. 
The city council shall have the power and authority to prescribe the kind of materials used within or beyond the limits of the city where it furnishes the service, and to inspect the same and require them to be kept in good order and condition at all times and to make such rules and regulations as shall be necessary and proper, and prescribe penalties for noncompliance with same. 
State Law reference— Municipal utilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 552.  
Sec. 2.16. - Eminent domain. 
The city shall have the full right, power and authority to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this Charter or by the constitution or laws of the state. The power of eminent domain shall include the right of the city to take the fee in the lands so condemned and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public property for such purposes. The city shall have and possess this power of condemnation for any municipal or public purpose, even though not specifically enumerated herein or in this Charter. 
State Law reference— Eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 251, V.T.C.A., Property Code ch. 21.  
SECTION III. - THE CITY COUNCIL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 26. 
 
Sec. 3.01. - Number, selection and term. 
The legislative and governing body of the city shall consist of a mayor and five council members and shall be known as the city council. 
(a)  The mayor and the other members of the city council shall be elected from the city in the manner provided in section V. 
(b)  The mayor shall conduct city council meetings following the posted agenda provided by the city secretary. The mayor shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no regular administrative duties. The mayor shall be entitled to vote on all matters under consideration by the city council, only to break a tie vote. 
(c)  In each even-numbered year two council members and a mayor shall be elected, and in each odd-numbered year three council members shall be elected. 
(d)  The term of office for the mayor shall be a period of two years and no more than three terms. An individual who has been elected for three terms as mayor cannot run for that office again for six years. 
(e)  The term of office for each council member shall be a period of two years and no more than three terms. An individual who has be elected for three terms as council member cannot run for that office again for six years. 
(f)  An ex-mayor can run for city council and an ex-city council member can run for mayor with the same time period and term limits as cited in (d) and (e). If an individual elected for the maximum number of terms in each office that individual may not run again for either office for six years. 
(g)  No city official can run for an office that will run concurrent with the office currently held by that official unless that city official resigns from his or her current office.  
Sec. 3.02. - Qualifications. 
Each member of the city council shall be a resident of the city, shall be a qualified voter of the state, shall have been a resident of the city for a period of not less than one year immediately preceding his election, and shall not be delinquently indebted to the city, provided, however, that any person with the above qualifications, except as to residence, who shall have been a resident, for a period of not less than one year immediately preceding his election, of any of the territory not formerly within the corporate limits of said city, but which is annexed under the provisions of section 1.03 of this Charter, shall be eligible for said office. If the mayor or any council member fails to maintain the foregoing qualifications, or shall be absent from three consecutive regularly scheduled meetings without valid excuse, the city council may at its next regular meeting declare a vacancy to exist and shall fill said vacancy as set forth in section 3.06 of this Charter. 
State Law reference— Age and residence requirements for city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 141.003.  
Sec. 3.03. - City council to be judge of election qualification. 
The city council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its own members and other elected officials of the city.  
Sec. 3.04. - Compensation. 
The city council shall fix the compensation to be received by its members for attendance at its meetings. Mayor $100.00 per month; council members $75.00 per month.  
Sec. 3.05. - Mayor pro tem. 
The city council, at its first meeting after election of council members shall elect one of its number mayor pro tem and he or she shall perform all the duties of the mayor in the absence or disability of the mayor.  
Sec. 3.06. - Vacancies. 
When a vacancy occurs in the city council, the remaining members of the council shall constitute a quorum and within ten business days of said vacancy shall appoint a qualified person to fill the unexpired term. However, the city council shall not appoint more than one council member in any 12-month period, and in case a vacancy has been filled by the city council within 12 months prior to the subsequent vacancy, or if more than one vacancy occurs at the same time or before a prior vacancy has been filled, the city council shall call a special election within ten days from the date the last vacancy occurred, to be held in accordance with state law on special elections, for the purpose of electing the successor or successors to the office or offices vacated.  
Sec. 3.07. - Powers of the city council. 
All powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the city council. Without limitation of the foregoing and among the other powers that may be exercised by the city council, the following are hereby enumerated for greater certainty. 
(a)  Remove a member of any city board or city commission. 
(b)  Establish, consolidate or abolish administrative departments and distribute the work of divisions. 
(c)  Adopt the budget of the city. 
(d)  Authorize the issuance of bonds by a bond ordinance. 
(e)  Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the city and make investigations as to municipal affairs. 
(f)  Provide for such additional boards and commissions, not otherwise provided for in this Charter, as may be deemed necessary, and appoint the members of all such boards and commissions. Such boards and commissions shall have all powers and duties now or hereafter conferred and created by this Charter, by city ordinance or by law. 
(g)  Adopt and modify the official map of the city. 
(h)  Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning, zoning and annexation commission for the clearance and rehabilitation of blighted areas. 
(i)  Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission for the planning, improvement and redevelopment of any area or district that may have been destroyed in whole or in part by disaster. 
(j)  Regulate, license and fix the charges or fares made by any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or controlling any vehicle of any character used for the carrying of passengers for hire, towing vehicles or the transportation of freight for hire on the public streets and alleys of the city. 
(k)  Provide for the establishment and designation of fire codes and prescribe the kind and character of buildings or structures or improvements to be erected therein, and provide for the erection of fireproof buildings within said codes, and provide for the condemnation of dangerous structures or buildings or dilapidated buildings, or buildings calculated to increase the fire hazard and prescribe the manner of their removal or destruction within said limits. 
(l)  Set the salaries and compensation of the city officers and employees and conduct the required reviews and evaluation of the city manager. 
(m)  Provide for a sanitary sewer and water system and require property owners to connect their premises with sewer system, and provide for penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer connections. 
(n)  Provide for sanitary garbage disposal, and set fees and charges therefor, and provide penalties for failure to pay such fees and charges. 
(o)  Provide for an electrical system and set fees and charges therefor and provide penalties for misuses of same. 
(p)  Exercise exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction including the right to close and abandon streets and alleys in, upon, over and under the public streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, highways, boulevards and public grounds of the city and provide for the improvement of same as provided in state law as now or hereafter amended. 
(q)  Compromise and settle any and all claims and lawsuits of every kind and character in favor of or against the city.  
Sec. 3.08. - City council not to interfere in appointments. 
Neither the city council nor any of its members shall direct the appointment of any person to office by the city manager or by any of his subordinates. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services solely through the city manager and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the city manager, either publicly or privately.  
Sec. 3.09. - Meeting of the city council. 
The city council shall hold two regular meetings in each month if necessary, at a time to be fixed by it for such regular meetings, and may hold as many additional meetings during the month as may be necessary for the transaction of the business of the city and its citizens. All meetings of the city council shall be public and shall be held at the city hall, except that the city council may designate another place for such meetings. Except in the case of an emergency, the city secretary will post notice of city council meetings at city hall. Any two elected officials may call special meetings of the city council at any time. Any council member may place items on the agenda used in city council meetings. 
State Law reference— Open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 551.  
Sec. 3.10. - Rules of procedure. 
The city council shall determine its own rules of procedure and may compel the attendance of its members. Three qualified members of the city council, plus the mayor or mayor pro tem shall constitute a quorum to do business and the affirmative vote of a majority of those present and voting shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance or resolution. Minutes of the proceedings of all meetings of the city council shall be kept, to which any citizen may have access at all reasonable times and which shall constitute one of the archives of the city. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by "ayes" and "nays" and entered upon the minutes, and every ordinance or resolution, upon its final passage, shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose under full caption, and shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer and the person performing the duties of the city secretary. Individual citizens will be granted one minute of time for input on the subject of any and all consideration and action items as they come up on the council agenda prior to the council vote. No prior sign up by citizens will be required for their input on agenda items. [Amendment voted on and approved by Council on May 14, 2009 to be effective June 1, 2009. See end notes.] 1  
Sec. 3.11. - Procedures for passage of ordinances. 
Every ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form and, upon passage, shall take effect at the time indicated therein; provided that any ordinance imposing a penalty, fine or forfeiture for a violation of its provisions shall become effective not less than ten days from the date of its passage; subject to the provisions of article [section] VII of this Charter. The clerk shall give notice of the passage of every ordinance imposing a penalty, fine or forfeiture for a violation of the provisions thereof, by causing the caption or title, including the penalty, of any such ordinance to be published in the official newspaper of the city at least once within ten days after the passage of said ordinance. The clerk shall note on every ordinance, the caption of which is hereby required to be published, and on the record thereof, the fact that same has been published as required by the Charter, and the date of such publication, which shall be prima fade evidence of the legal publication and promulgation of such ordinance; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the correction, amendment, revision and codification of the ordinances of the city for publication in book or pamphlet form. Except as otherwise provided by article [section] VII of this Charter, it shall not be necessary to the validity of any ordinance that it shall be read more than one time or considered at more than one session of the city council. Every ordinance shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and city clerk and shall be systematically recorded and indexed in an ordinance book in a manner approved by the council. It shall only be necessary to record the caption or title of ordinances in the minutes or journal of council meetings. The city council shall have power to cause the ordinances of the city to be corrected, amended, revised, codified and printed in code form as often as the council deems advisable, and such printed code, when adopted by the council, shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of publishing the same or any part thereof in a newspaper. Such printed code shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and places without further proof. 
State Law reference— Publication of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 52; code of municipal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 53.  
Sec. 3.12. - Enforcement of ordinances, citizen rights. 
City ordinances reflect the needs and wishes of the citizens of the city. It shall be the city manager's responsibility to see that all ordinances are enforced in [a] fair and impartial manner. It shall be the city council's duty to see that the city manager orders the strict and equitable enforcement of all ordinances. The city manager shall report enforcement activities as a regular agenda item each month at a regular[ly] scheduled city council meeting. 
State Law reference— Enforcement of municipal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54.  
Sec. 3.13. - Official bonds for city employees. 
The city manager and the city secretary and such other city officers and employees as the city council may require, shall, before entering upon the duties of their offices, enter into a good and sufficient fidelity bond in a sum to be determined by the city council, payable to the city and conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the duties of such persons and upon the faithful accounting for all monies, credits, and things of value coming into the hands of such persons, and such bonds shall be signed as surety by some company authorized to do business under the laws of the state, and the premium on such bonds shall be paid by the city, and such bonds must be acceptable to the city council.  
Sec. 3.14. - Investigation by the city council. 
The city council shall have authority to recommend that the proper agency inquire into the conduct of any office, department, agency, officer or employee of the city and to make investigations as to municipal affairs.  
Sec. 3.15. - Audit and examination of city books and accounts. 
The city council shall cause an annual audit to be made of the books and accounts of each and every department of the city. At the close of each fiscal year a complete audit shall be made by a licensed public accountant, who shall be selected by the city council, and such audit shall include a recapitulation of all audits made during the course of each fiscal year, and all audit reports shall be filed with the city council, shall be available for public inspection and shall be made a part of the archives of the city. Such accountant, so selected, shall not maintain or keep any of the city's accounts or records. See section IX.  
SECTION IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 
 
Sec. 4.01. - City manager. 
(a)  Appointment and qualifications. The city council shall appoint a city manager that shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the city and shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all the affairs of the city. He shall be chosen by the city council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative training, experience and ability, and need not, when appointed, be a resident of the city. The city manager shall be required to reside in the city after the appointment becomes effective. No member of the city council or mayor shall, during the time for which he is elected and for one year thereafter, be appointed city manager. 
(b)  Term and salary. The city manager shall be appointed for a definite term but may be removed at the will and pleasure of the city council by a vote of the majority of the entire council. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city manager shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility of such suspension or removal in the city council. In case of the absence or disability of the city manager, the city council may designate some qualified person to perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability. The city manager shall receive compensation as may be fixed by the council. 
(c)  Evaluation and performance review of city manager. The city council shall conduct a performance review of the city manager quarterly, and a complete evaluation annually. All performance reviews and annual evaluations are to be reviewed with the city manager. The standards for the reviews and annual evaluation will be established by the city council. All performance reviews and annual evaluations will become a permanent record in the city manager's personnel file. 
(d)  Duties of the city manager. 
(1)  Appoint and when necessary, remove any employee of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter. 
(2)  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the city council, and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the city council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year. 
(4)  Keep the city council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations as may seem desirable. 
(5)  Perform such duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or may be required of him by the city council, not inconsistent with this Charter. 
(6)  Conduct performance reviews and evaluations of each department head. The city manager will use the review and evaluation standards established by the city council. 
(7)  See that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed. 
(8)  Prepare and submit a five-year plan, updated yearly, that covers the budget and requirements of all city departments. This plan should be coordinated with the five-year capital program plan.  
Sec. 4.02. - Department of police. 
There shall be established and maintained a department of police to preserve order within the city and to secure the residents of said city from violence and the property therein from injury or loss. 
Chief of police. The chief of police shall be the chief administrative officer of the department of police. He shall, with the approval of the city manager, appoint and remove the employees of said department and shall perform such duties as may be required of him by the city. The chief of police shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of the city council, for an indefinite term, as provided by state law, as now or hereafter amended. The chief of police shall be responsible to the city manager for the administration of his department and the carrying out of the directives of the city. He may be removed from office by the city manager with the majority approval vote of the entire city council. [Amendment voted on and approved by Council on May 14, 2009 to be effective June 1, 2009. See end notes.] 2 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for a police department, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.003.  
Sec. 4.03. - City secretary. 
The city manager shall appoint the city secretary and such assistant city secretaries, as the city council shall deem advisable. The city secretary, or an assistant city secretary, shall give notice of council meetings, shall keep the minutes of the proceedings of such meetings, shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a book kept and indexed for the purpose, all ordinances and resolutions, and shall perform such other duties as the city manager shall assign to him or her, and those elsewhere provided for in this Charter. 
State Law reference— Local government records act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 201 et seq.  
Sec. 4.04. - Municipal court. 
(a)  There shall be established and maintained a court designated as a municipal court for the trial of misdemeanor offenses, with all such powers and duties as are now or hereafter may be prescribed by laws of the state relative to municipal courts. 
(b)  The judge of said court shall be a qualified voter of the city, shall be appointed by the city council, shall hold his office at the pleasure of the city council and shall receive such salary as may be fixed by ordinance of the city council. The city council may appoint an alternate judge if necessary. 
(c)  The city secretary or an assistant city secretary shall be ex officio clerk of said court. 
(d)  The clerk of said court and his deputies shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of said court thereto, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary by the clerk of courts in issuing process of said courts and conducting the business thereof. 
State Law reference— Municipal Courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 29; rules of procedure, etc., V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure ch. 45.  
Sec. 4.05. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a competent and duly licensed attorney practicing law in the state, who shall be the city attorney. He or she shall receive for his services such compensation as may be fixed by the city council and shall hold his office at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney, or such other attorneys selected by the city attorney with the approval of the city council, shall represent the city in all litigation and other legal matters. He or she shall be the legal advisor of, and attorney and counsel for, the city and all officers and departments thereof.  
Sec. 4.06. - Other departments. 
The city council may abolish or consolidate such offices and departments as it may deem to be to the best interest of the city, and may divide the administration of any such departments as it may deem advisable; may create new departments, and may discontinue any offices or departments at its discretion, except those specifically established by this Charter.  
SECTION V. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Elections generally, V.T.C.A., Election Code ch. 1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5.01. - Municipal elections. 
The general city election shall be held annually each spring election date as designated by the Texas Election Code between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. at which time the officers will be elected to fill those offices which become vacant that year. 
The city council shall fix the place for holding such election. The city council may, by ordinance, order a special election, fix the place for holding same and provide all means for holding such special election. Notice of the general election shall be given in accordance with the requirements set forth in the Texas Election Code. The council may cancel an election as authorized by the state law if only one or no candidate files for a particular seat. 
Editor's note— The election was changed to the November general election date per V.T.C.A., Election Code § 41.0052. 
State Law reference— Election dates and hours for voting, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 41.001 et seq.  
Sec. 5.02. - Official ballot. 
The official ballot shall be drawn up by the city secretary and will contain the names of all candidates for office, except those that may have been withdrawn, deceased, or become ineligible as provided by state law. Names will be placed on the ballot without any designation, and position on the ballot will be determined by drawing. 
State Law reference— Ballot form, content and preparation, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 52.001 et seq.  
Sec. 5.03. - Election of council members. 
The council shall be composed of five members elected by the voters of the city at large by place. The mayor shall be elected at large. 
At the appropriate time in the future, either the council or the citizens by referendum may propose amending this Charter to institute the election of the city council by single-member districts which will be presented to the voters. This Charter amendment shall follow the provisions of this Charter and state law. 
At the regular municipal election, the candidate for any office who shall have received the 50 percent of the votes cast in such elections for the office for which he or she is a candidate shall be declared elected. 
In the event that no candidate receives a majority of all votes cast for any one place at such election, the council shall, upon completion of the official canvass of the ballots, issue a call for a runoff election to be held in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Election Code. At such runoff election, the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes (or three persons in case of a tie for second place) for any one place in the first election shall again be voted for. 
Name of persons qualifying for such runoff election shall be reprinted on said official ballot in an order to be determined by the drawing of lots; provided, however, that any qualified runoff candidate may request that his or her name shall not appear on the official ballot at such runoff election, in which case, the candidate for such place standing next highest in the computation of votes shall be placed on the runoff ballot. 
All runoff elections will be decided by plurality. In the event of a tie between the two candidates for any office at said runoff election; the candidates shall cast lots to determine who shall be elected to such office. 
State Law reference— Vote required for election to office, V.T.C.A., Election Code ch. 2.  
Sec. 5.04. - Oath of office. 
Every elected official, the city manager and city secretary of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation to be filed and kept in the office of the city secretary: 
"I, ____________ , do solemnly swear (or affirm), that I will faithfully execute the duties of the office of ____________ , of the City of Floresville, State of Texas, and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the constitution and laws of the United States and of this state and the Charter and ordinances of this city; and I furthermore solemnly swear (or affirm), that I have not directly or indirectly paid, offered, or promised to pay, contributed, nor promised to contribute any money or valuable thing, or promised any public office or employment, as a reward for the giving or withholding a vote at the election at which I was elected, or if the office is one of appointment, to secure my appointment. So help me God." 
State Law reference— Oath of office, Tex. Const. art. 16, § 1.  
SECTION VI. - RECALL OF OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 6.01. - Scope of recall. 
Any elected city official, whether elected to office by the qualified voters of the city or appointed by the council to fill a vacancy, shall be subject to recall, and removal from office by the qualified voters of the city on grounds of incompetence, misconduct or malfeasance in office. A recall of an elected city official must not be within, six months before or after the regular municipal election of the officer or within six months after a recall election for such officer's recall.  
Sec. 6.02. - Petitions for recall. 
Before the question of recall of an elected city official goes before the voters, a petition asking for recall shall be submitted to the city secretary; the petition shall specify the grounds alleged for the removal of the officer in plain and intelligible language and must cite the time and place of the occurrence of each act alleged as a ground for removal with enough certainty as the nature of the case permits. The petition must be signed by ten percent of the registered voters and represent at least 20 percent of the number of votes cast at the last regular municipal election of the city whether voting at large or by district, but in no event less than 500 such petitioners. Each petitioner shall personally sign his or her name in ink. All other information (printed name, physical address, and date of birth and place of residence) can be written or printed by the petitioner or by the petition gatherer. No post office box numbers are allowed.  
Sec. 6.03. - Various papers constituting the petition. 
All papers comprising a recall petition shall be in original writing; no copies are to be submitted to the city secretary. No signatures to such petition shall remain effective or be counted which were placed thereon more than 45 days prior to the filing of such petition with the city secretary. The city secretary shall immediately notify, in writing the officer to be removed, by mailing such notice by certified mail.  
Sec. 6.04. - Presentation of petition to city council. 
Within ten business days after the date of the filing of the petition the city secretary shall verify the legal voters who signed the petition. The city secretary shall present such petition to the city council at the next regular council meeting and at that same meeting the council must set a date for a public hearing to be held in not less than five business days. At said public hearing, the person whose removal is sought may present facts and witnesses pertinent to the charges in the recall petition. [Amendment voted on and approved by Council on May 14, 2009 to be effective June 1, 2009. See end notes.] 3  
Sec. 6.05. - Election to be called. 
If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign within ten business days after the date of the public hearing, the city council shall, at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting, order an election and fix a date for holding such recall election in accordance with state law. [Amendment voted on and approved by Council on May 14, 2009 to be effective June 1, 2009. See end notes.] 4 
State Law reference— Ordering of election, V.T.C.A., Election Code ch. 3; election dates, V.T.C.A., Election Code ch. 41.  
Sec. 6.06. - Ballots in recall election. 
Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  With respect to each person whose removal is sought the question shall be submitted, shall (name of person) be removed from the office of (name of office) by recall? 
b.  Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the following words, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
YES 
NO 
[This provision renumbered on account of Amendments effective June 1, 2009.]  
Sec. 6.07. - Results of recall election. 
If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be NO that is against recall, the person on the ballot shall continue in office for the remainder of his or her unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be YES for recall, the position is declared to be vacant. 
[This provision renumbered on account of Amendments effective June 1, 2009.]  
Sec. 6.08. - Failure of city council to call an election. 
Should the city council fail or refuse to order any election as provided for in this Charter, when all the requirements of such election are complied with by the petitioning voters, then any citizen can seek mandamus to order the city council to order an election. 
[This provision renumbered on account of Amendments effective June 1, 2009.]  
SECTION VII. - LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 
 
Sec. 7.01. - Power of initiative. 
The people of the city reserve the power of direct legislation by initiative, and in the exercise of such power may propose any ordinance, not in conflict with this Charter, the state constitution, or the state laws. Any initiated ordinance may be submitted to the council by a petition signed by qualified voters of the city, except an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes.  
Sec. 7.02. - Power of referendum. 
The people reserve the power to approve or reject at the polls any legislation enacted by the council, which is subject to the initiative process under this Charter. Exceptions are ordinances enacted for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety, which contains a statement of its urgency, and which is adopted by a supermajority vote of council members. Prior to the effective date of any ordinance that is subject to referendum, a petition signed by qualified voters of the city may be filed with the city secretary requesting that any such ordinance be either repealed or submitted to a vote of the people. When such a petition has been certified as sufficient by the city secretary, the ordinance specified in the petition shall not go into effect, or further action thereunder shall be suspended if it shall have gone into effect, until and unless it is approved by the voters as herein provided.  
Sec. 7.03. - Form of petitions. 
Initiative or referendum petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed legislation in the form of an ordinance including a descriptive caption. Before the initiative or referendum goes before the voters, a petition shall be submitted to the city secretary. The petition must be signed by ten percent of qualified voters and represent at least 20 percent of the number of votes cast at the last regular municipal election of the city, but in no event less than 500 such petitioners. Each petitioner shall personally sign his or her name in ink. All other information (printed name, physical address, and date of birth and place of residence) can be written or printed by the petitioner or by the petition gatherer. No post office box numbers are allowed.  
Sec. 7.04. - Filing, examination and certification of petitions. 
Initiative or referendum petitions shall be filed with the city secretary. Upon receipt the city secretary shall provide a copy of the ordinance specified in the petition to the city council and the city attorney.  
Sec. 7.05. - Council consideration and submission to voters. 
When the council receives an authorized petition certified by the city secretary to be sufficient, the council shall either: 
a)  Pass the initiated ordinance without amendment within ten business days after the date of the certification to the council; or 
b)  Order an election and submit said initiated ordinance without amendment to a vote of the qualified voters of the city at the next allowable election date authorized by state law after the certification to the council. 
When the council receives an authorized referendum petition certified by the city secretary to be sufficient, the council shall reconsider the referred ordinance, and if upon such reconsideration such ordinance is not repealed, it shall be submitted to the voters of the city of Floresville at the next allowable election date authorized by state law after the date of the certification to the council. Special election on initiated or referred ordinances shall not be held more frequently than once each six months, and no ordinance on the same subject as an initiated ordinance which has been defeated at any election may be initiated by the voters within two years from the date of such election. 
State Law reference— Ordering of election, V.T.C.A., Election Code ch. 3; election dates, V.T.C.A., Election Code ch. 41.  
Sec. 7.06. - Ballot form and results of election. 
The ballot used in voting upon an initiated ordinance shall state the caption of the ordinance and below the caption shall set forth on separate lines the words: 
FOR THE ORDINANCE 
AGAINST THE ORDINANCE. 
The ballot used in voting on a referendum shall state the caption of the referendum and below the caption shall set forth on separate lines the words: 
FOR THE REPEAL OF THE ORDINANCE: 
AGAINST THE REPEAL OF THE ORDINANCE. 
Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. An ordinance so adopted may be repealed or amended at any time after the expiration of two years by a majority vote of the city council.  
Sec. 7.07. - Non-binding referendums. 
At any regular municipal election, the city council may place no more than three non-binding referendums on the election ballot. The wording must be sufficient to state clearly the intent of the referendum. Below the proposed referendum the following words shall be set forth on separate lines. 
YES 
NO 
Non-binding referendum(s) may be placed on the ballot and must be the last item(s) on the ballot.  
SECTION VIII. - MUNICIPAL PLANNING, ZONING AND ANNEXATION OF PROPERTY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of land use, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211 et seq.; municipal annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 43. 
 
Sec. 8.01. - Subdivision and extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(a)  Hereafter, every owner of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits of the city who may divide the same shall comply with the provisions of state law, as now or hereafter amended and any applicable city ordinances. 
(b)  The provisions of section 1.(a) above shall apply similarly to the owner of any tract of land situated within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as provided by state law. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of subdivisions and property development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212; extraterritorial jurisdiction of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 42.  
Sec. 8.02. - City council scope of participation. 
The city council shall cooperate in every manner possible with persons interested in the development of property within or beyond the city limits. No expenditure of public funds, however, shall be authorized for the development of privately owned subdivisions situated within or beyond the corporate limits of the city, except the council may expend public funds for extension of utilities or services to such areas, and except as provided by state law.  
Sec. 8.03. - Designation of a planning, zoning and annexation commission. 
Consistent with all applicable federal and state laws with respect to land use, development, and environmental planning, the planning, zoning and annexation commission shall: 
(a)  Carry out the planning, zoning and annexation oversight functions and such decision-making responsibilities as may be specified by ordinance; 
(b)  Propose a comprehensive plan and determine to what extent zoning and other land use ordinances must be consistent with the plan; 
(c)  Determine to what extent the comprehensive plan and zoning and other land use ordinances must be consistent with regional plan(s); 
(d)  Propose development regulations, to be specified by ordinance, to implement the plan; and 
(e)  Recommend annexation plan guidelines and criteria to the council. 
The planning, zoning and annexation commission, city manager, mayor and city council shall seek to act in cooperation with other jurisdictions and organizations in their region to promote integrated approaches to regional issues. 
State Law reference— Zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.007.  
Sec. 8.04. - Comprehensive plan. 
All annexations shall be coordinated with the city's adopted comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan shall be amended in order to reflect the annexations and the zoning instituted by the city council. 
State Law reference— Compliance with comprehensive plan, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.004.  
SECTION IX. - MUNICIPAL FINANCE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9.01. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on October 1 of each year and shall end on September 30 of each succeeding calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. 
State Law reference— City fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.022, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.05.  
Sec. 9.02. - City manager responsible for annual budget and multi-year capital plan. 
The city manager will present the budget and multi-year capital plan in fiscal terms and terms of work programs. The budget should present the manager's program for accomplishing the city council's goals and priorities for the city and other material the city manager deems desirable. 
State Law reference— Municipal budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 102.  
Sec. 9.03. - Submission of budget. 
The city manager, in no less than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, shall submit to the city council a proposed budget, which shall contain a complete financial plan for the coming fiscal year with explanations for salient changes from the previous fiscal year in expenditure and revenue items. The budget must contain a complete financial statement that shows by program all outstanding obligations of the municipality including debt service, cash on hand to credit of each fund and the estimated tax rate required to cover the proposed budget. The annual budget must include and be coordinated with the multi-year capital program.  
Sec. 9.04. - Revenues and expenditures compared with other years. 
In preparing the budget, the city manager shall show the revenue and expenditure items side by side: 
(1)  For the last completed fiscal year; 
(2)  For the current year a total of actual and anticipated revenues and expenditures; and 
(3)  The proposed revenues and expenditures for the new fiscal year. 
In addition, the city manager shall show the percentage of each revenue and expenditure item to the whole for each of the three years.  
Sec. 9.05. - Proposed budget and approved budget a public record. 
The budget and all supporting schedules shall be submitted to the city council and shall be a public record. The city manager shall make copies available to all interested persons. 
State Law reference— Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 201 et seq.  
Sec. 9.06. - Notice of public hearing on budget. 
At the meeting of the city council at which the budget is submitted, the council shall cause a notice to be published that sets forth the time and place of a public hearing on the submitted budget. This notice will be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten days but no more than thirty days before the date of the hearing. 
State Law reference— Special notice by publication for budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.0065.  
Sec. 9.07. - Public hearing on budget. 
At the time and place so advertised, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted, to which all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard, for or against any item or amount of an item contained therein. 
State Law reference— Public hearing on proposed budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.006.  
Sec. 9.08. - Amendments before adoption. 
After the public hearing, the city council may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures required by law or debit service. No amendment to the budget shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than estimated income.  
Sec. 9.09. - Vote required for adoption. 
The budget shall be adopted by the favorable vote of at least a majority of the city council. 
State Law reference— Adoption of budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.007.  
Sec. 9.10. - Date of final adoption of budget. 
The city manager shall submit a proposal budget in accordance with sections 9.03, 9.04 and 9.05 at least 60 days prior to the end of the fiscal year. The city council shall adopt an approved budget no less than 30 days prior to the end of the fiscal year. [Amendment voted on and approved by Council on May 14, 2009 to be effective June 1, 2009. See end notes.] 5 
State Law reference— Adoption of budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.007.  
Sec. 9.11. - Copies made available. 
Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the fiscal year. A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be filed with the city secretary, county clerk, and the State Comptroller of Public Accounts at Austin. The final budget shall be reproduced and sufficient copies shall be made available for the use of all offices, department, and agencies and for the use of interested persons and civic organizations. The budget can be posted to the city Website and published in a local newspaper. 
State Law reference— Approved budget filed with municipal clerk, posting on internet, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.008.  
Sec. 9.12. - Other necessary appropriations. 
The city budget may be amended and appropriations altered in accordance therewith in cases of public necessity, the actual fact of which shall have been declared by the city council. The city council shall not increase taxes above the rate imposed by state law on Type A General Law municipalities.  
Sec. 9.13. - Administration and fiduciary oversight of the budget. 
The city council shall provide by ordinance the procedures for administration and fiduciary oversight of the budget. 
The council is entrusted with the fiduciary responsibility for the city and as such must provide review and oversight of the budget. The city manager administers the budget and manages the work programs and spending by departments within the policy goals and appropriations set by the council. As chief administrator, the manager must have the authority to revise the allotments at any time during the year and for any reason.  
Sec. 9.14. - Power to tax. 
The city council shall have the power under the provisions of state law to levy, assess and collect an annual tax upon real and personal property within the city to the maximum provided by the constitution and general laws of the state. 
State Law reference— Levy of taxes, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.009.  
Sec. 9.15. - Property subject to tax. 
All real and personal property within the city not expressly exempted by law shall be subject to annual taxation.  
Sec. 9.16. - City's representative on appraisal review board. 
The city's appointed representative to the county appraisal review board will report to the city council at a regular or special meeting actions or policies of the county appraisal district that would impact the real property owners in the city. These reports will be scheduled by the city council.  
Sec. 9.17. - Depository. 
At the beginning of the fiscal year, the city council shall designate a financial institution in or out of the city as the city depository which shall be selected for a period of two years and the financial institution that shall bid the highest rate of interest on the average daily balance and which shall be acceptable to the city council shall be selected. If the council requests the bid or bids offered by the financial institution(s) in the city, the city council may also seek bids from financial institutions outside the city but these institutions must have a place of business in the state. 
State Law reference— Depositories for municipal funds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 105.  
Sec. 9.18. - Issuance of bonds. 
In accordance with the constitution of the state, and not contrary thereto, the city shall have the power to borrow money against the credit of the city for any public purpose that is not now nor hereafter prohibited by the constitution and laws of the state. The city shall have the power to issue all tax bonds, revenue bonds, funding and refunding bonds, time warrants, and any other evidences of indebtedness as now authorized or may be authorized hereafter to cities by the laws of the state. 
State Law reference— Specific authority for municipalities to issue securities, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 1501 et seq.  
Sec. 9.19. - Revenue bonds. 
The city shall have the power to borrow money for such purposes [as] constructing, purchasing, improving, expansion of, or repair of public utilities, recreational facilities, or other facilities of self-liquidating municipal function not now or hereafter prohibited by the laws of the state; and to issue revenue bonds as evidence of the obligation so created. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable solely from the properties or interest therein acquired and the income therefrom, and these bonds shall never become a debt of the city. The council shall have authority to provide for the terms and form of any purchase agreement, contract, mortgage, bond or document, desired or necessary, for the issuance of revenue bonds, and the acquisition and operation of any such property or interest.  
Sec. 9.20. - Approval and registration. 
All bonds, warrants, and certificates of indebtedness shall be signed by the mayor, countersigned by the city secretary, and sealed with the official seal of the city, and forwarded to the attorney general of the state for approval and for registration by the comptroller of public accounts as may be required by law.  
Sec. 9.21. - Bond register. 
There shall be kept as a public record by the city secretary a register showing bonds, warrants, and certificates of indebtedness issued, the date, amount, rate of interest, where payable, and the maturity contained thereon. When such indebtedness and/or its interest has been paid, that payment shall be recorded in said register.  
Sec. 9.22. - Manner of issuance. 
All bonds, warrants, or other indebtedness shall be issued in the manner provided the general laws of the state. None of it shall be deemed invalid because they are sold for less than par value and accrued interest.  
Sec. 9.23. - Capital program. 
The city manager shall prepare and submit to the city council a five multi-year capital program no later than 30 days before taking action on the budget.  
Sec. 9.24. - Contents of capital program. 
A clear general summary of its contents. Identification of the long-term goals of the community. A list of all capital improvements and other capital expenditures which are proposed to be undertaken during the fiscal years next ensuing with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for each. Cost estimates and recommended time schedules for each improvement or other capital expenditure. Method of financing upon which each capital expenditure is to be reliant. The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. A commentary on how the plan addresses the sustainability of the community and the region of which it is a part. Methods to measure outcomes and performance of the capital plan related to the long-term goals of the community. The multi-year capital program provisions should compel long-range, goal-oriented planning of capital improvement.  
Sec. 9.25. - City council action of capital programs. 
The city council shall publish the general summary of the capital program. In addition to the initial capital expenditure the summary shall include estimated operating and maintenance costs of proposed capital facilities. This provides a more realistic projection of future expenditures and it also discourages neglect of maintenance through lack of budgeting.  
Sec. 9.26. - Hearing and notice of capital programs. 
The procedures for hearing and notice of the city budget should be applied to capital programs.  
Sec. 9.27. - Independent audits of city accounts. 
The city council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all city accounts and may provide for more frequent audits, as it deems necessary. An independent certified public accountant or firm of such accountants shall make such audits. Such audits should be performed in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards (GAAS) and generally accepted governmental auditing standards (GAGAS). 
The council shall designate no fewer than three of its members to serve as an audit committee. This committee shall: 
(1)  Lead the process of selecting an independent auditor; 
(2)  Direct the work of the independent auditor as to the scope of the annual audit and any matters of concern with respect to internal controls; and 
(3)  Receive the report of the internal auditor and present that report to the city council with any recommendations from the committee. 
The council shall, using competitive bidding, designate such accountant or firm annually, for a period not exceeding five years, but the designation for any particular fiscal year all be made no later than 30 days after the beginning of such fiscal year. The standard for independence is that the auditor must be capable of exercising objective and impartial judgment on all issues encompassed within the audit engagement. No accountant or firm may provide any other services to the city during the time it is retained to provide dependent audits to the city. The city council may waive this requirement by a majority vote at a public hearing. If the state makes such an audit, the council may accept it as satisfying the requirements of this section.  
SECTION X. - FRANCHISE AND PUBLIC UTILITIES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Water and utilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 401 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10.01. - Powers of the city. 
In addition to the city's power to buy, own, construct, maintain, and operate utilities within or without the city limits and to manufacture and distribute electricity, gas or anything else that may be needed or used by the public, either by itself or in conjunction with other municipal corporations pursuant to any agreement entered into between the city and such other municipal corporations, the city shall have further powers as may now or hereafter be granted under the constitution and the laws of the state.  
Sec. 10.02. - Inalienability of public property. 
The right of control and use of the public streets, highways, sidewalks, rights-of-way, easements, alleys, parks, public squares, and public places of the city is hereby declared to be inalienable by the city, except by ordinances not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter. No act or omission by the council or any officer or agent of the city shall be construed to grant, renew, extend, or amend by estoppel or implication, any right, franchise or easement affecting said public street, highways, sidewalks, rights-of-way, easements, alleys, parks, public squares, public places and other real property.  
Sec. 10.03. - Power to grant franchise. 
The council shall have the power by ordinance to grant, renew, and extend all franchises of all utilities used by the public of every character operating within the city, and, with consent of the franchise holder, to amend the same. Provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted to an indeterminate term and no more than 20 years.  
Sec. 10.04. - Ordinance granting franchise. 
Every ordinance granting, renewing, extending, transferring or amending a franchised utility used by the public shall be read at two regular meetings of the council, and shall not be finally acted upon until 30 days after the first reading thereof. Within five days following the first reading of the ordinance, the caption thereof shall be published for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper with general circulation in the city, and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the prospective franchise holder.  
Sec. 10.05. - Transfer of franchise. 
No franchised utility used by the public shall be transferred by the holder thereof except with the approval of the city council expressed by ordinance.  
Sec. 10.06. - Regulation of franchises. 
Every grant, renewal, extension, or amendment of a public utility franchise, whether so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the council: 
(1)  To forfeit any such franchise by ordinance at any time for failure of the holder thereof to comply with the terms of the franchise, such power to be exercised only after notice and hearing; 
(2)  To impose reasonable regulations to insure safe, efficient and continuous service to the public; 
(3)  To require such expansion and extension of plants and facilities as are necessary to provide adequate service to the public; 
(4)  To require every franchise holder to furnish to the city, without cost to the city, full information regarding the location, character, extent and condition of all facilities of such franchise holder in, over and under the streets, alleys, and other public property of the city; and to regulate and control the location, relocation, and removal of such facilities; 
(5)  To collect from every public utility operating in the city its fair and just proportion of the expense of excavating, grading, paving, repaying, constructing, reconstructing, draining repairing, maintaining, lighting, sweeping, and sprinkling such portions of the alleys, bridges culverts, viaducts, and other public places and ways of the city as may be occupied or used in whole or in part by such utilities; or to compel such public utility to perform, at its own expense such excavating, relocation, grading, paving, repaying constructing, reconstructing, draining repairing, maintaining, lighting, sweeping and sprinkling as may hereafter be required by ordinance and any other obligations regarding construction in the right-of-way; 
(6)  To require every franchise holder to allow other public utilities to use its tracts, poles, wires pipes or other facilities, including bridges and viaducts, wherever in the judgment of the council such use shall be in the public interest and without damage to the franchise holder, provided that in such event the council shall fix a reasonable rental to be paid to the owner of the facility for such use, after notice to the interested parties and a hearing of the facts; 
(7)  a.  To prescribe the form of accounts kept by every franchise holder; 
b.  To examine and audit at any time the accounts and other records of any franchise holder; 
c.  To require annual and other reports, including reports on the local operations of the utility, which shall be in such form and contain such information, as the council shall prescribe; 
(8)  To require and collect any compensation and rental or taxes not now or hereafter prohibited by the laws of this state; 
(9)  To require such franchise holders who request an increase in rates, charges or fares, to reimburse the city for reasonable expenses incurred in employing attorneys, engineers, accountants and rate consultants to conduct investigations and present evidence and advise the council on such requested increase.  
Sec. 10.07. - Regulation of franchise rates. 
The council shall have full power after notice and hearing to regulate by ordinance the rates charges and fares of any franchise holder operating in the city. Any franchise holder requesting an increase in its rates, charges, or fares shall have, at the hearing on such request, the burden of establishing by clear and convincing evidence the value of its investments and the amount and character of its expenses and revenues. No franchise holder shall institute any legal action to contest any rate, charge, or fare fixed by the council until such franchise holder has filed a motion for rehearing with the council specifically setting out each ground of its complaint against the rate, charge or fare fixed by the council, and until the council shall have acted upon such motion.  
Sec. 10.08. - Other conditions. 
All franchises, contracts, and agreements heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the city and the grantee, and the contractual rights as contained in any such franchises shall not be impaired by the provisions of this Charter, except that the power of the city to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of any utility property, is in all things reserved, and except the general power of the city heretofore existing and herein provided for, which shall include the right to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service, and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. Every franchise hereafter granted, shall be held subject to all the terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this Charter on franchises, whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise. Nothing in this Charter shall operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the discretion of the council or the electors of the city in imposing terms and conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant.  
Sec. 10.09. - Franchise records. 
Six months after this Charter takes effect, every public utility and every owner of a public utility franchise shall file with the city-certified copies of all franchises owned or claimed, or under which such utility is operated. The city shall compile and maintain a public record of public utility franchises.  
Sec. 10.10. - Accounts of municipally owned utilities. 
Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated independently by the city or in conjunction with other municipal corporations, in such manner as to show the true and complete financial results of such city ownership and operation, including all assets, appropriately subdivided into different classes, all liability subdivided by classes depreciation reserve, other reserves, and surplus; also revenues, operating expenses including depreciation, interest payments, rental, and other disposition of annual income. The account shall show the actual capital cost to the city of each public utility owned, also the cost of all extensions, additions and improvements, and the source of the funds expended for such capita purposes. They shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any service furnished to, or rendered by any such utility to any other city or government department. The council shall annually cause to be made and published, a report showing the financial results of such city ownership and operation, giving the information specified in this section or such data as the council shall deem expedient.  
SECTION XI. - APPOINTMENTS TO COMMITTEES 
 
Sec. 11.01. - Council members serving on committees. 
Council members are prohibited from appointing themselves to any committee or board, even if permitted under state law. Specifically, no council member, mayor, or city employee may serve on any 4A or 4B corporation of the city. These corporations shall follow state law including the requirements specified in the city Charter. [This section inserted pursuant to Amendment voted on and approved by Council on May 14, 2009 to be effective June 1, 2009. See end notes] 6  
SECTION XII. - CONSTRUCTION PROJECT REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 12.01. - Projects for approval. 
All new construction projects over $25,000.00 entered into by the city or the 4A and 4B corporations of the city must be competitively bid. 
Before the council can consider a project, the backup documents for the project presented to the city council must include professional architectural/engineered drawings, the specifications and costs of the project, and the draft of the advertisement for bid that will be published for the project. 
In the cases of competitive bid projects, state law requirements shall be followed. 
Construction projects entered into by the city, whether competitively bid or not, must be approved by the city council meeting. [This section inserted pursuant to Amendment voted on and approved by Council on May 14, 2009 to be effective June 1, 2009. See end notes.] 7  
SECTION XIII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Previously Section XI and renumbered. See end notes. 8 
 
Sec. 13.01. - Publicity of records. 
All records and accounts of every office, department, or agency of the city shall be open as may be provided by the Texas Public Information Act to inspection by any citizen or by any representative of the press at all reasonable times and under such reasonable regulations established by the city council or the mayor except for those records which may be exempt from disclosure under the Texas Public Information Act or other law. 
State Law reference— Public information, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 552; Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 201 et seq.  
Sec. 13.02. - Personal interest. 
No officer of the city shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the city, nor shall he be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the city of any land, or rights or interest in any land, materials, supplies or service. The above provision shall not apply where the interest is represented by ownership of stock in a corporation involved, provided such stock ownership amounts to less than one percent of the corporation stock. Any violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any officer of the city found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his office or position. Any violation of this section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the city shall render the contract voidable by the city manager or a majority of the city council. An officer is not considered to have an interest described above if the officer complies with the requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 171.  
Sec. 13.03. - Nepotism. 
No person related within the second degree by affinity (marriage), or within the third degree by consanguinity (family blood) to any elected officer of the city, or to the city manager, shall be appointed to any paid office, position or clerkship or other service of the city. 
Employment of relatives of other employees is permitted with the following exceptions: 
(1)  No family member may exercise supervisory authority over another family member who is within the second degree of affinity or third degree of consanguinity; or 
(2)  Within the same degree of affinity and consanguinity, hold occupational positions in such relationships as would impair internal control of any system of financial or property accountability. 
State Law reference— Nepotism, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 573.  
Sec. 13.04. - Provisions relating to assignment, execution and garnishment. 
The property, real and personal, belonging to the city shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ or execution or cost bill. The funds belonging to the city, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or sequestration; nor shall the city be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any account whatever. The city shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents, or contractors except those mandated by state law. 
State Law reference— Garnishment, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code ch. 63; garnishment of municipal funds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.023.  
Sec. 13.05. - City not required to give security or execute bond. 
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the city is a party, for any bond, undertaking, or security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of the city on any of the state courts, but in all such actions, suits, appeals, or proceedings same shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given as required by law. 
State Law reference— Cities exempt from security for court costs, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 6.002.  
Sec. 13.06. - Special provisions covering damage suits. 
Before the city shall be liable to damage claim or suit for personal injury, or damage to property, the person who is injured or whose property is damaged or someone in his behalf shall give the city manager or the person performing duties of city secretary, notice in writing within six months after the occurrence of the incident giving rise to the claim of the alleged injury, or damage, stating specifically such notice when, where and how the injury or damage was sustained, and setting forth the extent of the injury or damage as accurately as possible. No action at law for damages shall be brought against the city for personal injury or damage to property prior to the expiration of thirty days after the notice herein before described has been filed with the city manager or the person performing the duties of city secretary, no later than two years after the occurrence of the injury or damage to property. In case of injuries resulting in death, before the city shall be liable in damages thereof the person or persons claiming such damages shall after the death of the injured person give notice as above required in case of personal injury. Provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to mean that the city waives any rights, privileges, defenses or immunities in tort actions which are provided under the common law, the constitution and general laws of the state. 
State Law reference— Governmental liability, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code ch. 101 et seq.  
Sec. 13.07. - Severability clause. 
If any section or part of section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly apply.  
Sec. 13.08. - Effect of this charter on existing law. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force under the city government of the city and not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter, shall remain in force under this Charter until altered, amended or repealed by the council after this Charter takes effect; and all rights of the city under existing franchises and contracts are preserved in full force and effect to the city.  
Sec. 13.09. - Interim municipal government. 
From and after the date of the adoption of this Charter, the persons then filling elective offices, which are retained under this Charter, will continue to fill those offices for the terms to which they were elected. At the first regular city election after the adoption of this Charter, three council members shall be elected, and each shall serve a two-year term. Thereafter, the city council and mayor shall be elected as provided in section V of this Charter. Persons who, on the date this Charter is adopted, are filling appointive positions with the city which are retained under this Charter, may continue to fill these positions for the term for which they were appointed. However, any currently elected and sitting council member or mayor who has completed the six-year term limit set by this Charter, prior to the adoption of this Charter, shall be precluded from running again for the position in which term limits have been met. The waiting period to run again are applicable to these members.  
Sec. 13.10. - Applicability of general laws. 
The constitution of the state, the statutes of said state applicable to home-ruled municipal corporations, as now or hereafter enacted, this Charter and ordinances enacted pursuant hereto shall, in the order mentioned, be applicable to the city, but the city shall also have the power to exercise any and all powers conferred by the laws of the state upon any other kind of city, town or village, not contrary to the provisions of said home-rule statutes, Charter and ordinances, but the exercise of any such powers by the city shall be optional with it, and it shall not be required to conform to the law governing any other cities, towns or villages.  
Sec. 13.11. - Amending the charter. 
Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted by the city council or by referendum legislation by the people, to the voters of the city as prescribed in section seven of this Charter and as prescribed by state law. 
State Law reference— Charter amendments, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.004 et seq.  
Sec. 13.12. - Charter review commission. 
The city council may call for an election of a Charter review commission of 15 citizens of the city. 
State Law reference— Charter commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 9.002, 9.003. 
HISTORICAL NOTES 
1 2009 AMENDMENT 
3.10. Rules of procedure. 
Amendment effective June 1, 2009, added the following language at the end: 
"Individual citizens will be granted one minute of time for input on the subject of any and all consideration and action items as they come up on the council agenda prior to the council vote. No prior sign up by citizens will be required for their input on agenda items." 
2 2009 AMENDMENT 
4.02. Department of police. 
Amendment effective June 1, 2009, inserted the following language: 
"There shall be established and maintained a department of police to preserve order within the city and to secure the residents of said city from violence and the property therein from injury or loss." 
Deleted "council" to now read "required of him by the city." 
Also inserted "the city manager for the administration of his department and the carrying out of the directives of the city." 
3 2009 AMENDMENT 
6.04. Presentation of petition to city council. 
Amendment effective June 1, 2009, deleted the following language: 
"and the council shall then set a date for a public hearing." 
The following language was added at the end "and at that same meeting the Council must set a date for a public hearing to be held in not less than five business days. At said public hearing, the person whose removal is sought may present facts and witnesses pertinent to the charges in the recall petition." 
4 2009 AMENDMENT 
6.05. Public hearing. 
Deleted in its entirety and included in 6.05 Amendment effective June 1, 2009, see below. 
6.05. Election to be called. 
Amendment effective June 1, 2009, renumbered old 6.06 and deleted the following language: 
"If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign within ten business days of notice receipt of certified mail for the public hearing or within ten business days of the public hearing, then it shall become the duty of the city council to." 
And substituted the following language: 
"If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign within ten business days after the date of the public hearing, the city council shall, at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting," and deleted at the end "on Special Elections." 
5 2009 AMENDMENT 
9.10. Date of final adoption, failure to adopt. 
Deleted in its entirety and rewritten pursuant Amendment effective June 1, 2009, see below. 
Deleted language: "The budget shall be finally adopted not later than the twenty-seventh day of the last month of the fiscal year. Should the city council take no final action on or prior to such day, the budget proposed by the city manager shall go into effect." 
This section rewritten as follows: 
"9.10. Date of final adoption of budget. 
The city manager shall submit a proposal budget in accordance with sections 9.03, 9.04 and 9.05 at least 60 days prior to the end of the fiscal year. The city council shall adopt an approved budget no less than 30 days prior to the end of the fiscal year." 
6 2009 AMENDMENT 
SECTION XI. APPOINTMENTS TO COMMITTEES 
This section added pursuant to Amendment effective June 1, 2009. 
7 2009 AMENDMENT 
SECTION XII. CONSTRUCTION PROJECT REQUIREMENTS 
This section added pursuant to Amendment effective June 1, 2009. 
8 2009 AMENDMENT 
SECTION XIII. GENERAL PROVISIONS 
This section previously Section XI and renumbered in its entirety due to addition of new sections XI and XII pursuant to Amendment effective June 1, 2009 
CERTIFICATION OF AUTHENTICITY OF THE CITY OF FLORESVILLE'S CHARTER AS AMENDED EFFECTIVE JUNE 1, 2009 
I, Daniel M. Tejada, in my capacity as Mayor for the City of Floresville, Texas, do hereby certify that the attached Charter of the City of Floresville includes the amendments voted on and approved May 9, 2009, and subsequently approved by the city council on May 14, 2009. The amendments are to be effective June 1, 2009. The adopted amendments are noted within the Charter and are further explained in the Historical Notes set forth at the end of the Charter. 
To certify which, witness my hand and seal of said City this ____________ day of May, 2009. 
	_____
DANIEL M. TEJADA 
Mayor 
 
Attest: 	
_____
MARGARET DE HOYOS 
Secretary of the 
City of Floresville 	SEAL 
 
CERTIFICATION BY SECRETARY 
I, Margaret De Hoyos , do hereby certify that I am the Secretary of the City of Floresville (hereinafter called the "city"), that the above and foregoing is a true, full and correct copy of Amended Charter of the City of Floresville duly adopted by the city council of the City of Floresville at its duly noticed Council meeting of Tuesday, May 26, 2009 , and entered into the Minutes Book of the City, that the meeting was duly held in accordance with the Charter of the city, and that such Charter has not been rescinded or modified. 
To certify which, witness my hand and seal of the City of Floresville this 26 th day of May, 2009. 
SEAL 	_____
MARGARET DE HOYOS 
City Secretary 
City of Floresville 
  
Title I - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
CHAPTER 10. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 10.01. - Title of Code. 
This codification of ordinances by and for the municipality of Floresville shall be designated as the Code of Ordinances, City of Floresville, Texas, and may be so cited. 
(Code 1996, § 10.01) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt a civil and criminal code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001.  
Sec. 10.02. - Interpretation. 
Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of state law. 
(Code 1996, § 10.02) 
State Law reference— Code Construction Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 311.  
Sec. 10.03. - Application to future ordinances. 
All provisions of this title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this Code unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(Code 1996, § 10.03)  
Sec. 10.04. - Captions. 
Headings and captions used in this Code other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
(Code 1996, § 10.04)  
Sec. 10.05. - Definitions. 
(a)  General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import. 
(b)  For the purpose of this Code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Agencies, officers. Any reference to any federal, state or local agency or officer shall include any successor agency or officer. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Floresville, Texas. 
City council. The term "city council" means the City Council of Floresville, Texas. 
Code, this Code or this Code of Ordinances. The term "Code," "this Code" or "this Code of Ordinances" means this municipal Code as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections. 
County. The term "county" means Wilson County, Texas. 
May. The term "may" means the act referred to is permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Oath. The term "oath" means an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officer, office, employee, commission, or department. The term "officer," "office," "employee," "commission" or "department" means officer, office, employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Person. The term "person" extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms "person" or "whoever" as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof. 
Preceding or following. The term "preceding" or "following" means next before or next after, respectively. 
Shall. The term "shall" means the act referred to is mandatory. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Texas. 
Tex. Admin. Code, TAC. The abbreviation "Tex. Admin. Code" or "TAC" refers to the Texas Administrative Code, as amended or revised now or in the future. 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." means and includes the most recent edition or supplement of Vernon's Annotated Texas Statutes, Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, and Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, as amended or revised now or in the future. 
V.T.C.A. The abbreviation "V.T.C.A." means the most recent edition or supplement of Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, as amended or revised now or in the future. 
Written. The term "written" means any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words "year of our Lord." 
(Code 1996, § 10.05)  
Sec. 10.06. - Rules of interpretation. 
The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance: 
(1)  And or or. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written "and/or," if the sense requires it. 
(2)  Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized agent or deputy. 
(3)  Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting one gender shall be deemed to include all genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable. 
(4)  General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited. 
(Code 1996, § 10.06)  
Sec. 10.07. - Severability. 
If any provision of this Code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application. 
(Code 1996, § 10.07)  
Sec. 10.08. - Reference to other sections. 
Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision. 
(Code 1996, § 10.08)  
Sec. 10.09. - Reference to offices. 
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. 
(Code 1996, § 10.09)  
Sec. 10.10. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 10.11. - References and editor's notes. 
The references and editor's notes appearing throughout the Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to assist the user of the Code.  
Sec. 10.12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted in the Code, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 10.13. - Errors and omissions. 
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word when another word was clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of such error. 
(Code 1996, § 10.10)  
Sec. 10.14. - Official time. 
The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all municipal business. 
(Code 1996, § 10.11)  
Sec. 10.15. - Reasonable time. 
(a)  In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of such act or the giving of such notice. 
(b)  The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day is Sunday, it shall be excluded. 
(Code 1996, § 10.12)  
Sec. 10.16. - Ordinances repealed. 
This Code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this Code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 10.13)  
Sec. 10.17. - Ordinances unaffected. 
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this Code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication. 
(Code 1996, § 10.14)  
Sec. 10.18. - Effective date of ordinances. 
All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(Code 1996, § 10.15)  
Sec. 10.19. - Repeal or modification of ordinance. 
(a)  Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(b)  No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided. 
(c)  When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided. 
(Code 1996, § 10.16)  
Sec. 10.20. - Ordinances which amend or supplement Code. 
(a)  If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this Code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its place. 
(b)  Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing Code a new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this Code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance. 
(Code 1996, § 10.17)  
Sec. 10.21. - General penalty. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the city, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, except for: 
(1)  Violations of municipal ordinances that govern fire, safety, zoning, public health and sanitation, other than the dumping of refuse, in which the maximum fine shall be $2,000.00 for each offense; 
(2)  Violations of municipal ordinances that govern dumping of refuse shall have a maximum fine of $4,000.00; and 
(3)  Violations of traffic laws which are punishable as a Class C misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
However, no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the state. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Any violation of any provision of this Code of Ordinances which constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the city for such purposes. If any violation of this Code is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this Code, such nuisance may be summarily abated by the city in addition to the imposition of a fine or imprisonment. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that does not exceed $500.00 does not require a culpable mental state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. 
(d)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that exceeds $500.00 shall require a culpable mental state of intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence. 
(e)  Prosecution or conviction under this Code shall never be a bar to any other remedy or relief for violations of this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 10.99) 
State Law reference— Penalty for ordinance violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001; authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001; jurisdiction of municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003; punishments, V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 12.  
Title III - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— See the Charter, which contains provisions concerning the administration of the city. 
 
CHAPTER 30. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City council, § I. 
State Law reference— Organization of municipal government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 5 et seq.; form of government in home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 26. 
 
Sec. 30.01. - Attorney-client privilege. 
(a)  No waiver of the attorney-client privilege or of any confidential communications between any attorney representing the city and city council shall occur or be effective until: 
(1)  The issue of waiver of the attorney-client privilege and/or release of confidential communications between the city council and the attorneys representing the city must first be a posted item on the agenda for the city council meeting in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act; 
(2)  The item must be fully voted on by the city council in open session; and 
(3)  The waiver of the attorney-client privilege and the waiver of the confidentiality of communications between the city and its attorneys shall be effective only if two-thirds of the entire membership of the city council in such vote, votes in favor of waiving the privilege and/or releasing confidential communications by the city. Should any court find this provision to be invalid for any reason, either on its face or as applied, a majority vote shall nevertheless be required for any such waiver. 
(b)  In no case shall any action taken by any individual council member constitute a waiver of the attorney-client privilege or of the confidentiality of any communications between the city council and any attorney representing the city. The only recognized waiver of the attorney-client privilege or waiver of any client confidentiality of any communications between the city and any attorney representing the city is in accordance with the process delineated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Any breach of the attorney-client privilege shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 30.04; Ord. No. 242, 3-22-2007)  
Sec. 30.02. - Copies to be stored and distributed. 
Copies of all ordinance updates, changes, or new ordinances shall be stored in the vault and distributed to city departments as deemed necessary for implementation. 
(Code 1996, § 30.11; Undated Ord.)  
CHAPTER 31. - CITY OFFICIALS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Administrative services, § IV. 
State Law reference— Municipal officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.071; compensation set by city council, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 141.001; matters affecting public officers and employees, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 141 et seq. 
 
SUBCHAPTER II. - ETHICS POLICY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of conflicts of interest of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 171. 
 
Sec. 31.20. - Declaration of ethics policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires city officials to be independent, impartial and responsible; and that no city official permit any interest, financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engagement in any business, transaction, or professional activity to conflict with the proper discharge of duties in the public interest; that governmental decisions and policies be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for illegal or improper personal gain; and that city officials shall at all times strive to avoid even the appearance of impropriety or partisanship. The city council shall be maintained as a nonpartisan body. 
(b)  In furtherance of the above declaration of policy, this subchapter has four purposes: 
(1)  To establish high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  To establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all city officials; 
(3)  To require disclosure by city officials of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the city; and 
(4)  To provide discipline for those who violate this subchapter. 
(c)  The city recognizes that city officials are also members of society and, therefore, cannot and should not be without any personal and economic interest in the decisions and policies of government common to the general public; that city officials retain their rights as citizens to interests of a personal or economic nature and their rights to publicly express their views on matters of general public interest. It is not the intent of this subchapter to diminish the rights of city officials as citizens of the community. 
(d)  The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports, or regulation of political campaigns or to the conduct of candidates in campaigns. 
(e)  This subchapter defines two types of conflicts of interest and treats them differently. A "substantial interest" is defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 171.002, and the provisions applicable to local public officials who have a "substantial interest" are set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 171. This subchapter is intended to go beyond the requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 171, by addressing "economic interests." An economic interest is more comprehensive than a "substantial interest" and covers various kinds of economic benefits that might accrue to a city official that are not included in the Texas Statute. 
(Ord. No. 280, 6-30-2011)  
Sec. 31.21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust, or any other entity recognized by law. 
City official means the mayor, every member of the city council, the city attorney, and all members of any commission, committee, or board appointed by the city council, which has final decision-making authority, such as the planning and zoning commission, the zoning board of adjustment (to be established), the 4A and 4B Boards, the Parks Foundation, or any other city-sponsored entity. 
Confidential information means any information that a city official would be privy to because of the official's position, but otherwise is not available to the public under the provisions of the Texas Public Information Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 552. 
Economic benefit means any money, real or personal property, contract rights, sale, lease, option, credit, loan, discount, service, or other tangible or intangible thing of value, whether similar or dissimilar to those enumerated. 
Economic interest means a legal or equitable interest in real or personal property or a fiduciary obligation to such property or contractual right in such property that is more than minimal or insignificant and would be recognized by reasonable persons to have weight in deciding a case or an issue. Service by a city official as an officer, or director in an educational, religious, charitable, fraternal, or civic organization does create an economic interest in the property of that organization. Ownership of an interest in a mutual or common investment fund that holds securities or other assets is not an economic interest in the securities or other assets unless the city official participates in the management of the fund. A city official does not have an economic interest in a matter if the economic impact on the city official is indistinguishable from the impact on the general public or on the particular group affected by the matter. 
Family member means the city official's spouse, children, parents or spouse's parents and any other family member within two degrees of affinity or consanguinity. See Exhibit A attached to the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived and kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
Gift means a favor, hospitality, or economic benefit other than compensation but which does not include campaign contributions reported as required by state law, gifts received from a relative if given on account of kinship, or any value received by will, intestate succession, or as a distribution from an inter vivos or testamentary trust. 
Income means economic benefit received. 
Indirect ownership means an equity interest in a business entity where the interest is held through a series of business entities, some of which own interests in others. 
Property means real estate, personal items, equipment, goods, crops, livestock, or an equitable right to income from real estate, personal items, equipment, goods, crops, or livestock. 
Second degree of consanguinity or affinity is defined in Exhibit A, which is attached to the ordinance from which this subchapter derived and kept on file in the office of the city secretary, and incorporated herein for all purposes. See also V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 171 and V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 573.024 and 573.025. 
Source of income means any business entity, employment, investment, or activity which earned or produced income, including interest, dividends, royalties, or rents, which has been paid to or for the credit of a city official, candidate, or family member or which would be taxable to said city official, candidate, or family member under the United States Internal Revenue Code, as amended, even though not actually paid or credited. 
Substantial interest. 
(1)  The term "substantial interest" means an interest in a business entity if a city official and/or a family member: 
a.  Owns ten percent or more of a proprietorship, partnership, or voting stock or shares of the business entity; 
b.  Owns ten percent or more, or $15,000.00 or more of the fair market value of the business entity; or 
c.  If funds received from the business entity exceeds ten percent or more of the person's gross income for the previous year. 
(2)  A city official has a substantial interest in real property if he and/or a family member has an interest in the property and the interest has a market value of $2,500.00 or more. 
(3)  A city official is considered to have a substantial interest under this definition if a person related to the official in the first degree by consanguinity or affinity, as determined under V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 573, has a substantial interest under this definition. 
(Ord. No. 280, 6-30-2011)  
Sec. 31.22. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  No city official may disclose any confidential information gained through the official's position concerning property, operations, policies, or affairs of the city, for gain or advantage in an economic interest of the city official or the persons identified in subsection (c)(2)b of this section. 
(2)  No city official may use the official's position or city-owned facilities, equipment, supplies, or resources of the city for gain in an economic interest of the city official, for a political campaign of the official, or for any of the persons identified in subsection (c)(2)b of this section. 
(3)  Except as specifically authorized by city ordinance, no city council member may appear before the city council to represent the city official or any person identified in subsection (c)(2)b of this section. Other city officials shall not appear before the board of which they are a member. The exception to this section is if the city official is representing the city official's owner-occupied homestead before a city body. The city official may designate and be represented by a person of the official's choice in any such matter, other than someone related within the second degree of consanguinity of affinity. 
(4)  No city official may act as surety for any person or business entity that has a contract with the city, or as a surety on any bond required by the city for a city official. 
(5)  City officials shall respect and adhere to the council-manager structure of the city government as provided in state law and the city Charter, recognizing that the manager shall manage city employees and the council shall set policy and provide budgetary guidance direction. 
(6)  City officials, excluding the city attorney, shall not attend internal staff meetings or meetings between city staff and third parties unless invited by city staff or directed by the city council. 
(7)  City officials shall refrain from abusive conduct, actions and language and shall not knowingly make a false statement of material fact relating to the character or motives of other members of the city council, boards, commissions, committees, city staff or the public. 
(8)  City officials shall make all reasonable efforts to attend all properly noticed public meetings where their attendance is required by state law or the city Charter. 
(9)  Nonelected city officials addressing the city council or any other city board or commission as members of the general public during the public comments section, public hearing section or any other time during which public comments are taken during any open meeting shall identify themselves by name and disclose their position with the city, and their financial interest, if any, in the matter. 
(10)  A person related to the mayor or a member of the city council within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity shall not be eligible for appointment to nor service upon any city board, committee or commission. 
(11)  Any person who serves on any city board, committee or commission on the effective date of the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived and who is related to the mayor or a member of the city council shall immediately give notice of such relationship, the council shall take notice that the position is open and appoint replacements not later than 30 days upon receipt of such notice. 
(b)  Gifts. No city official may solicit or accept any contribution, gift, or economic benefit that is offered or given with the intention of influencing the judgment or discretion of such official; or given in consideration of the favorable exercise of the official's judgment or discretion in the past. 
(c)  Conflict of interest. 
(1)  Substantial interest. No city official may vote on or participate in any decision-making process on a matter concerning property or a business entity if the official has a substantial interest in the property or business entity. 
(2)  Economic interest. 
a.  No city official may vote on or participate in any decision-making process on a matter if the official has an economic interest in the outcome of the matter under consideration. 
b.  To avoid the appearance and risk of impropriety, a city official shall not take any official action that the official knows is likely to affect the economic interests of: 
1.  The city official's parent, child, stepchild, spouse, or other family member within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity, a client of the city official or the city official's spouse with whom the city official or the city official's spouse has an economic interest (See Exhibit A attached to the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived); 
2.  An employer of the city official, the official's parent, child, stepchild, or spouse; 
3.  A business entity (profit or nonprofit) for which the city official serves as an officer or director or serves in any policy-making position; 
4.  A person or business entity from whom, within the past 12 months, the city official or the official's spouse, directly or indirectly, has solicited, received and not rejected, or accepted an offer of employment; or 
5.  A person or business entity from whom, within the past 12 months, the city official or the official's spouse, directly or indirectly, is engaged in negotiations pertaining to business opportunities. 
(d)  Disclosure of interest and recusal. 
(1)  A city official who has an economic interest in the outcome of the matter under consideration shall disclose that the official has an economic interest and shall recuse himself from discussion of and voting on the matter. 
(2)  A city official having a substantial interest in the outcome of a matter under consideration shall disclose that the official has a substantial interest and recuse himself immediately from voting and from the discussion of the matter. Before a vote or decision on a matter under consideration, the city official shall also promptly file an affidavit with the city secretary disclosing the nature and extent of the conflict, and the affidavit shall be included in the official minutes of the body, in accordance with state law. 
(3)  Upon recusal, a city official who has disclosed having either an economic interest or a substantial interest in the outcome of a matter under consideration shall leave the dais, but may remain at the open meeting in the public seating area. 
(Ord. No. 280, 6-30-2011)  
Sec. 31.23. - Role of the city attorney. 
(a)  The city attorney serves as legal counsel to the city council. When complaints are filed relating to the mayor or city council members, independent legal counsel may be utilized to advise the council and take part in its proceedings. When complaints are filed relating to the city attorney, independent legal counsel shall be utilized to advise the council and take part in its proceedings. 
(b)  The city attorney serves as ethics advisor to city officials. As ethics advisor, the city attorney is available to respond confidentially to inquiries relating to this subchapter, and may render advisory opinions on potential conflicts of interest or violation of this section at the request of a city official. The advisory opinion in any subsequent charges concerning the matter may be used as a defense to an alleged violation of this section unless material facts were omitted or misstated by the person requesting the opinion. 
(c)  The city attorney shall receive all sworn complaints and provide a copy and a preliminary review of the complaint to the council for action. The preliminary review does not advise on the merits of a complaint. 
(d)  If a complainant alleges a violation by the city attorney, the complaint must be filed with the city secretary, with a copy to the mayor and city manager. 
(Ord. No. 280, 6-30-2011)  
Sec. 31.24. - Complaint process. 
(a)  Filing. 
(1)  Any person who believes that there has been a violation of this subchapter may file a sworn complaint. A complaint alleging a violation of this subchapter must meet the requirements of subsection (a)(2) of this section and must be filed with the city secretary. A complaint alleging a violation of this subchapter by the city attorney must also be filed with the persons named in section 31.23(d). Complaints shall be filed in the manner described herein within 90 days of the date of the alleged acts forming the basis of the complaint. Complaints filed more than 90 days after the date of the alleged acts forming the basis of the complaint shall be considered untimely. 
(2)  Required contents of a complaint. An ethics complaint must be in writing and under oath and must set forth in simple, concise, and direct statements the following: 
a.  The name of the complainant; 
b.  The street or mailing address, email address and the telephone number of the complainant; 
c.  The name of the person who allegedly committed the violation; 
d.  The position or title of the person who allegedly committed the violation; 
e.  The nature of the alleged violation, including, if possible, the specific rule or provision of this subchapter alleged to have been violated; 
f.  A statement of the facts constituting the alleged violation and the dates on which or period of time in which the alleged violation occurred; and must contain the following: 
1.  Documents or other material available to the complainant relevant to the allegation; 
2.  A list of all documents or other material relevant to the allegation and available to the complainant, but that are not in the possession of the complainant, including the location of the documents; if known; and 
3.  A list of all documents or other material relevant to the allegation, but unavailable to the complainant, including the location of the documents, if known. 
g.  If the complaint is based on information and belief, the complaint shall state the source and basis of the information and belief. 
(3)  The complaint must be accompanied by an affidavit stating that the information contained in the complaint is either true and correct or that the complainant has good reason to believe and does believe that the facts alleged constitute a violation of this subchapter. 
(4)  Upon request, the city secretary shall provide information to persons about the requirements of a complaint and the process for filing a complaint. 
(b)  Confidentiality and ex parte communications. 
(1)  No city official may reveal information relating to the filing or processing of a complaint except as required for the performance of official duties. 
(2)  All documents relating to a pending complaint are confidential, unless they are required to be disclosed under the Texas Public Information Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 552. 
(3)  After a complaint has been filed, and during the consideration of a complaint by the council, a member of the council may not communicate directly or indirectly with any party or person about any issue of fact or law regarding the complaint, except at a meeting of the council if such item is properly placed on the agenda in compliance with open meetings laws. This provision does not prevent a member of the council from consulting with the city attorney regarding procedure and legal issues. 
(c)  Notification. 
(1)  A copy of a complaint which meets the requirements of this section shall be promptly forwarded by the city secretary to the mayor, city manager and city attorney and to the person charged in the complaint. 
(2)  The person alleged in the complaint to have violated this subchapter shall be provided with a copy of this subchapter and informed that: 
a.  Within 14 days of receipt of the complaint, the person charged may file with the city secretary a sworn response; 
b.  Failure to file a response does not preclude the city attorney from processing the complaint; 
c.  A copy of any response to a complaint must be provided by the city secretary to the complainant, who may within seven days respond by sworn writing filed with the city secretary, who shall provide a copy of the sworn writing to the person charged in the complaint. 
(3)  City officials have a duty to cooperate with the city attorney, pursuant to this subchapter. 
(4)  All members of the council shall receive copies of the complaint, any documentation, and any response at least seven days before any hearing on the matter. 
(Ord. No. 280, 6-30-2011)  
Sec. 31.25. - Hearing process. 
(a)  Preliminary hearing. 
(1)  As soon as reasonably possible, but in no event later than 60 days after receiving a complaint, the council shall conduct a preliminary hearing, which shall be noticed in compliance with applicable open meetings laws. The purpose of the preliminary hearing is to determine whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this subchapter has occurred. If the city official named in the complaint is a member of the city council, that person is precluded from participation in the preliminary hearing. 
(2)  The complainant and the city official named in the complaint have the right of representation by private counsel. 
(3)  Statements at a preliminary hearing shall be under oath, but there shall be no cross examination or requests for persons or evidence issued for the hearing. 
(4)  The person filing a complaint shall state the alleged violation and describe in narrative form the testimony and other evidence which are presented to prove the alleged violation as stated in the written complaint. 
(5)  The city official named in the complaint shall have the opportunity to respond but is not required to attend or make any statement. The official may describe in narrative form the testimony and other evidence presented to disprove the alleged violation. If the official agrees that a violation has occurred, the council may consider the appropriate sanction. 
(6)  Only members of the council or the city attorney may question the complainant or the city official named in the complaint. 
(7)  At the conclusion of the preliminary hearing one of the following actions shall be taken: 
a.  If the council does not determine that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this subchapter has occurred, the complaint shall be dismissed. 
b.  If the council determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this subchapter has occurred, it shall schedule a final hearing. 
c.  If the city official has agreed that a violation has occurred, the council may proceed to determine the appropriate sanction. 
(b)  Final hearing. 
(1)  A final hearing shall be held as expeditiously as possible following the determination by the council that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this section has occurred, but in no event shall it be held more than 30 days after said determination. The council may grant two postponements, not to exceed 15 days each, upon the request of the city official named in the complaint or the complaining party. 
(2)  If a complaint proceeds to a final hearing, the council may request witnesses to attend and testify, administer oaths and affirmations, take evidence and request the production of books, papers, records, or other evidence needed for the performance of the council's duties or exercise of its powers, including its powers of investigation. 
(3)  The issue at a final hearing is whether a violation of this subchapter has occurred. The council shall make its determination based on the evidence in the record. All witnesses shall make their statements under oath. If the council determines that a violation has occurred, it shall state its findings in writing, identify the particular provision of this subchapter which have been violated, and within five working days deliver a copy of the findings to the complainant, the person named in the complaint, and the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 280, 6-30-2011)  
Sec. 31.26. - Sanctions and violations. 
(a)  If the council determines that a violation of this subchapter has occurred, it shall consider appropriate sanctions. The council may receive additional testimony or statements before considering sanctions, but is not required to do so. 
(b)  If the council determines that a violation has occurred, it may impose the following sanctions: 
(1)  A letter of notification is an appropriate sanction when the violation is clearly unintentional. The letter of notification shall advise the official of any steps to be taken to avoid future violations. 
(2)  A letter of admonition is the appropriate sanction when the council finds the violation is minor. 
(3)  A letter of reprimand is the appropriate sanction when the council finds a serious violation has been committed. 
(4)  A letter of censure is the appropriate sanction when the council finds that a statutory violation has occurred or more than one serious violation or repeated serious violations of this subchapter have been committed. 
(c)  Copies of all sanction letters issued by the council under this section shall be filed of record with the city secretary. 
(d)  In addition, when the seriousness of the violation warrants, the city council may suspend or remove from office any official serving in a council-appointed position. 
(e)  Except with regard to violations of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 171, a violation by any city official as designated herein, of one or more of the provisions of this subchapter shall not be deemed to be a Class C misdemeanor under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 280, 6-30-2011)  
Sec. 31.27. - Distribution and proof of compliance. 
(a)  The city secretary shall make available to each new city official designated in this subchapter, a copy of the text of this subchapter; V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 171, pertaining to conflicts of interest; the Texas Open Meetings Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 551; and the Texas Public Information Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 552 (collectively referred to in this section as the "Ethics Statutes"). 
(b)  The city attorney shall conduct one or more annual seminars devoted to educating city officials who serve on bodies with final decision-making authority on the meaning and legal significance of the Ethics Statutes. 
(c)  Each city official shall file with the city secretary a signed and dated affidavit in which the city official acknowledges that he has read and understands this subchapter. 
(d)  The affidavit required to be filed by this section shall be filed with the city secretary before the next regularly scheduled regular meeting of the city council following the effective date of the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived, or within 30 calendar days of the date new city officials takes office, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 280, 6-30-2011)  
CHAPTER 32. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Department of police, § 4.02. 
State Law reference— Municipal law enforcement, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 341. 
 
SUBCHAPTER II. - POLICE RESERVE FORCE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Police reserve force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012. 
 
Sec. 32.15. - Establishment. 
There is hereby established a police reserve force for the city. 
(Code 1996, § 32.15; Ord. No. 0029, 6-14-1973)  
Sec. 32.16. - Appointment by police chief; number. 
(a)  Members of the police reserve force shall be appointed and or relieved at the discretion of the chief of police and shall serve as police officers during the actual discharge of official duties. 
(b)  The police reserve force shall not exceed in number the total number authorized by the chief of police. 
(Code 1996, § 32.16; Ord. No. 0029, 6-14-1973)  
Sec. 32.17. - Call to active service. 
Members of the police reserve force shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police and may be called into active service at any time the chief of police considers it necessary to have additional police officers to preserve the peace and enforce the law. 
(Code 1996, § 32.17; Ord. No. 0029, 6-14-1973)  
Sec. 32.18. - Compensation; benefits. 
Members of the police reserve force may serve without compensation. Uniform compensation may be provided to the reserve police officers at the discretion of the chief of police. The uniform compensation shall be based solely upon time served by the member of the police reserve while in training for or in the performance of official duties. The city may provide hospital and medical assistance to members of the police reserve force who sustain injury in the course of performing official duties in the same manner as provided by the city for its full time police officers and reserve officers and shall be eligible for death benefits as set out in Chapter 86 Acts of the 60th Legislature, Regular Session 1967, as amended (V.T.C.A., Government Code § 615.001 et seq.); provided, however, that nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to authorize or permit a member of the police reserve force to become eligible for participation in any pension fund created pursuant to state statute to which regular officers may become a member by payroll deductions or otherwise. Reserve police officers shall act only in a supplemental capacity to the regular police force and shall in no case assume the full time duties of regular police officers. 
(Code 1996, § 32.18; Ord. No. 0029, 6-14-1973)  
Sec. 32.19. - Training standards; qualification. 
Reserve police officers must comply with the minimum training standards established by the state commission on law enforcement officers standards and education minimum standards established for all reserve law enforcement officers identical to the standards so established which must be fulfilled before a person appointed as a reserve law enforcement officer may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer. The chief of police shall establish qualifications and standards of training for members of the police reserve force and shall establish rules and regulations governing reserve police officers. The chief of police may establish minimum physical, mental, educational, and moral standards as used by the regular police department, but in no case shall the standards be less than that established by the state commission on law enforcement officer standards and education. 
(Code 1996, § 32.20; Ord. No. 0029, 6-14-1973)  
CHAPTER 33. - MUNICIPAL COURT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, § 4.04. 
State Law reference— Municipal Courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 29; rules of procedure, etc., V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure ch. 45. 
 
Sec. 33.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accusation means a charge made in a lawful manner against any person that he has been guilty of some offense which subjects him to prosecution by the city. A person is said to be accused of an offense from the time that any criminal action shall have been commenced against him. A legal arrest without warrant, a complaint to the city council or city secretary, municipal judge, city clerk, or a warrant legally issued, are all examples of accusations, and a person proceeded against by any of these is said to be the accused. 
Arms means and includes any deadly weapon. 
Jail means any place of confinement used for detaining a prisoner. 
Judge means the person who presides over the municipal court of the city. 
Legally confined means a person is legally confined in jail, or legally detained in custody when he has been committed or arrested upon a legal warrant, or arrested in any of the modes pointed out in the Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure. 
Misdemeanor means: 
(1)  Every act or omission in violation of any ordinance of the city now in force or that may hereafter be passed, shall be held and deemed a misdemeanor. 
(2)  Whenever anything is forbidden or declared not to be lawful, or to be unlawful, or declared to be a duty by the ordinances of the city, anyone doing the thing forbidden or declared not to be lawful, or to be unlawful, or declared to be a duty by the ordinances of the city, or failing to do the things prescribed as a duty, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; notwithstanding there being no words in such ordinances expressly declaring the same to be a misdemeanor. 
(3)  Any law declared to be a misdemeanor by the laws of the state. 
Officer means any peace officer of the city, or any person specially authorized to arrest by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1996, § 33.02; Ord. No. 0030, 11-9-1972)  
Sec. 33.02. - Location; courtroom. 
The city shall hold session in the city hall or at such other location as the municipal judge may desire within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 33.03; Ord. No. 0030, 11-9-1972)  
Sec. 33.03. - Officers. 
(a)  Municipal judge. In case of disability or absence of the judge of the municipal court, the mayor, or in his absence of disability, the mayor pro tempore, shall act as judge of said court. 
(b)  The city secretary or his deputy shall act as clerk of the municipal court and it shall be his duty to take care of all records and attend court each day or when requested by the recorder, to administer oaths, take affidavits, complaints, issue warrants, subpoenas, and any and all other processes. However, the judge may administer oaths, take affidavits, complaints, issue warrants and subpoenas also. 
(Code 1996, § 33.04; Ord. No. 0030, 11-9-1972)  
Sec. 33.04. - Sessions of court. 
There shall be a session of court on any day except Saturday or Sunday whenever business justifies the same or whenever other matters arise requiring the attention of the court. Such session may be held either in the morning or in the afternoon, or at such times and places as desired by the judge. 
(Code 1996, § 33.05; Ord. No. 0030, 11-9-1972)  
Sec. 33.05. - Forfeiture of bond; capias warrant. 
(a)  When a prisoner has made a cash bond, and fails to appear when the case is set for trial, his name will be called, and if he or his representative fails to appear, the cash bond shall be forfeited by the judge by making a notation on the docket after hearing the evidence and satisfying himself that the forfeiture of the bond is sufficient punishment for the offense for which the bond was given and that there need not be a capias warrant issued for the defendant's rearrest. 
(b)  Forfeiture of cash bonds shall operate as a fine except in instances where it appears to the judge, after hearing evidence, that forfeiture of the bond is insufficient punishment, and then the judge shall order a capias warrant for the defendant's rearrest and trial. 
(Code 1996, § 33.06; Ord. No. 0030, 11-9-1972)  
Sec. 33.06. - Plea on failure to appear. 
The cash bond receipts shall be formulated in such manner that the prisoner shall have entered a plea of nolo contendere on failure to appear at the time set on the bond. 
(Code 1996, § 33.07; Ord. No. 0030, 11-9-1972)  
Sec. 33.07. - Payment of fines; methods of payment; failure to pay. 
(a)  According to a schedule when an individual presents a tag at the city hall and pays the amount of the fine, the same records shall be kept and the transaction handled exactly as a cash bond in any other case, and payment of such fine shall be a plea of nolo contendere. 
(b)  Methods of payment. 
(1)  The municipal judge is authorized in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 132 to accept payment of fines, fees, court costs, or other charges by electronic means (as the term is defined under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 132.001) for the payment of any and all amounts due to the city, including any and all amounts to be remitted by the city to the state comptroller or other agency or entity as required by law. 
(2)  The municipal judge is authorized to collect, in addition to the actual fines and fees, a service charge for processing or handling the collection of such fines or fees by either credit card or electronic means. 
(c)  Failure to pay. 
(1)  Any person who, upon conviction, shall fail or neglect to pay any fine or costs imposed under any law or ordinance for any breach or violation of the same, shall be committed to jail or to work on the parks, streets or any property of the city until such fine costs have been fully paid or satisfied, as provided by law, and the decree of the court or the verdict of the jury shall, in all cases, be presumed to include such commitment on failure or refusal or neglect to pay the same. 
(2)  Every person committed to work on the streets shall be required to work for the city under the direction of the chief of police, a deputy, or other proper officer at such labor as the health and strength of the person so committed will permit, not exceeding eight hours each day; and for such labor, the person so employed shall be allowed the sum of $50.00 per day, or as provided by law for each day's work, exclusive of his board, which amount shall go toward paying such fine and costs. 
(Code 1996, § 33.13; Ord. No. 0030, 11-9-1972; Ord. No. 237, 11-9-2006)  
Sec. 33.08. - Schedule of fines. 
(a)  There shall be a schedule of fines, approved by the city council, for certain offenses, which may be printed on the reverse side of the copy of the summons that is left with the defendant. The defendant may, if said schedule is applicable and if he shall elect, pay to the clerk such fine as is shown on the schedule and accordingly enter his plea of nolo contendere. No fine shall be accepted which is not in accord with the schedule, unless set by the judge in open court. 
(b)  Schedule. 
Violation 	Base 
Fine 
Child riding in open bed of truck or trailer 	$56.00 
Consuming alcoholic beverage during prohibited hours 	$50.00 
Consumption of alcohol by a minor 	$98.00 
Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverage in motor vehicle 	$94.00 
Criminal mischief ($0.00 to $50.00) 	$87.00 
Cutting across private property 	$59.00 
Defective brakes 	$46.00 
Disorderly conduct 	$112.00 
Display fictitious license plate 	$87.00 
Disregarding crossing guard 	$64.00 
Disregarding flashing yellow signals 	$59.00 
Disruption of classes 	$112.00 
Driving in turning lane 	$59.00 
Driving under the influence of alcohol by a minor 	$113.00 
Driving without headlights when required 	$54.00 
Driving wrong side of roadway 	$64.00 
Driving wrong way in one-way 	$64.00 
Exhibition of acceleration 	$119.00 
Expired driver's license 	$62.00 
Expired motor vehicle inspection 	$67.00 
Expired motor vehicle registration 	$64.00 
Failure to appear or violate promise to appear 	$120.00 
Failure to control speed 	$59.00 
Failure to dim headlights 	$48.00 
Failure to display motor vehicle inspection 	$62.00 
Failure to display motor vehicle registration 	$67.00 
Failure to drive in single lane 	$64.00 
Failure to maintain financial responsibility — First offense 	$252.00 
Failure to maintain financial responsibility — Second offense 	$350.00 
Failure to provide identification to a police officer 	$62.00 
Failure to report accident 	$62.00 
Failure to signal lane change 	$46.00 
Failure to stop when exiting a business 	$64.00 
Failure to yield right-of-way 	$64.00 
Failure to yield right-of-way to pedestrian in crosswalk 	$64.00 
Failure to yield to emergency vehicle 	$59.00 
Following too closely 	$59.00 
Illegal or improper parking 	$86.00 
Illegal sunscreen 	$79.00 
Illegal, unsafe, or improper turn 	$62.00 
Impeding traffic 	$85.00 
Improper loading/unloading 	$66.00 
Improper, illegal, or unsafe backing 	$59.00 
Leaving a child in a vehicle 	$109.00 
Leaving the scene of an accident 	$147.00 
Minor in possession 	$79.00 
Misuse of farm plates 	$64.00 
No driver's license 	$67.00 
No front license plate 	$64.00 
No license plate light 	$36.00 
No motorcycle endorsement 	$59.00 
No motorcycle required gear 	$59.00 
No or defective headlight or taillight 	$56.00 
No seat belt 	$50.00 
Overtaking or passing a school bus 	$201.00 
Parked blocking a fire hydrant 	$85.00 
Parked in handicap parking 	$250.00 
Parked in handicap zone 	$250.00 
Parked in no park zone 	$85.00 
Passing in no pass zone 	$59.00 
Passing on right shoulder 	$59.00 
Permitting unlicensed person or minor to drive 	$62.00 
Possession of burning tobacco products by a minor 	$69.00 
Possession of drug paraphernalia 	$112.00 
Public intoxication 	$103.00 
Racing or contest of speed 	$109.00 
Ran red light 	$64.00 
Ran stop sign 	$64.00 
Reckless driving 	$112.00 
Speeding (add $1.00 each mile over limit) 	$53.00 
Speeding in school zone (add $2.00 each mile over limit) 	$78.00 
Tampering with warning devices 	$87.00 
Theft under $50.00 	$87.00 
Unclean license plate 	$54.00 
Unrestrained child under age four (child safety seat or restraint) 	$100.00 
Unrestrained passenger (seat belt) 	$50.00 
Unsafe change of marked lanes 	$43.00 
Use of equipment not approved 	$59.00 
Unsafe speed 	$62.00 
Violation of city ord: BB gun or pellet gun 	$64.00 
Violation of city ord: Burning trash 	$112.00 
Violation of city ord: Curfew 	$62.00 
Violation of city ord: Discharging firearm in city limits 	$212.00 
Violation of city ord: Discharging fireworks in city limits 	$100.00 
Violation of city ord: Loose dog 	$62.00 
Violation of city ord: Loose livestock 	$112.00 
Violation of driver's license restriction code 	$46.00 
 
(1)  Local and state court costs will be added to the base fine. 
(2)  Violations not included on the fine schedule are set at the judge's discretion. 
(Code 1996, § 33.14; Ord. No. 0030, 11-9-1972; Ord. No. 0080, 9-29-1986; Ord. No. 127, 9-8-1994; Ord. No. 152, 9-25-1997; Ord. No. 168, 9-9-1999; Ord. No. 183, 8-23-2001)  
Sec. 33.09. - Appearance in open court; time for decision. 
(a)  If the offense is not one shown on the schedule, the defendant must enter his appearance in open court prior to a disposition of his case. No disposition of any case, except as provided in section 33.08, shall be made except in open court. 
(b)  If, at the conclusion of a trial in open court, the judge shall desire additional time to examine authorities, or for any other reason, he shall note on the jacket of such case hold for decision, and such case shall be resubmitted by the prosecutor for decision in not more than two weeks' time. 
(Code 1996, § 33.15; Ord. No. 0030, 11-9-1972)  
Sec. 33.10. - Conflicts; code of criminal procedure to prevail. 
The Texas Code of Criminal Procedure shall be the procedure to be followed in all matters in the event of any conflict between this chapter and said Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(Code 1996, § 33.16; Ord. No. 0030, 11-9-1972)  
Sec. 33.11. - Municipal court building security fund. 
There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court Building Security Fund (the "fund") pursuant to article 102.017 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(Code 1996, § 33.17; Ord. No. 151, 9-25-1997)  
Sec. 33.12. - Municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  Establishment of fund. 
(1)  There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court Technology Fund, herein now known as the fund, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 102.0172. 
(2)  The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account. 
(b)  Establishment of amount of fee and assessment and collection. 
(1)  The fee shall be in the amount of $4.00. 
(2)  The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
a.  Judgment, sentence or both are imposed on the person; 
b.  The person is placed on deferred disposition; or 
c.  The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence. 
(3)  The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after August 10, 2006. 
(4)  The clerk of court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the municipal treasurer or city secretary who shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund. 
(c)  Designated use of fund and administration. 
(1)  The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of technology enhancements for the municipal court. Technology enhancements shall include any and all items described in V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 102.0172. 
(2)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council. 
(d)  Administration of fund. The purpose of the use of any funds remaining in the fund shall continue to be used and administered as required by this section and for that purpose this section remains in effect. 
(Code 1996, § 33.18; Ord. No. 202, 2-13-2003; Ord. No. 231, 8-10-2006)  
Sec. 33.13. - Collection fees. 
(a)  In accordance with V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 103.0031(b), there is hereby established a 30 percent collection fee on all current and future unpaid debts and accounts receivable that, as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, are currently, or hereafter become, outstanding for longer than 60 days. 
(b)  An item subject to the collection fee established under this chapter is considered more than 60 days past due if it remains unpaid on the 61st day after the following appropriate date: 
(1)  With respect to a debt, fine, fee, forfeited bond, or court cost, the date the municipal court of the city determined that such must be paid in full; 
(2)  With respect to cases in which the defendant failed to appear, the date by which the accused promised to appear or was notified, summoned, or ordered to appear; or 
(3)  With respect to false alarm penalties as authorized by city ordinance, the date on which a penalty or fee is due pursuant to policy, procedure, or rule of the city. 
(c)  The collection fee does not apply to a case that has been dismissed by a court of competent jurisdiction or to any amount that has been satisfied through time-served credit or community service. The collection fee may be applied to any balance remaining after a partial credit for time served or community service if the balance is more than 60 days past due. Unless the contract provides otherwise, the municipal court of the city shall calculate the amount of any collection fee due and shall receive all fees, including the collection fee. 
(d)  In accordance with V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 103.0031(d), a defendant is not liable for the collection fees authorized by this chapter if the municipal court of the city has determined the defendant is indigent, or has insufficient resources or income, or is otherwise unable to pay all or part of the underlying fine or costs. 
(e)  The city may not use this additional 30 percent collection fee for any purpose other than compensating the collection contractor who earns the fee. 
(f)  Pursuant to the section 3.11 of the city Charter, the caption of the ordinance from which this chapter shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation in the city and the ordinance from which this chapter is derived has an effective date of ten days from the date of passage by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-010, 8-8-2013)  
CHAPTER 34. - FINANCE AND TAXATION[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal finance, § IX. 
State Law reference— V.T.C.A., Finance Code ch. 1 et seq.; finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 101 et seq.; V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 1 et seq. 
 
SUBCHAPTER I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 34.01. - Annual occupation tax. 
There is hereby levied and there shall be collected from every person, firm, association, or corporation pursuing any occupation under the general laws of the state, an annual occupation tax, equal in each instance to one-half of the state occupation tax, which said taxes shall be paid annually in advance except where otherwise provided by the state laws, in which event the same shall be paid as is provided by the state law. 
(Code 1996, § 34.03; Ord. No. 0038, 11-21-1974) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy one-half of state occupation tax, Tex. Const. art. 8, § 1; occupation tax on oil and gas wells, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 191.081 et seq.; municipal governing body may impose and collect occupation taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 302.101; local occupational tax prohibited unless specifically permitted by state law, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 101.008; occupation tax on coin operated machines, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.451.  
Sec. 34.02. - Fee schedule for Floresville Event Center. 
The fee schedule for use of the Floresville Event Center shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2014-005, 5-8-2014)  
SUBCHAPTER II. - PROPERTY TAX[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Property tax code, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 34.10. - Levy of property tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied or adopted a tax rate in an amount to be determined from time to time by ordinance of the city council on $100.00 valuation of property, that tax being levied and apportioned to the specific purposes provided by ordinance. 
(b)  The tax assessor-collector is authorized to assess and collect the taxes of the city, employing the most current tax rate. 
(Code 1996, § 34.01; Ord. No. 0038, 11-21-1974; Ord. No. 132, 9-14-1995; Ord. No. 136, 9-12-1996; Ord. No. 153, 9-25-1997; Ord. No. 167, 9-9-1999; Ord. No. 185, 9-13-2001; Ord. No. 198, 9-12-2002; Ord. No. 223, 9-22-2005; Ord. No. 234, 9-28-2006; Ord. No. 264, 9-25-2008) 
Charter reference— Power to tax, § 9.14. 
State Law reference— Levy of taxes, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.009.  
Sec. 34.11. - Purpose. 
The tax hereby levied is levied for the purposes stated in such ordinances, and those specified in and authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 302, and none other, to wit; for current expenses, and for the construction or purchase of public buildings, water works, sewers, and other permanent improvements within the limits of the city and the construction and improvement of the roads, bridges and streets of the city within its limits. 
(Code 1996, § 34.02; Ord. No. 0038, 11-21-1974)  
Sec. 34.12. - County appraisal district map. 
(a)  A county appraisal district map which reflects properties for municipal taxation purposes is attached to the ordinance from which this section was derived and kept on file in the office of the city secretary (Exhibit A), and included by reference as if fully set forth. 
(b)  Exhibit A is hereby adopted as the official record of the city limits as of the date that the city adopted its Home Rule Charter, November 10, 2004. 
(c)  Said Exhibit A defines subsequent annexations through the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived. 
(Ord. No. 281, 6-30-2011)  
Sec. 34.13. - Homestead exemption. 
(a)  That the city adopts an allowance of a $15,000.00 homestead exemption for city property owners 65 years of age and over, and for those property owners (regard less of age) who qualify for disability benefits under the Federal Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance Program administered by the Social Security Administration. An eligible disabled person who is 65 years of age or over may not receive the homestead exemption for both qualifying as "65 or over" and "disabled," but may choose either. Each person desiring such exemption shall file an application with the county appraisal district, such application being in a form and filed at such time as shall be required by law. 
(b)  The surviving spouse of an individual who qualified for an exemption under this section for the residence homestead of a person 65 or older is entitled to an exemption for the same property in an amount equal to that of the exemption for which the deceased spouse qualified if: 
(1)  The deceased spouse died in a year in which the deceased spouse qualified for the exemption; 
(2)  The surviving spouse was 55 or older when the deceased spouse died; and 
(3)  The property was the residence homestead of the surviving spouse when the deceased spouse died and remains the residence homestead of the surviving spouse. 
(c)  A surviving spouse is not entitled to an additional exemption under this section if the surviving spouse qualifies for an exemption on his own. 
(d)  That the adopted tax exemption shall be effective for the year 2014 tax year and all future tax years, unless and until the tax exemption is either revised or repealed by city council. If revised, pursuant to article VIII, section 1-b(b) of the Texas Constitution and the V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13(d), such allowance for homestead exemption shall be no less than $3,000.00; however, the city may repeal the homestead tax exemption enacted by this section in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2013-009, §§ 2, 3, 10-24-2013) 
State Law reference— Residence homestead, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13.  
SUBCHAPTER III. - HISTORIC DISTRICTS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Tax exemption for historic sites, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.24. 
 
Sec. 34.20. - Historical building tax abatement. 
The owner of a historical commercial building located in the historical district (as defined in chapter 154) may apply for a city property tax abatement on repair and/or restoration costs for both the land and structure on the building site. The land and building will have an annual assessed value equal to the assessed value of the tax year immediately before the repairs and/or restoration was completed, for the next five years following completion of work. The tax abatement will begin the first day of the first tax year after verification of the repairs or the remodeling. For purposes of this subchapter, the term "repairs" or "remodeling" means work performed in accordance with building and construction codes of the city and in accordance with the city design review committee. For purposes of this subchapter, the term "historical commercial building" means any building, 50 years old or over, utilized for nonresidential use as provided in chapter 154. 
(Code 1996, § 34.20; Ord. No. 187, 9-27-2001)  
Sec. 34.21. - Eligibility for tax abatement. 
To be eligible for property tax abatement, the property must meet all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The property must be located within the city limits; 
(2)  The property must contain a historical commercial building as defined by this subchapter; and 
(3)  At the time of application for the tax abatement, the exterior and/or the interior must be in need of repairs. The cost of which (as shown on a legitimate contract or bid) exceeds 25 percent of the assessed value of the structure the year the work is to begin. Only that work for which a building permit, plumbing permit, or other project permit used may be counted on determining whether the work exceeds 25 percent of the assessed value. 
(Code 1996, § 34.21; Ord. No. 187, 9-27-2001)  
Sec. 34.22. - Application for tax abatement. 
An application for a tax abatement must be filed with the county appraisal district and the city code compliance officer. Each application must be signed and sworn to by the owner of the property and must include the following information: 
(1)  The legal description of the property; 
(2)  Detailed plans and documents related to the proposed work showing how the repairs are in accordance with building and construction codes and how restoration is in accordance with the criteria set forth by the city design review committee; 
(3)  A statement and documentation of the cost for repairs of the exterior and interior of the building to show that the costs exceed 25 percent of the assessed value of the structure; and 
(4)  A projection of the construction time and completion date of the repairs. 
(Code 1996, § 34.22; Ord. No. 187, 9-27-2001)  
Sec. 34.23. - Qualification for tax abatement. 
(a)  Upon completion of the repairs in accordance with the city design review committee and/or building and construction codes of the city, the owner shall submit to the county tax appraiser and the city code compliance officer a sworn statement certifying that the repairs have been completed. 
(b)  The owner shall obtain a certificate of qualification for a tax abatement from the county tax appraiser committee signed by the code compliance officer. A certificate of qualification shall not be approved until the applicant files a commitment of immediate repay to the city for all tax revenues not paid because of the tax abatement, if the owner is required to repay the taxes under section 34.24. The commitment must be approved as to form by the city attorney and filed in the county deed records. The commitment shall run with the land and bind the owner and his heirs and assigns. Any unpaid repayment required under section 34.24 shall be a lien against the property in accordance with section 34.20. 
(c)  Once the certificate of qualification is approved, the county appraisal district shall appraise the property in accordance with section 34.20. 
(d)  Once the certificate of qualification is approved, the property shall be entitled to a tax abatement as follows: 
(1)  For the first calendar year following the granting of such certificate of qualification, an abatement of 100 percent of the taxes generated by the increase in value of the property attributable to the repairs or remodeling as described above; 
(2)  For the second calendar year following the granting of the certificate of qualification, an amount equal to 80 percent of the taxes generated by the increase in value of the property attributable to the repairs or remodeling as described above; 
(3)  For the third calendar year following the granting of the certificate of qualification, an amount equal to 60 percent of the taxes generated by the increase in value of the property attributable to the repairs or remodeling as described above; 
(4)  For the fourth calendar year following the granting of the certificate of qualification, an amount equal to 40 percent of the taxes generated by the increase in value of the property attributable to the repairs or remodeling as described above; and 
(5)  For the fifth calendar year following the granting of the certificate of qualification, an amount equal to 20 percent of the taxes generated by the increase in value of the property attributable to the repairs or remodeling as described above. 
(Code 1996, § 34.22; Ord. No. 187, 9-27-2001)  
Sec. 34.24. - Destruction or alteration of historic landmark. 
If the design review committee has reason to believe that a historic landmark that has received a tax abatement, as provided for herein, has been totally or partially destroyed by any cause, or altered by the willful act or negligence of the owner or his representatives in violation of the preservation criteria contained in the policies of the design review committee, then the committee shall immediately cause the matter to be scheduled for the earliest possible consideration by the city council. If the council determines that the historic landmark has been totally or partially destroyed by any cause, or altered by the willful act or negligence of the owner or his representatives, the owner shall immediately repay to the city all of the tax revenues that were not paid because of the tax abatement. 
(Code 1996, § 34.24; Ord. No. 187, 9-27-2001)  
SUBCHAPTER IV. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Hotel occupancy tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 156; municipal hotel occupancy taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 351. 
 
Sec. 34.30. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consideration means the cost of the room, sleeping space, bed or dormitory space or other facilities in such hotel and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning and readying such rooms or space for occupancy, and shall not include any tax assessed for occupancy thereof by any other governmental agency. 
Hotel means a building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term "hotel" includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodginghouse, inn, roominghouse, or bed and breakfast. The term "hotel" does not include: 
(1)  A hospital, sanitarium, or nursing home; 
(2)  A dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution of higher education as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Education Code § 61.003, used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or activity at the institution; or 
(3)  An oilfield portable unit, as defined by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 152.001. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to use or possession of any room, space or sleeping facility in a hotel for any purpose. 
Occupant means anyone, who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms, or sleeping space or facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right to use or possess a room in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days, so long as there is no interruption of payment for the period. 
Person means any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
Quarterly period means the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March, the second quarter being the months of April, May and June, the third quarter being the months of July, August and September, and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
Tax collector means the tax assessor and collector of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 115.01; Ord. No. 155, 12-11-1997)  
Sec. 34.31. - Levy of tax, rate and exception. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a tax upon the occupant of any room or space furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven percent of the consideration paid by the occupant. 
(b)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon any persons who are permanent residents. 
(c)  Governmental entity exemption. 
(1)  A United States governmental entity described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(a) is exempt from the payment of tax authorized by this subchapter. 
(2)  A state governmental entity described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(b) shall pay the tax imposed by this subchapter but is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(3)  A person who is described by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(d) is exempt from the payment of the tax authorized by this subchapter. 
(4)  A person who is described by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(c) shall pay the tax imposed by this subchapter but the state governmental entity with whom the person is associated is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(5)  To receive a refund of tax paid under this subchapter, the governmental entity entitled to the refund must file a refund claim on a form provided by the city and containing the information required by the city. The state comptroller by rule shall prescribe the form that must be used and the information that must be provided. 
(6)  A governmental entity may file a refund claim with the city under this subchapter only for each calendar quarter for all reimbursements accrued during that quarter. 
(7)  The right to use or possess a room in a hotel is exempt from taxation under this subchapter if the person required to collect the tax receives, in good faith from a guest, an exemption certificate stating qualification for an exemption provided in this subsection (c). The exemption must be supported by the documentation required under rules adopted by the state comptroller and the city. 
(Code 1996, § 115.02; Ord. No. 155, 12-11-1997; Ord. No. 156, 3-12-1998)  
Sec. 34.32. - Collection. 
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in section 34.31 for the city. 
(Code 1996, § 115.03; Ord. No. 155, 12-11-1997)  
Sec. 34.33. - Reports. 
On or before the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required in section 34.32 to collect the tax imposed herein, shall file a report with the tax assessor and collector showing the consideration paid for all room or sleeping space occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information as the tax collector and assessor may reasonably require, which report shall be in writing. Such persons shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing of such report. 
(Code 1996, § 115.04; Ord. No. 155, 12-11-1997)  
Sec. 34.34. - Rules and regulations. 
The tax collector and assessor shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied herein, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required in this chapter and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 115.05; Ord. No. 155, 12-11-1997)  
Sec. 34.35. - Use of proceeds. 
(a)  The proceeds of the hotel occupancy tax levied by this subchapter shall be used at the discretion of the city council, but only for those uses authorized under V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 351, subch. B (V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.101 et seq.). 
(b)  The funds are to be dispersed at the direction of the city council by the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, § 115.06; Ord. No. 155, 12-11-1997; Ord. No. 156, 3-12-1998)  
Sec. 34.36. - Penalty. 
If any person required by the provisions of this subchapter to collect the tax imposed herein, or make reports required herein, and pay to the tax assessor and collector the tax imposed herein, shall fail to collect such tax, file such report or pay such tax, or if any such person shall file a false report, or any such person shall violate any of the provisions of this subchapter, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall pay to the tax assessor and collector the tax due, together with a penalty as provided in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.004. 
(Code 1996, § 115.99; Ord. No. 155, 12-11-1997)  
CHAPTER 35. - PERSONNEL POLICIES 
 
Sec. 35.01. - Participation in Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(a)  Election to participate in the TMRS. On behalf of the city, the city hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereafter TMRS) as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq., and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted. 
(b)  Adoption by reference. Ordinances effecting the plan for participation in the TMRS, employee contributions, updated service credits, increases in benefits and retirement annuities and any other applicable legislation of the city and state are adopted by reference into this Code of Ordinances as if fully set forth herein and shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1996, § 35.01; Ord. No. 172, 2-10-2000; Ord. No. 200, 9-12-2002; Ord. No. 226, 11-10-2005; Ord. No. 232, 9-14-2006; Ord. No. 241, 3-22-2007; Ord. No. 243, 4-12-2007)  
Sec. 35.02. - Longevity pay program. 
There is hereby established a longevity pay program to be instituted by the city under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means every full-time employee of the city other than the city manager. 
Years of service means the number of full years running from employee start date until December 1 of the current calendar year. If an employee leaves city employment and returns at a later date, the years of service shall be calculated as the aggregate amount of time spent as a city employee. 
(2)  Years of service. 
a.  Each employee's years of service shall be calculated annually on December 1; and 
b.  In the subsequent pay period following December 1, each employee shall be entitled to a payment in the sum of $50.00 multiplied by the employee's years of service. 
(3)  Longevity pay. 
a.  Longevity pay as authorized by this chapter is subject to the availability of funds. This chapter shall be reviewed annually during the city's budget process and the amounts contained in subsection (2)b of this section shall be amended or eliminated as necessitated by the city's budget. 
b.  The first calculation of years of service and payments pursuant thereto shall be on December 1, 2016, and continue annually thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-028, 9-22-2015)  
CHAPTER 36. - INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEVICE USAGE POLICY  
SUBCHAPTER I. - APPLICATION OF POLICY 
 
Sec. 36.01. - Scope and purpose of policy. 
The policy provided in this chapter provides guidance for the acceptable use of information technology systems including electronic devices, electronic mail, Internet access, and/or software among other city systems. This includes acceptable use of city-owned computers, mobile devices and/or personal devices reimbursed through city stipends. This chapter establishes and identifies responsibility for the acceptable use of technology to help ensure the confidentiality, integrity and availability of city systems. 
(Ord. No. 2017-003, § 36.01, 2-23-2017)  
Sec. 36.02. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City-administered information technology systems means any technology or equipment that is used and/or managed by the city even if the city does not own the technology or equipment. City-managed information technology systems include technology or equipment owned by the city, on loan to the city, funded by grants, leased by the city, etc. The term "information technology (IT) systems" includes, but is not limited to, computers, mobile communication devices, telecommunication devices, servers, networks, software, databases and email messages, among other physical and virtual infrastructure. 
Digital signature means an electronic identifier intended by the person using it to have the same force and effect as the use of a manual signature. 
Electronic mail record means an electronic government record sent and received in the form of a message on an electronic mail system of a government, including any attachments, transmitted with the message. 
Electronic record means a record created, generated, sent, communicated, received, or stored by electronic means. 
Electronic signature means an electronic sound, symbol, or process attached to, or logically associated with a record and executed or adopted by a person with the intent to sign the record. 
Incidental use means personal use of technology that does not interfere with the performance of assigned duties, does not have a detrimental effect on city information technology systems, and is not prohibited by this chapter. 
ITSD means the information technology systems department and is the designated individual or department responsible for maintaining the operation and security of the city's technological environment. 
Local government record retention schedules means publications issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission under the authority of V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 441, subch. J, which establishes the mandatory minimum retention period for a local government record except and as where superseded by a records retention schedule adopted by the city as authorized by the Texas Government Code. 
Malware means malicious software designed to impact the confidentiality, integrity and/or availability of an information technology system. Malware can include viruses, worms, Trojan horses, or adware among other malicious programs. 
Network means a group of two or more computers linked together to facilitate communication, data sharing and processing among other computer activities. 
Policy means the technological device usage policy as set forth in this chapter. 
Records management officer means the person who administers the records management program established in each local government under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.026. 
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording or receipt of a record or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record before it is eligible for destruction. 
Sponsor means the departmental representative responsible for authorizing non-employee access to city assets and/or systems. 
User means any employee or non-employee who uses city-administered information assets and/or systems, exclusive of the city's web and/or social media pages. 
(Ord. No. 2017-003, § 36.02, 2-23-2017)  
SUBCHAPTER II. - ACCEPTABLE USE OF TECHNOLOGY SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 36.10. - Acceptable use. 
(a)  Personal use of technology must not interfere with the performance of assigned duties, must not have a detrimental effect on any city information technology system, and not be prohibited by this chapter. This includes the personal use of city-owned or managed technology that: 
(1)  Does not cause any additional expense to the city; 
(2)  Is infrequent and brief; 
(3)  Does not have a negative impact on overall user productivity; 
(4)  Does not interfere with the normal operations of the a user's department or work unit; 
(5)  Does not compromise the city in any way; 
(6)  Does not embarrass either the city or the user; 
(7)  Does not contravene other elements of this chapter; and 
(8)  Serves the interest of the city in allowing employees to address personal matters which cannot be addressed outside of work hours without leaving the workplace. 
(b)  Examples of personal communications that can be in the interest of the city include: 
(1)  Communications to alert household members about working late or other schedule changes; 
(2)  Communications to make alternative child care arrangements, communications with doctors, hospital staff or day care providers; 
(3)  Communications to determine the safety of family or household members, particularly in an emergency; 
(4)  Communications to reach businesses or governmental agencies that only can be contacted during work hours; and 
(5)  Communications to arrange emergency repairs to vehicles or residences. City departments may consult with the human resources department to determine whether a use is personal or business and, if the usage is personal, whether it is incidental. 
(Ord. No. 2017-003, § 36.10, 2-23-2017)  
Sec. 36.11. - Unacceptable use. 
The following activities are prohibited unless performed in the course of legitimate job responsibilities. The list below is by no means exhaustive, but provides a framework for activities which fall into the category of unacceptable uses of city IT systems. 
(1)  Engaging in any activity that is illegal under local, state and/or federal statutes as well as any activity that violates city policies and administrative directives; 
(2)  Accessing, displaying, storing or transmitting material that is offensive in nature, including sexually explicit materials, or any text or image that can be considered threatening, racially offensive, or hate speech. This includes any images, text, files, etc. sent via email to co-workers or outside parties. Accessing, storing, displaying, or transmitting pornographic materials using city-owned and managed technology is strictly forbidden; 
(3)  Engaging in any form of harassment, whether sexual or otherwise, or sending any unwelcome personal communication. It is the perception of the recipient that prevails in most instances, not the intent of the sender; 
(4)  Any personal use that interrupts city business and that keeps an employee from performing his work. Users should not use their city email account as a personal email address or to register with a non-work related social network. City systems shall also not be used to chat online, "blog," or shop online; 
(5)  Extensive personal use of the Internet for any non-work-related purpose during working hours which decreases the employees productivity or results in decreased performance of the city's Internet facilities; 
(6)  Violating any copyright, trade secret, patent and/or other intellectual property or similar laws or regulations, including, but not limited to, the installation or distribution of "pirated" or other software products that are not appropriately licensed for use by the city; 
(7)  Revealing a city account password to others or allowing use of a city account by others. This includes household members and visitors when work is being done at home. Revealing a city account password to an authorized technician during a troubleshooting procedure is not a violation of this chapter. In such a situation, a new password should be established as soon as possible, after the problem is resolved; 
(8)  Requesting a password to another users network or application account; 
(9)  Unauthorized reading, deleting, copying, modifying, printing and/or forwarding of electronic communications of another, or accessing electronic files of another without authorization; 
(10)  Unauthorized downloading or duplication of copyrighted material including, but not limited to, text and photographs from magazines, books or other copyrighted sources, copyrighted music and/or copyrighted movies. Downloading, copying, or installing copyrighted software for which the city or the end user does not have an active license is not permitted; 
(11)  Sending spam, chain letters, memes, and other non-city business related mass communications to either internal or external parties. Individual email accounts will be limited by technical controls as a preventive measure to detect Spam originating from a city email account. Large volume emails to recipients will not be allowed from individual email accounts. Request for approved email accounts designated for such business purposes will be submitted to the city manager; 
(12)  Approved email accounts must not regularly send bulk emails unless distribution lists are maintained. All undeliverable or invalid addresses from distribution lists must be regularly removed to prevent the city from not being able to send email through internet service providers and/or mail hosts; 
(13)  Downloading and/or copying music, photographs or video material, including such material that has been obtained legally, onto city computers or servers unless such are for authorized city purposes; 
(14)  Downloading and/or installing executable program files from external media or the Internet without the approval of the city manager or his designated official; 
(15)  Exporting software, technical information, encryption software and/or technology, in violation of international or regional export control laws; 
(16)  Using the city's electronic mail or Internet systems for private gain or profit; 
(17)  Using unauthorized personal software which allows peer-to-peer communications between two workstations (Yahoo Messenger, AIM, Google Talk, Torrent Networks, etc.); 
(18)  Maliciously introducing malware or similar programs into the network or server; 
(19)  All soliciting for political and/or religious causes as such are in violation of state and federal law, and/or other non-business uses not authorized by the city. Using city technology, electronic mail and/or Internet facilities for political activity including voting, private gain, gambling, shipping, games, entertainment or other non-business function unless permitted by this directive; 
(20)  Making fraudulent offers of products or services originating from any city account; 
(21)  Accessing any non-business related application which maintains a persistent application connection to the Internet, such as streaming videos or media, such as Pandora, YouTube, Netflix, and/or Google Video, among others; 
(22)  Including email "tag lines" or personal quotations other than ones that state the mission of the city or the user's department; 
(23)  Using the city's email system to automatically forward city email to a personal email account; 
(24)  Causing security breaches or disruptions of city communications. Security breaches or disruptions can include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Accessing data which the user is not authorized to access or logging into a server or user account that the user is not expressly authorized to access. 
b.  Causing network disruptions for malicious purposes including, but not limited to, network sniffing, ping floods, packet spoofing, denial of service of any kind, and forged routing information for malicious purposes. 
c.  Port scanning or vulnerability scanning for malicious purposes is prohibited. Non-malicious scanning that is part of a city-sanctioned security process is allowed. The city manager or ITSD should be notified prior to any such scanning. 
d.  Circumventing user authentication or security of any device, network or account. 
e.  Maliciously interfering with or denying service through a denial of service attack, or by other means. 
f.  Using any program/script/command, or sending messages of any kind, with the intent to interfere with, and/or disable, another user's device or session, via any means, locally or via the city's network. 
g.  Adding/removing hardware components, attaching external devices, and/or making configuration changes to information technology devices without the explicit approval by city manager or ITSD. 
h.  Storing confidential data on personally owned devices. 
(Ord. No. 2017-003, § 36.11, 2-23-2017)  
Sec. 36.12. - Fees associated with use of IT systems. 
The user of any device owned by the city or operated on the city's network that incurs an unauthorized fee or expenditure in excess of that approved by the city manager shall be responsible for reimbursement to the city for the actual charge incurred as well as any associated taxes, penalties, and fees associated therewith. This shall include overage fees for excessive minutes, text messages, and internet usage as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2017-003, § 36.12, 2-23-2017)  
Sec. 36.13. - Monitoring to ensure compliance with usage policy. 
City systems may be monitored by the city to support operational, maintenance, auditing, security and/or investigative activities including enforcement of this chapter, legal requests, and public records requests or for other business purpose. Only department directors or higher may request monitoring of city administered IT systems for employees under their supervision for administrative purposes. Unauthorized monitoring or reading of electronic communications systems or their contents violates this chapter. Any request to monitor must be approved by the city manager or his designees or the city council. To obtain the necessary authorization, a written request from the requestor's department director to the city manager or city council must include subject employee information (i.e., name, employee number), a specific description of request (e.g., email, share drives, web usage, etc.) and name and phone number of the employee in the requesting department who is responsible for coordination of the request. 
(Ord. No. 2017-003, § 36.13, 2-23-2017)  
Sec. 36.14. - Electronic signatures and electronic records. 
(a)  Electronic signatures, an automated function that replaces a handwritten signature with a system-generated signature statement, and electronic records can be utilized as a means for authentication of city documents, computer generated city documents and/or electronic city entries among other uses. System-generated electronic signatures are considered legally binding as a means to identify the author of record for entries and confirm that the contents of what the author intended. City departments and staff will be allowed to utilize electronic signatures in accordance with this directive, city, state, and/or federal regulations regarding such. As such, acceptable use of electronic records and electronic signatures are allowed: 
(1)  Where policies, laws, regulations, and rules require a signature and that requirement is met if the document contains an electronic signature; 
(2)  Where policies, laws, regulations, and/or rules require a written document, and that requirement is met if the document is an electronic record; 
(3)  Each party to a transaction must agree to conduct the transaction electronically in order for the electronic transaction to be valid and binding. Consent may be implied from the circumstances, except with respect to any electronic records used to deliver information for which consumers are otherwise entitled by law to receive in paper or hardcopy form; 
(4)  If a law prohibits a transaction from occurring electronically, the transaction must occur in the manner specified by law; 
(5)  If a law requires an electronic signature to contain specific elements, the electronic signature must contain the elements specified by law; 
(6)  If a law requires that a record be retained, that requirement is satisfied by retaining an electronic record of the information in a record that accurately reflects the information set forth in the original record and shall remain accessible for later reference. When the requirements for retention require an original form, retention by an "electronic form" shall provide and satisfy the retention requirement. 
(b)  Procedures, forms, guidelines and resources for electronic signatures. 
(1)  Procedures for electronic signatures can be found under the Texas Uniform Electronic Transactions Act; 
(2)  United States governance can be found in 18 USC 2510 (Electronic Communications Privacy Act); 
(3)  Record management for the city is established by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code chs. 201 through 205. The state legislature requires local governments to establish a records program by ordinance; 
(4)  The city Charter mandates that the city secretary shall keep the records of the council and of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-003, § 36.14, 2-23-2017)  
SUBCHAPTER III. - SECURITY REQUIREMENTS OF TECHNOLOGY SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 36.20. - Confidentiality of information on technological devices. 
Information stored on any city-administered information technology system should be classified in accordance with federal, state and local statues, ordinances, regulations, and/or policies among other directives regarding the confidentiality of the information. Users shall take the necessary steps or follow the prescribed processes to prevent unauthorized access to confidential information. Unclassified information should not be released to non-city entities without authorization and approval by the city manager's office. Users must comply with all city directives regarding use of information technology, including: 
(1)  Electronic communications (email, voice and Internet); 
(2)  Password management; 
(3)  Security; 
(4)  Data management and classification; 
(5)  Monitoring; 
(6)  Remote access. 
(Ord. No. 2017-003, § 36.20, 2-23-2017)  
Sec. 36.21. - Protection from unauthorized access. 
(a)  All personal computers, laptops, and workstations should be protected from unauthorized access when the system is unattended. The recommended method of security for city devices is with a password-protected screensaver (with the automatic activation feature set to 15 minutes or less) or by manually locking the device (Ctrl-Alt-Delete for most Microsoft operating systems). Devices that cannot be locked as described above should be secured by logging off the devices or turning them off. 
(b)  For all other technological devices, users must take reasonable and necessary precautions to secure and protect such devices; this includes requiring a password for access to mobile phones and tablets. 
(c)  ITSD regularly maintains operating systems, updates security software, and applies security patches by sending those updates during non-business hours to computers attached to the network. When a user leaves for the day, he should log off from his computer, but should leave the computer turned on and attached to the network. If laptops are secured during non-business hours and are not connected to the network, it is possible that updates were sent; as such, users should work with their business owner to ensure updates to portable devices are installed in a timely manner. 
(d)  All technology devices used by a technology user to connect to the city's networks shall continually execute approved security software with a current virus definition file. This includes user-owned equipment attached to the city's networks through remote access technologies. The city is not responsible for providing the required security software for user-owned computers. 
(e)  Email attachments that may constitute a risk to the city's technology environment will be removed from email messages passing through the city's mail servers if possible. Removed attachments are replaced by a message indicating that they have been removed and the header and text of the original message delivered normally. 
(f)  A spam message filter is used to reduce the transmission of chain letters, broadcast announcements, general advertisement postings, or any other message via email to a group of persons not requesting the message. 
(Ord. No. 2017-003, § 36.21, 2-23-2017)  
Sec. 36.22. - Passwords. 
(a)  Generally. Passwords are an important element of the acceptable use of technology and associated information security. A poorly chosen password may result in the compromise of the city's network. All technology users are responsible for taking appropriate steps to select and secure passwords. Users shall take reasonable and necessary care to prevent unauthorized access to workstations, laptops, applications, mobile and/or other devices. No departmental personnel, including administrative staff, shall request access to or maintain lists of other user passwords. 
(b)  Password guidelines. 
(1)  Use of "strong" passwords. Strong passwords that are at least eight characters in length, are not based on words in any language, slang, dialect or jargon, are not based on personal information such as family names, use at least one each English uppercase (A through Z), lowercase (a through z), digit (0 to 9) and non-alphanumeric character (!, $, #, %), are not common usage words like family, pets, friends, "Floresville," birthdays, phone numbers, addresses, computer terms, fantasy characters and/or common patterns like aaabbb, qwerty, zyxwvuts, 123321 or any derivation followed by a digit. 
(2)  If ITSD deems required, all users' passwords will expire at intervals of 90 days. In the event that this occurs, ITSD will institute a policy where users will be prompted to change passwords beginning ten days before the next expiration date. Passwords may not be re-used. 
(3)  Passwords will be changed immediately after a security breach has been detected to the affected city systems. 
(4)  As the city system software permits, an initial or reset password issued to a user will be valid only for the user's next log in. After that, the user must be prompted to change their password. 
(c)  Password protection guidelines. 
(1)  Do not write passwords down, store them online, or reveal them in any electronic format. 
(2)  Do not use the same password for city accounts as for other accounts (i.e., social media, personal email account, banking sites, etc.). 
(3)  Passwords must be treated as sensitive and confidential information; thus, do not share city passwords with anyone. 
(4)  ITSD support personnel may require a user's password to resolve a problem; however, the user shall be present to enter the required password. 
(5)  Do not talk about a password in the presence of others. 
(6)  Do not hint at the format of a password ("my family name"). 
(7)  Do not click on links in emails from unknown sources and provide account information that includes personal information and/or password. 
(8)  Do not reveal a password on questionnaires or security forms. 
(9)  Do not use the "remember password" feature. 
(10)  Do not store passwords in a file on any computer system without encryption. 
(Ord. No. 2017-003, § 36.22, 2-23-2017)  
Sec. 36.23. - Reporting security breaches. 
Technology users shall report any suspected security violations or threat to the city manager and/or ITSD immediately. Any activity performed under a user ID/password combination is presumed to have been performed by that user and is the responsibility of that technology user. 
(Ord. No. 2017-003, § 36.23, 2-23-2017)  
SUBCHAPTER IV. - RECORDS RETENTION OF TECHNOLOGY SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 36.30. - Records retention of electronic records. 
(a)  The city's approved declaration of compliance with the local government records retention schedules establishes record series and the retention period for each series. It is the content and function of an email, text message, or any other electronic communication that determines the retention period for that message. All email, text messages, or other electronic communication sent or received by a government is considered a government record. Therefore, all emails, text messages, and other electronic communications must be retained and disposed of according to the city's retention requirements. Email systems must meet the retention requirement found in Tex. Admin. Code ch. 7, § 7.77. 
(b)  Users and their supervisors or sponsor should seek guidance from the city manager if there is a question concerning whether an electronic message should be deleted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-003, § 36.30, 2-23-2017)  
SUBCHAPTER V. - PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 36.40. - Penalties. 
Compliance with city administrative directives, security policies, and/or procedures is the responsibility of all city employees, contractors and/or other third parties. The city can temporarily or permanently suspend, block, and/or restrict access to information or physical assets, independent of such procedures, when it is reasonable and associated probable cause exists to do so in order to protect the confidentiality, integrity or availability of city resources as well as protect the city from liability, and/or to comply with applicable federal, state, and municipal laws, regulations, statutes, court orders, or other contractual obligations. Violations of any of portions of this chapter shall result in disciplinary actions in a manner as determined by the city manager. Disciplinary action may range from reprimand and loss of access privileges to suspension to separation of employment. Violations may also result in civil and/or criminal prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 2017-003, § 36.40, 2-23-2017)  
CHAPTER 37. - SOCIAL MEDIA USAGE POLICY  
SUBCHAPTER I. - APPLICATION OF POLICY 
 
Sec. 37.01. - Scope and purpose of policy. 
(a)  The purpose of the policy set forth in this chapter is to provide standards and procedures for the appropriate use of social media that is used in conducting city business. At present time this generally applies to the most popular sites, being Facebook, YouTube and Twitter; it is acknowledged that social media is an evolving communications tool and that new resources may become available over time. 
(b)  Except for posting to a city social media site, this chapter does not apply to use of social media by city employees that occurs on the employee's own time, or to use of social media that is not part of the employee's job. Such personal usage is covered under other applicable personnel policies and standards. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.01, 2-9-2017)  
Sec. 37.02. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City social media content means information posted or provided to a city social media site by a city employee (or authorized representative) when such activity is a part of the employee's job duties. 
City social media sites means those pages, sections or posting locations in social media websites that are established or maintained by an employee of the city who is authorized to do so as part of the employee's job, and that are used to conduct city business, communicate with officeholders or city staff, and/or communicate with or gather feedback from residents and other interested parties. 
Social media means a third-party website, desktop application, mobile application, or other form of technological communication which allows for the creation of content and dialogue around general content or a specific issue or area of interest. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.02, 2-9-2017)  
SUBCHAPTER II. - GENERAL GOVERNANCE OF SOCIAL MEDIA SITES 
 
Sec. 37.10. - General city approval of creation of social media sites. 
(a)  City social media sites may contain information that represents the city's position on policy issues and/or the positions of its leadership, or may create the appearance of representing such positions. For this reason, all city social media sites will be approved by the city manager in advance of creating the site. Those wishing to launch new city social media sites and/or pages should present his request to the city manager in writing with an explanation of why such site is necessary. All city social media sites are subject to review by the city council solely as applies to necessity of maintenance of such site. No city social media site will be approved without the designation of a specific departmental representative assigned responsibility for maintenance of the resource. 
(b)  The city manager or the city council may disable a city social media site or prohibit all posting of city social media content to a site at any time or for any reason, including, without limitation, any violation of any part of this chapter, unprofessional use of the resource, lack of use or disinterest by the public, or a department's failure to maintain the site. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.10, 2-9-2017)  
Sec. 37.11. - Consolidated city social media sites. 
Unless a specific case is made and approved for a separate account, city social media content posted on social media sites should be coordinated through the city's central social media sites. A separate account may be approved if there is a limited, defined interest group for the targeted information (such as for the FEDC, 4a, P&Z, etc.). If approved, these accounts must be set up to "follow" all other city social media sites, if possible, and a designated social media representative must be selected to coordinate postings with the city manager and his social media representatives. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.11, 2-9-2017)  
Sec. 37.12. - General posting procedures and management. 
Departments or programs should contact the city manager or his designated social media representatives to coordinate posts to the desired social media resource. To allow for after-hours or emergency use, login and password information for city social media sites shall be held by the city manager and his designated social media representatives. In the event of an emergency (water main break, disaster declaration, etc.), the city manager and his social media representative should be contacted as soon as possible to provide notice on city social media sites. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.12, 2-9-2017)  
Sec. 37.13. - Following of other accounts. 
City social media site accounts shall only follow, friend, or otherwise appear to support official governmental or educational Twitter accounts, or accounts owned by an organization with an official partnership or supportive business relationship with a city department or program. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.13, 2-9-2017)  
Sec. 37.14. - Login management. 
All city social media site login and password information, including those of boards and committees if authorized for separate social media accounts, will be shared with the city manager and his designated social media representatives. All login recovery emails must be official city email accounts. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.14, 2-9-2017)  
Sec. 37.15. - General conduct of employees managing social media sites. 
Employees creating or posting information to a city social media site must conduct themselves at all times as representatives of the city and in accordance with all relevant human resources policies and administrative bulletins. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.15, 2-9-2017)  
Sec. 37.16. - Scope and presentation of social media sites. 
(a)  City social media sites should be should be focused and limited in scope and topic, and should complement rather than replace the city's existing web resources. General "departmental" pages and associated content should be managed within the current city website. 
(b)  Information that is proprietary, attorney-client privileged, subject to state or federal privacy laws, and information not subject to disclosure under the Texas Public Information Act should not be posted on a city social media site. Any questions concerning this standard should be directed to the city manager. 
(c)  A clear statement of the intent, purpose and subject matter of the site, as well as a statement clearly articulating that all content and comments posted to the site are subject to public disclosure laws, should be clearly posted on any city social media site. 
(d)  All city social media sites shall clearly indicate the portion of the social media site that is maintained by the city and shall have appropriate city contact information prominently displayed. 
(e)  Links placed to a city social media site should link to a resource on http://www.floresvilletx.gov or other city-owned web site, a state, federal or local government site, an educational web site (.edu) or an organization with an official partnership or supportive business relationship with a city department or program. Exceptions to this rule will be at the discretion of the city manager, based on the relevance and appropriateness of the request. 
(f)  Design elements (logos, background, images) should be appropriate to the subject matter and consistent with the city's design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.16, 2-9-2017)  
Sec. 37.17. - Reporting security breaches. 
City social media site users shall report any suspected security violations or threat to the city manager immediately. Any social media activity performed on a social media site is presumed to have been performed by the city manager or his social media representatives, and responsibility for all posts lie with such individuals. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.17, 2-9-2017)  
Sec. 37.18. - Passwords. 
(a)  Generally. Passwords are an important element of the acceptable use of social media and associated information security. A poorly chosen password may result in the compromise of the city's social media sites and managing individuals shall take reasonable and necessary care to prevent unauthorized access to city social media sites. 
(b)  Mandatory password guidelines. 
(1)  Use of "strong" passwords is mandatory for city social media sites. Unless disallowed by the social media site, it shall be required that the following rules shall apply: At least eight characters in length, are not based on words in any language, slang, dialect or jargon, are not based on personal information such as family names, use at least one each English uppercase (A through Z), lowercase (a through z), digit (0 to 9) and non-alphanumeric character (!, $, #, %), are not common usage words like family, pets, friends, "Floresville," birthdays, phone numbers, addresses, computer terms, fantasy characters and/or common patterns like aaabbb, qwerty, zyxwvuts, 123321 or any derivation followed by a digit. 
(2)  Passwords will be changed immediately after a security breach has been detected to the affected city social media site; 
(3)  The same password shall not be used for multiple city social media site accounts; 
(4)  Passwords must be treated as sensitive and confidential information and only shared with individuals authorized by the city manager; 
(5)  Do not click on links in emails from unknown sources and provide account information that includes personal information and/or password; 
(6)  Do not reveal a password on questionnaires or security forms; 
(7)  Do not use the "remember password" feature; 
(8)  Do not store passwords in a file on any computer system without encryption. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.18, 2-9-2017)  
SUBCHAPTER III. - PUBLIC COMMENTS ON SOCIAL MEDIA 
 
Sec. 37.20. - Setup of city social media sites regarding public comment. 
City social media site accounts must be set up in a way that either maximizes public comments or completely limits the resource to organizational postings only. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.20, 2-9-2017)  
Sec. 37.21. - City social media sites open to the public. 
Membership to a city social media site should not be required in order for the public to post comments. If this is not possible, then a city email contact must be posted as an alternative for providing comments. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.21, 2-9-2017)  
Sec. 37.22. - Disclaimer required and limited curating of content. 
A city department that creates a city social media site that permits interactivity and comments should provide a disclaimer on the site that posted comments do not necessarily reflect the views or position of the city. Editing or deleting of public comments posted on an "open forum" by the city or department that maintains the site is permitted if, and only if, the comments: 
(1)  Clearly violate the site's terms of service; 
(2)  Contain information about city business or operations that is confidential and non-public; 
(3)  Would reasonably be considered pornographic, obscene, or defamatory in nature; 
(4)  Directly promote or advocate violence or the threat of violence; 
(5)  Promote or advocate discrimination based on race, creed, color, age, religion, gender, marital status, national origin, physical or mental disability, or sexual orientation; 
(6)  Are solicitations of commerce or promotion of private business enterprises; 
(7)  Contain or link to inappropriate sexual content; 
(8)  Encourage or promote illegal activity; 
(9)  Include information that may compromise the safety or security of the public or public systems; or 
(10)  Appear to violate the legal ownership interest of any other party. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.22, 2-9-2017)  
Sec. 37.23. - Solicitation of public media 
If photos, video, or other media are solicited through a city social media site, all submissions must be accepted and posted unless they fail to meet the guidelines as set forth in section 37.22. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.23, 2-9-2017)  
SUBCHAPTER IV. - STATE COMPLIANCE FOR SOCIAL MEDIA SITES 
 
Sec. 37.30. - Records retention of electronic records. 
The city's approved declaration of compliance with the local government records retention schedules establishes record series and the retention period for each series. Subject to these rules, all public comments and posted media files inclusive of any edited content must be archived and stored in accord with requirements of state and federal laws and city records retention policies. For city social media sites, the recommended course of action is to regularly (at least weekly) create a screenshot log of social media posts since the previous update. This recommended course of action may be superseded by another form of record retention that fulfills the requirements of retention of records. Prior to the removal of any postings on a city social media site, a screen shot or other archival record of the posting to be removed must be recorded. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.30, 2-9-2017)  
Sec. 37.31. - Open meetings interactions. 
Due to the potential for violations of V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 551 concerning open meetings requirements, individual members of the city council or any board subject to the Texas Open Meetings Act are prohibited from participating in postings or discussion threads on city social media sites created and maintained by the city. In addition, any use of city social media sites shall not serve as a replacement for postings and notifications required to be posted to city websites by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.31, 2-9-2017)  
SUBCHAPTER V. - PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 37.40. - Penalties. 
Compliance with city administrative directives, security policies, and/or procedures is the responsibility of all city officials, employees, contractors and/or other third parties. The city can temporarily or permanently suspend, block, and/or restrict access to information or physical assets, independent of such procedures, when it is reasonable and associated probable cause exists to do so in order to protect the confidentiality, integrity or availability of city resources as well as protect the city from liability, and/or to comply with applicable federal, state, and municipal laws, regulations, statutes, court orders, or other contractual obligations. Violations of any of portions of this chapter shall result in disciplinary actions in a manner as determined by the city manager. Disciplinary action may range from reprimand and loss of access privileges to suspension to separation of employment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 37.40, 2-9-2017)  
CHAPTER 38. - ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
 
Sec. 38.01. - Created; composition; term, removal of members; filling of vacancies. 
There is hereby created and established a zoning board of adjustment, which shall consist of five members to be appointed by the city council. Such members shall serve for two-year staggered terms. The city council shall also appoint two alternate members of the zoning board of adjustment, any of which shall serve in the absence of one of the regular members when requested to do so by the city manager or the city manager's designee. The alternate members shall serve for two-year staggered terms. Both regular and alternate members may be removed from office for cause by the city council upon written charges and after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member or alternate member whose term becomes vacant. All cases to be heard by the zoning board of adjustment shall always be heard by a minimum number of four members. 
(Ord. No. 2017-027, § II(1), 11-9-2017)  
Sec. 38.02. - Officers; compensation. 
(a)  The zoning board of adjustment shall meet and organize as soon as practicable and shall elect one of its members as chairperson. Such chairperson, or in his absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(b)  The zoning board of adjustment shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-027, § II(2), 11-9-2017)  
Sec. 38.03. - Rules and meetings. 
The zoning board of adjustment shall adopt rules of procedure in accordance with the provisions of the city Charter and the city's ordinances not inconsistent with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008 et seq. Meetings of the zoning board of adjustment shall be at such times as the zoning board of adjustment may determine. All meetings of the zoning board of adjustment shall be held in compliance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. The zoning board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city secretary and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 2017-027, § II(3), 11-9-2017)  
Sec. 38.04. - Authority. 
(a)  The zoning board of adjustment may: 
(1)  Hear and decide an appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter or an ordinance adopted under this chapter; 
(2)  Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of a zoning ordinance when the ordinance requires the board to do so; 
(3)  Authorize in specific cases a variance from the terms of a zoning ordinance if the variance is not contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the ordinance is observed and substantial justice is done; and 
(4)  Hear and decide other matters authorized by an ordinance adopted under the city's zoning regulations. 
(b)  In exercising its authority under subsection (a)(1) of this section, the board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or determination, and for that purpose the board has the same authority as the administrative official. 
(c)  The concurring vote of 75 percent of the members of the board is necessary to: 
(1)  Reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official; 
(2)  Decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the board is required to pass under a zoning ordinance; or 
(3)  Authorize a variation from the terms of a zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-027, § II(4), 11-9-2017)  
Sec. 38.05. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any of the following persons may appeal to the zoning board of adjustment a decision made by an administrative official under the city's zoning regulations: 
(1)  A person aggrieved by the decision; or 
(2)  Any officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality affected by the decision. 
(b)  The appellant must file with the board and the official from whom the appeal is taken a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The appeal must be filed within a reasonable time as determined by the rules of the board. On receiving the notice, the official from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record of the action that is appealed. 
(c)  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action that is appealed unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certifies in writing to the board facts supporting the official's opinion that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, the proceedings may be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the board or a court of record on application, after notice to the official, if due cause is shown. 
(d)  The board shall set a reasonable time for the appeal hearing and shall give public notice of the hearing and due notice to the parties in interest. A party may appear at the appeal hearing in person or by agent or attorney. The board shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-027, § II(5), 11-9-2017)  
Sec. 38.06. - Special exceptions and variances. 
(a)  All applications for special exceptions shall be in writing and shall specify the facts involved, the relief desired, the provision this Code authorizing the special exception, and the grounds therefor. 
(b)  Each such application shall be filed with the community development department which, after investigation, shall transmit such application together with their report to the zoning board of adjustment within 15 business days after the filing of the application with the administrative officer. A fee, as specified on the schedule of fees on file in the office of the city secretary, must accompany all applications for said special exceptions and variances. 
(c)  The zoning board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of all applications for special exceptions and variances, give due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by an agent or by attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2017-027, § II(6), 11-9-2017)  
Sec. 38.07. - Limitation on special exceptions and variances. 
Any special exception or variance authorized by the zoning board of adjustment shall constitute authority to authorize the issuance of a zoning permit or a certificate of occupancy, as the case may be, if applied for within 120 days from the date of favorable action on the part of the zoning board of adjustment, unless such zoning board of adjustment authorizes a longer period. If the zoning permit or certificate of occupancy shall not have been applied for within such 120 days, or such extended period as the zoning board of adjustment may have authorized, then the grant of the special exception or variance shall terminate. Such termination shall be without prejudice to a subsequent application to the zoning board of adjustment in accordance with the rules and regulations regarding applications. No application to the zoning board of adjustment shall be allowed on the same piece of property prior to the expiration of six months from a ruling of the zoning board of adjustment on any application to such body unless other property in the same block or within 500 feet thereof, within such six-month period, has been altered or changed by a ruling of the zoning board of adjustment, in which case such change of circumstances shall permit the allowance of such an application but shall in nowise have any force in law to compel the zoning board of adjustment, after a hearing, to grant such subsequent application, but such application shall be considered on its merits as in all other cases. 
(Ord. No. 2017-027, § II(8), 11-9-2017)  
Sec. 38.08. - Appeals. 
Any person, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the zoning board of adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the city, may present to a court of record a petition for a writ of certiorari, as provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.011, duly verified setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing of the decision in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2017-027, § II(9), 11-9-2017)  
Sec. 38.09. - Enforcement; remedies. 
If a building or other structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained or if a building, other structure, or land is used in violation of this chapter, the city attorney, upon approval by the city council, in addition to other remedies, may institute appropriate action to: 
(1)  Prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use; 
(2)  Restrain, correct, or abate the violation; 
(3)  Prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or land; or 
(4)  Prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use on or about the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2017-027, § II(10), 11-9-2017)  
Title V - PUBLIC WORKS  
CHAPTER 50. - PUBLIC UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Public utilities, § 2.06; sales of electricity, water and sewer services, § 2.15; franchise and public utilities, § X. 
State Law reference— Municipal utility systems, general powers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 551 et seq. 
 
SUBCHAPTER I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 50.01. - Utility easements. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Utility easement means an interest in land granted to the city for installing and maintaining utilities across, over, or under private land together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and other vehicles necessary for the maintenance of said utilities. 
(b)  If the owner of the property upon which the utility easement is located desires to use it for lawn purposes, fencing across the easement shall be permitted, but gates along the side lot lines must be provided. The gates shall be 15 feet wide (two seven-foot gates) and shall be capable of being opened and closed at all times. These gates shall be secured in the center by a drop rod or some similar device which does not obstruct free passage over the easement. The drop rod may be lowered into a drop rod keeper, installed so as to be flush with the ground level. No permanent-type center pole for the gates may be erected on the easement. The gates provided for herein shall remain unlocked at all times. 
(c)  Maintenance of the easement shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property upon which it is located. It shall be the duty of the property owner to keep the area across, over, or under this easement clear of any structure, debris, vegetation, trees, shrubs, or landscaping whatsoever except that lawn grass which shall be regularly mowed and controlled may be grown thereon. 
(Code 1996, § 50.01; Ord. No. 0009, 2-4-1971)  
SUBCHAPTER II. - UTILITY BILLING PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 50.15. - Method of billing. 
It is hereby provided that monthly charges for water service, sewer service, and garbage disposal service shall be made to each customer therefor on one monthly statement. Such statement shall show the monthly charge for each service separately and the total for all three services combined, together with any other pertinent data in line with existing practice. 
(Code 1996, § 50.15; Ord. No. 0049, 9-3-1970)  
Sec. 50.16. - Payment procedure; delinquency; discontinuance of water service. 
(a)  It is hereby provided that each customer shall be required to pay the total charge for all three said services for each month for which the customer is billed, and that no payment less than the full amount due for all three said services for each of such months, as shown by each of such statements shall be accepted by the city. Failure to pay the full total due as shown on each such statement, shall constitute a delinquent account and constitute an express refusal to pay for each of said three services, whether considered separately or collectively. 
(b)  All such combined statements of account shall be payable on the first day of each calendar month for the charges for such three services for the preceding billing month. No discounts shall be allowed after the tenth day of the month in which such statement is rendered. Water services shall be discontinued to any connection on which the full combined statement shall not have been paid on or before the 20th day of the month in which such statement was rendered, in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 50.17. 
(Code 1996, § 50.16; Ord. No. 0049, 9-3-1970)  
Sec. 50.17. - Disconnection for late payment. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's form for application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address, room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect: 
(1)  That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on the bill; 
(2)  That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for nonpayment; and 
(3)  That any customer disputing the correctness of his bill shall have a right to a hearing at which time he may be represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present orally or in writing his complaint and contentions to the city official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that the customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final determination of the customer's complaint. 
(b)  Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days. 
(c)  When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on charge in the sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance of the city council from time to time, and kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, § 50.17)  
CHAPTER 51. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Garbage disposal, § 2.08. 
State Law reference— Minimum standards of sanitation and health protection measures, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 341; local regulation of sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 342; Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 361; municipal solid waste, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 363; litter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 365. 
 
Sec. 51.01. - Franchise. 
The full text of the franchise agreement for solid waste collection and/or contract for solid waste collection and disposal is available in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2017-012, § 51.01, 7-13-2017)  
Sec. 51.02. - Mandatory service. 
All residents, including businesses, are required to use the solid waste collection services of the franchisee approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-012, § 51.02, 7-13-2017)  
Sec. 51.03. - Enforcement. 
The franchisee may enforce such terms and conditions of the franchise agreement for solid waste collection and/or contract for solid waste collection and disposal, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-012, § 51.03, 7-13-2017)  
Sec. 51.04. - Service and fees. 
Service schedule and fees for the provision of solid waste collection shall be in accordance with the franchise agreement for solid waste collection and/or contract for solid waste collection and disposal, as may be amended from time to time, and available in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2017-012, § 51.04, 7-13-2017)  
Sec. 51.05. - Temporary roll-off and industrial provision and franchise fee. 
All temporary roll-off waste bins are required to be provided and serviced by the solid waste collection services of the franchisee approved by the city. A franchise fee of five percent shall be remitted from the franchisee to the city in a manner established in the franchise agreement for solid waste collection and/or contract for solid waste collection and disposal, as may be amended from time to time, and available in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2017-012, § 51.05, 7-13-2017)  
CHAPTER 52. - SEWER REGULATIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal power regarding sewers and privies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.002. 
 
SUBCHAPTER I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 52.01. - Connecting materials to sanitary sewer system; requirements. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City sanitary sewer means the city's existing system. 
Inspector means anyone authorized by the city to inspect. 
Installer means a plumber connecting the system. 
(b)  Materials. The following materials may be used: 
(1)  PVC (four inches or larger) (schedule 40, or SDR 35). 
(2)  Vitrified clay (four inches or larger). 
(3)  Any other materials must be approved by a city inspector before being installed. 
(c)  Inspection. 
(1)  The ditch must be left open until inspected. 
(2)  All connections must meet National Code Standards. 
(d)  Irregularities. The installer may be required to remove all materials if irregularities occur. 
(Code 1996, § 52.01; Ord. No. 0051, 8-27-1974)  
Sec. 52.02. - Monthly sewer rates. 
The monthly wastewater (sewer) rates for all connections within and outside the corporate limits of the city shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance of the city council from time to time, and kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, § 52.02; Ord. No. 111, 9-12-1991; Ord. No. 118, 9-10-1992; Ord. No. 125, 9-8-1994; Ord. No. 146, 12-12-1996; Ord. No. 147, 1-23-1997; Ord. No. 186, 9-13-2001; Ord. No. 208, 9-11-2003; Ord. No. 224, 10-13-2005; Ord. No. 269, 8-31-2009; Ord. No. 2013-004, § II, 4-25-2013; Ord. No. 2014-004, § II, 3-27-2014; Ord. No. 2014-013, § I, 8-28-2014; Ord. No. 2015-032, 1-14-2016)  
Sec. 52.03. - Sewer connection charges. 
The sewer connection charge for all connections within the corporate limits of the city shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance of the city council from time to time, and kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, § 52.03; Ord. No. 124-A, 9-8-1994; Ord. No. 230, 7-13-2006)  
SUBCHAPTER II. - DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE 
 
Sec. 52.15. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approving authority means the city council or their duly authorized representative. 
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20 degrees Celsius. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, (also called house lateral and house connection). 
City means the City of Floresville, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf. 
COD (chemical oxygen demand). Measure of oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Control point means a point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Garbage means solid waste that is putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce and other food products. 
Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater. 
Industrial waste charge means the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewerage system. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Normal domestic wastewater means wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 250 mg/l and BOD is not more than 250 mg/l. 
Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
pH means the reciprocal of the logarithm (base ten) of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in grams per liter. 
Public sewer means a pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the city. 
Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Storm sewer means a public sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Stormwater means rainfall or any other forms of precipitation. 
Superintendent means the water and wastewater superintendent of the city, or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
Suspended solids means solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
To discharge means to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
Trap means a device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
Unpolluted wastewater means water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease or oil. 
(2)  No acids or alkalis. 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water. 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution. 
(5)  No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases. 
(6)  Not more than ten mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD. 
(7)  Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the Platinum-Cobalt method of determination as specified in Standard Methods. 
Waste means rejected, unutilized, or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural, or industrial activities. 
Wastewater means a combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities means and includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
Wastewater service charge means the charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater. 
Wastewater treatment plant means any city-owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing, and treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewers. 
Watercourse means a natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1996, § 52.15; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.16. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities. 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals. 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  All discharges shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 52.16; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.17. - Chemical discharges. 
(a)  No discharge to public sewers may contain: 
(1)  Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l. 
(2)  Fluoride greater than that contained in the public water supply. 
(3)  Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l. 
(4)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(5)  Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (COD). 
(b)  No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain: 
(1)  Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
(2)  Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0—65 degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials. 
(4)  Obnoxious, toxic, or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of section 52.16(a). 
(c)  No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel at the wastewater facilities. 
(d)  All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste- and odor-producing substances, shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters. 
(Code 1996, § 52.17; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.18. - Heavy metals and toxic materials. 
(a)  No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals stated in terms of mg/l, determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with standard methods are: 
(1)  Arsenic: 0.05 mg/l. 
(2)  Barium: 5.0 mg/l. 
(3)  Boron: 1.0 mg/l. 
(4)  Cadmium: 0.02 mg/l. 
(5)  Chromium (total): 5.0 mg/l. 
(6)  Copper: 1.0 mg/l. 
(7)  Lead: 0.1 mg/l. 
(8)  Manganese: 1.0 mg/l. 
(9)  Mercury: 0.005 mg/l. 
(10)  Nickel: 1.0 mg/l. 
(11)  Selenium: 0.02 mg/l. 
(12)  Silver: 0.1 mg/l. 
(13)  Zinc: 5.0 mg/l. 
(c)  No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable provisions. 
(d)  Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Antimony. 
(2)  Beryllium. 
(3)  Bismuth. 
(4)  Cobalt. 
(5)  Molybdenum. 
(6)  Tin. 
(7)  Uranyl ion. 
(8)  Rhenium. 
(9)  Strontium. 
(10)  Tellurium. 
(11)  Herbicides. 
(12)  Fungicides. 
(13)  Pesticides. 
(Code 1996, § 52.18; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.19. - Discharge of garbage. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. 
(b)  Particles greater than two inches in any dimension are prohibited. 
(c)  The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater. 
(Code 1996, § 52.19; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.20. - Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers: 
(1)  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, or subsurface drainage. 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water. 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process waters. 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage. 
(b)  In compliance with V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.001 et seq. and other statutes, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged. 
(Code 1996, § 52.20; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.21. - Temperature. 
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature more than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1996, § 52.21; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.22. - Radioactive wastes. 
(a)  No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving authority. 
(b)  The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. 
(Code 1996, § 52.22; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.23. - Impairment of facilities. 
(a)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstruction to the flow in sewers. 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities. 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, materials which exert or cause concentrations of: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Fuller's earth. 
b.  Lime slurries. 
c.  Lime residues. 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than 1,000 mg/l, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Sodium chloride. 
b.  Sodium sulfate. 
(3)  Excessive discoloration, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Dye wastes. 
b.  Vegetable tanning solutions. 
(4)  BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(c)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewer. 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease handling equipment. 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action. 
(4)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which: 
(1)  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed. 
(2)  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process. 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities. 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater. 
(4)  Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
(f)  No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Ashes. 
(2)  Cinders. 
(3)  Sand. 
(4)  Mud. 
(5)  Straw. 
(6)  Shavings. 
(7)  Metal. 
(8)  Glass. 
(9)  Rags. 
(10)  Feathers. 
(11)  Tar. 
(12)  Plastics. 
(13)  Wood. 
(14)  Unground garbage. 
(15)  Whole blood. 
(16)  Paunch manure. 
(17)  Hair and fleshings. 
(18)  Entrails. 
(19)  Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(20)  Slops. 
(21)  Chemical residues. 
(22)  Paint residues. 
(23)  Bulk solids. 
(Code 1996, § 52.23; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.24. - Compliance with existing authority. 
(a)  Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging: 
(1)  Wastewater. 
(2)  Industrial waste. 
(3)  Polluted liquids. 
(4)  Unpolluted waters or liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the relevant state authority, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property in or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet. 
(2)  Watercourse. 
(3)  Storm sewer. 
(4)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of the laws, regulations, ordinances, rules, and orders of federal, state, and local governments. 
(Code 1996, § 52.24; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.25. - Approving authority requirements. 
(a)  If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may: deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters; create a hazard to life or health; or, create a public nuisance, the approving authority shall require: 
(1)  Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers. 
(2)  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
(3)  Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The approving authority shall reject wastes when: 
(1)  It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  The discharger does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1996, § 52.25; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.26. - Approving authority review and approval. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and installation of equipment and processes. 
(b)  The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances, and other laws. 
(c)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalizing, or other facilities, shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense. 
(Code 1996, § 52.26; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.27. - Requirements for traps. 
(a)  Discharges requiring a trap include: 
(1)  Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts. 
(2)  Oil. 
(3)  Sand. 
(4)  Flammable wastes. 
(5)  Other harmful ingredients. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring traps shall at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority. 
(2)  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection. 
(3)  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
(Code 1996, § 52.27; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.28. - Requirements for building sewers. 
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible and safely located control manhole. 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation sampling and measurement of the waste. 
(3)  Maintain the equipment and facilities. 
(Code 1996, § 52.28; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.29. - Sampling and testing. 
(a)  Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property. (Note: The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite sample from all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls. Where applicable, 16-hour, eight-hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH.) 
(b)  Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this subchapter shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods. 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority. 
(c)  BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling. 
(d)  The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD, and suspended solids. 
(e)  The city is entitled to select the time of sampling at its sole discretion so long as at least annual samples are taken. 
(Code 1996, § 52.29; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.30. - Payment and agreement required. 
(a)  Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to cover the cost of collection and treatment. 
(b)  When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving authority, the city or its authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing: 
(1)  Terms of acceptance by the city; and 
(2)  Payment by the person making the discharge. 
(Code 1996, § 52.30; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.31. - Industrial waste charge and added costs. 
(a)  If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city does not cause overloading of the sewage collection, treatment, or disposal facilities of the city, then prior to approval, the city and the person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay an industrial waste charge to be determined from the schedule of charges. 
(b)  If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city requires that wastewater collection, treatment, or other disposal facilities of the city be improved, expanded, or enlarged in order to treat the waste, then prior to approval, the city and the person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay in full all added costs the city may incur due to acceptance of the waste. 
(c)  The agreement entered into pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Amortization of all capital outlay for collecting and treating the waste, including new capital outlay and the proportionate part of the value of the existing system used in handling and treating the waste; 
(2)  Operation and maintenance costs, including salaries and wages, power costs, costs of chemicals and supplies, proper allowances for maintenance, depreciation, over-head, and office expense; and 
(3)  Amortization shall be completed in a 20-year period and payment shall include all debt service costs. 
(Code 1996, § 52.31; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.32. - Schedule of charges. 
Industrial waste charges shall be calculated by the following formula: 
Ci = 46.555 V + 0.0333 B + 0.0175 S 
Ci = Charge to industrial user 
V = Volume of waste from industrial user (mg/year) 
B = Amount of BOD from industrial user (lbs./year) 
S = Amount of S.S. from industrial user (lbs./year) 
(Code 1996, § 52.32; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.33. - Adjustment of charges; billing procedure. 
(a)  The city shall adjust charges at least annually to reflect changes in the characteristics of wastewater based on the results of sampling and testing. 
(b)  Increases in charges shall be retroactive for two billing periods and shall continue for six billing periods unless subsequent tests determine that the charge should be further increased. 
(c)  The city shall review at least annually the basis for determining charges and shall adjust the unit treatment cost in the formula to reflect increases or decreases in wastewater treatment costs based on the previous years' experience. 
(d)  The city shall bill the discharger by the month and shall show industrial waste charges as a separate item on the regular bill for water and sewer charges. The discharger shall pay monthly in accordance with practices existing for payment of sewer charges. 
(Code 1996, § 52.33; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.34. - Failure to pay. 
In addition to sanctions provided for this subchapter, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
(Code 1996, § 52.34; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.35. - Conditions of permits. 
(a)  The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all requirements of this subchapter, provided that the person: 
(1)  Submits an application within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived on forms supplied by the approving authority. 
(2)  Secures approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for pretreatment facilities when required. 
(3)  Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Payment of charges. 
b.  Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities. 
c.  Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength. 
(4)  Provides a sampling point subject to the provisions of this subchapter and approval of the approving authority. 
(b)  A person applying for a new discharge shall: 
(1)  Meet all conditions of subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste. 
(Code 1996, § 52.36; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.36. - Power to enter property. 
(a)  The superintendent and the other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this subchapter. 
(b)  Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire protection. 
(c)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the sampling operation. 
(d)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purposes of: 
(1)  Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, or repair. 
(2)  Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements. 
(3)  Conducting any other authorized activity. 
(e)  No person acting under the authority of this provision may inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers. 
(Code 1996, § 52.37; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.37. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect an industrial customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment processes are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater. 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment. 
(3)  The industrial customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority. 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system. 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due. 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers. 
(b)  If service is disconnected pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the city shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer. 
(2)  Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information. 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer provides the additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from his industrial wastes. 
(Code 1996, § 52.38; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.38. - Notice of violations. 
The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this subchapter with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. 
(Code 1996, § 52.39; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.39. - Continuing prohibited discharges. 
No person may continue discharging in violation of this subchapter beyond the time limit provided in the notice. 
(Code 1996, § 52.40; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975)  
Sec. 52.40. - Tampering with public sewers or treatment facilities. 
The city may pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under the authority of statutes and ordinances against a person negligently, willfully, or maliciously causing loss by tampering with or destroying public sewers or treatment facilities. 
(Code 1996, § 52.41; Ord. No. 0048, 2-3-1975) 
State Law reference— Criminal mischief, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.03.  
CHAPTER 53. - WATER[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— V.T.C.A., Water Code ch. 1 et seq.; water systems in home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 552.017. 
 
SUBCHAPTER I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 53.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air gap (in a water supply system) means the unobstructed vertical atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood-level rim of the receptacle. 
Backflow means the reverse flow (by gravity) of water in a water distribution system. 
Backflow preventer means a device or means to prevent backflow into the potable water system. 
Back-siphonage means the reverse flow (induced by siphonage) of water in a water distribution system. 
Cross-connection means a physical connection or other arrangement through which a potable water system may be contaminated by back siphonage or backflow. 
Meter means the instrument installed to measure the volume of water delivered through it. 
Pool means a water receptacle used for swimming or as a plunge or other bath, designed to accommodate more than one bather at a time. 
Potable water means water which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes, and meets the requirements of the health authority having jurisdiction. 
Water main means the street main that is a water-supply pipe for public or community use. 
Water-service pipe means the pipe from the water main or other source of water supply to the building served. 
(Code 1996, § 53.01; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
Sec. 53.02. - Furnishing water by city; scope. 
In the sale of water by the city to any person within and without the city, and in the supply of water for municipal use for the protection of property against fires, the city does not agree, nor is the city bound, to furnish water of any special or specific analysis, and the amount of water may be supplied from the wells of the city, or such other sources as the city may select, and in an amount within the capacity of the source and the city's pumping plants. 
(Code 1996, § 53.02; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
Sec. 53.03. - Compliance with rules required. 
The city shall not furnish water to any person unless such person has complied with all the rules and regulations of the city water system, and if any patron of the city water system violates any of such rules and regulations, the city shall shut off the water from the premises of such violator, and the violator shall forfeit the unexpired term for which such violator has paid rent. 
(Code 1996, § 53.03; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
Sec. 53.04. - City not liable for failure of water supply. 
In the event of accident by reason of which the city may become unable to supply water to the patrons of the city, within or without the city, or to the municipality for the prevention or suppression of fire, the city will in no manner be liable for damage by reason of any failure of the water system to supply water to any patron of the water system, or to any person whose property may have been destroyed by fire or otherwise damaged. 
(Code 1996, § 53.04; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
Sec. 53.05. - Tampering with system prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, injure, or deface any hydrants, stop cocks, stand-pipes, or other city water system fixtures, or use or take from the city water system any water except in accordance with the rules and regulations governing such system, or use or injure any water pipe, or any other property whatsoever belonging to the city water system, except as permitted by the regulations of the city council. Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fee as set by the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1996, § 53.05; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971) 
State Law reference— Criminal mischief, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.03.  
Sec. 53.06. - Drought contingency plan. 
The city's drought contingency plan is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out herein as the official policy of the city. The full text of the plan is available in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, § 53.06; Ord. No. 176, 8-24-2000)  
SUBCHAPTER II. - CONNECTIONS AND EQUIPMENT 
 
Sec. 53.15. - Unauthorized reconnection prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or property owner to connect to city water or to reconnect after service has been discontinued without first obtaining permission from the city water and sewer department. 
(Code 1996, § 53.15; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
Sec. 53.16. - Cross-connections with other sources. 
Cross-connections between piping receiving water from city water mains and piping receiving water from any other source or storage is positively forbidden, and the city reserves the right, when it discovers the existence of any such cross-connection, to immediately and without further notice disconnect the service connecting such piping with the city mains. Potable water supply piping, water discharge outlets, backflow prevention devices, or similar equipment shall not be located so as to make possible their submergence in any contaminated or polluted liquid or substance. 
(Code 1996, § 53.16; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
Sec. 53.17. - Flush valves. 
Flush valves shall be equipped with an approved vacuum breaker. The vacuum breaker shall be installed on the discharge side of the flush valve with the critical level at least four inches above the overflow rim of the bowl. 
(Code 1996, § 53.17; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
Sec. 53.18. - Flushing tanks. 
Flushing tanks shall be equipped with an approved ball-cock. The ball-cock shall be installed with the critical level of the vacuum breaker at least one inch above the full opening of the overflow pipe. In cases where the ball-cock has no hush tube, the bottom of the water supply inlet shall be installed one inch above the full opening of the overflow pipe. 
(Code 1996, § 53.18; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
Sec. 53.19. - Lawn sprinklers. 
Lawn sprinkler systems shall be equipped with an approved vacuum breaker on the discharge side of each of the last valves. The vacuum breaker shall be at least six inches above the highest head, and at no time less than six inches above the surrounding ground. Where the combination control valves and backflow preventers are installed, the bottom of the valve shall constitute the bottom of the backflow preventer. 
(Code 1996, § 53.19; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
Sec. 53.20. - Fixtures with hose attachments. 
Fixtures with hose attachments shall be protected by an approved vacuum breaker installed six inches above the highest point of usage and on the discharge side of the valve. 
(Code 1996, § 53.20; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
Sec. 53.21. - Backflow prevention; provision of air gap. 
The water distribution system shall be protected against backflow. Every water outlet shall be protected from backflow where possible, by having the discharge end elevated to provide a minimum required air gap. 
(Code 1996, § 53.21; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
Sec. 53.22. - Unauthorized taps prohibited. 
No plumber or other person except the city water department superintendent, or other persons acting under the direction of the city council, shall be allowed to tap any city water main or any service pipe. 
(Code 1996, § 53.22; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
Sec. 53.23. - Stops in service line. 
The city water department shall cause to be placed in each service line, a stop. All stops as aforesaid shall be for the exclusive use of the city and shall be under the exclusive control of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 53.23; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
SUBCHAPTER III. - METERS 
 
Sec. 53.35. - Installation. 
There will be a service charge as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for installation of meters to all new customers where water service exists. No meter installation charge will be made for new water services. 
(Code 1996, § 53.35; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
Sec. 53.36. - Charges estimated when access denied. 
If a meter reader is, in the opinion of the city water department, unable to procure the reading of the meter owing to the buildings being locked or vacant or the occupant not permitting entrance, or the entrance to the premises is made precarious by a vicious dog or otherwise, or easy access to the meter is obstructed in any manner whatsoever, the charges may be estimated for the amount not to exceed double the normal charge, and it is further provided that in case the consumer does not remedy the condition and should he further refuse to pay the estimated bill, the city water department shall have the right to discontinue service without further notice, and service shall not be resumed until the conditions complained of have been remedied and all charges for water service and reconnection charges have been paid. 
(Code 1996, § 53.36; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
Sec. 53.37. - Required for service. 
Water from the city water system shall be sold and delivered by the city through its mains only to patrons at whose premises water meters are installed, from water meter readings, and water meter computations only. 
(Code 1996, § 53.37; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
Sec. 53.38. - Separate meters. 
(a)  For any service hereafter installed each individual residence or building making connections with the city water system shall have a separate meter, and no new connection shall be made by the city unless such individual residence or building is separately metered. Exceptions to this will be pre-existing conditions and/or connections previously made prior to August 25, 1988. 
(b)  Each meter installed at any premises shall constitute a separate service and must be paid for as such. 
(Code 1996, § 53.38; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971; Ord. No. 0089, 8-25-1988)  
Sec. 53.39. - Multiple use of meter in existing building. 
In existing cases where more than one building is served by a single meter, the entire amount of water consumed and registered through such meter, shall be billed to the building nearest the meter and shall include an additional minimum for each and every other building served by such meter and such procedure shall continue until such buildings are separately metered. All such buildings will have separate meters and will be installed at the city's convenience. 
(Code 1996, § 53.39; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
SUBCHAPTER IV. - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 53.50. - Rates. 
The monthly water rates in effect for all connections inside and outside of the corporate limits of the city, the water meter connection charges, the bulk water rates, the water transfer and cut-in charges, and the fire hydrant charges shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance of the city council from time to time, and kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, § 53.50; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971; Ord. No. 99, 12-14-1989; Ord. No. 117, 9-10-1992; Ord. No. 124-A, 9-8-1994; Ord. No. 199, 9-12-2002; Ord. No. 217, 9-23-2004; Ord. No. 220, 5-17-2005; Ord. No. 230, 7-13-2006; Ord. No. 247, 8-23-2007; Ord. No. 269, 8-31-2009; Ord. No. 2013-004, § I, 4-25-2013; Ord. No. 2014-004, § I, 3-27-2014)  
Sec. 53.51. - Payment procedure; discontinuance of service; charge for restoring service. 
(a)  All accounts shall be payable on the first day of each month at the city hall. No discount will be allowed after the tenth day of the month following the date of the statement. Services will be discontinued to any connection on which the statement shall not have been paid on or before the 20th day of the month following the date of the statement, in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 50.17. 
(b)  Minimum water rents shall be due and payable monthly in advance, together with any charge for water in excess of the minimum for the preceding month. Such rents and charges shall be due on the dates indicated on the patron's bill. If such rents and charges are not paid within 20 days after the indicated due and payable date, the water shall be cut off without further notice and shall not be restored until the rents and charges are paid and an additional sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance of the city council from time to time, and kept on file in the office of the city secretary, for restoring such service has been paid. 
(Code 1996, § 53.51; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
Sec. 53.52. - Failure to receive bill not excuse for nonpayment. 
Failure of any patron to receive a bill for water used shall be no excuse for nonpayment and shall in no way operate to extend the disconnect period provided for in this subchapter. 
(Code 1996, § 53.52; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
SUBCHAPTER V. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 53.65. - Right of entry of officers; shut off water for repair. 
Every patron of the city water system agrees by requesting city water service, that the city water superintendent, or anyone acting under the direction of the city council, shall at reasonable times be permitted to enter any premises or building in which water is used. It is expressly agreed and must be understood that the city reserves the right at any time to shut off the water in the mains for the purpose of repairing the same, making connections or extensions to the same, and for cleaning same, and in so doing the city shall not be liable in any manner for damages. 
(Code 1996, § 53.65; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
Sec. 53.66. - Deposit and disbursement of receipts. 
All receipts from the city water system shall be paid into the treasury of the city, such receipts to be disbursed by the city council in such manner as the city council may direct. 
(Code 1996, § 53.66; Ord. No. 0050, 7-1-1971)  
SUBCHAPTER VI. - WELLS 
 
Sec. 53.80. - Purpose. 
(a)  This subchapter sets forth uniform requirements for the uses and the construction of facilities in or on land within 150 feet of the city water wells in order to promote sanitary conditions in and around such wells, to secure all such land from pollution hazards and to enable the city to comply with all applicable state and local regulations. 
(b)  The objective of this subchapter is to prevent certain uses and the construction of facilities in or on land surrounding the city water wells which might create a danger of pollution to the water produced from such wells. 
(Code 1996, § 53.80; Ord. No. 201, 2-13-2003)  
Sec. 53.81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Wells means the water wells owned and operated by the city, which are more specifically identified and described in exhibit A attached to the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived and incorporated herein by reference and kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, § 53.81; Ord. No. 201, 2-13-2003)  
Sec. 53.82. - Prohibited activities. 
The following activities are prohibited within the designated areas of land surrounding the city water wells: 
(1)  Construction and/or operation of underground petroleum and/or chemical storage tanks and liquid transmission pipelines, stock pens, feedlots, dump grounds, privies, cesspools, septic tanks, sewage treatment drainfields, absorption beds, evapotranspiration beds, improperly constructed water wells of any depth, and all other construction or operation that would create an unsanitary condition is prohibited within, upon, or across all areas of land within a 150-foot radius of the city water wells. For the purpose of this subchapter, the term "improperly constructed water wells" means those wells that do not meet the surface and subsurface construction standards for a public water supply well. 
(2)  Construction of tile or concrete sanitary sewers, sewer appurtenances, septic tanks, storm sewers and cemeteries is specifically prohibited within, upon, or across any area of land within a 50-foot radius of the city water wells. 
(3)  Construction of homes or buildings upon any area of land within a 150-foot radius of the city water wells is permitted, provided the restrictions described in subsections (1) and (2) of this section are met. 
(4)  Normal farming and ranching operations are not prohibited by this subchapter; provided, however, livestock shall not be allowed within a 50-foot radius of the wells. 
(Code 1996, § 53.82; Ord. No. 201, 2-13-2003)  
Sec. 53.83. - Right of entry. 
City employees, or authorized representatives of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to immediately enter upon any premises located within a 150-foot radius of any city water well to conduct any inspection or observation necessary to enforce this subchapter. 
(Code 1996, § 53.83; Ord. No. 201, 2-13-2003)  
Title VII - TRAFFIC CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 1 et seq.; powers of local authorities regarding regulation of traffic, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202; limitations on local authorities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.203; municipal authority to regulate by traffic control devices, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(1). 
 
CHAPTER 70. - TRAFFIC RULES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Rules of the road, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 541 et seq. 
 
SUBCHAPTER I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 70.01. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 541 shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Barricade means every barrier or obstruction block placed upon or across any road, street, or highway of this city by an authorized person for the purpose of preventing the passing of motor vehicles over such street, road or highway during a period of construction or repair to said street, road or highway. 
Commercial vehicle means every truck and every private vehicle with the name of the firm represented inscribed or painted on the front door on both sides in letters at least two inches high in contrasting colors to that of the vehicles which are maintained or used primarily for the transportation of property. 
School or other institution of learning means any public or private organization giving regular instruction and having an average daily attendance of 50 students or more. 
(Code 1996, § 70.01; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 70.02. - Authority of police department. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all of the traffic provisions of street traffic in this city. 
(b)  Officers for the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that in the event of fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic, or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Code 1996, § 70.02; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 70.03. - Obedience to police department officials. 
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer. 
(Code 1996, § 70.03; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
SUBCHAPTER II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 70.35. - Turning movements; limitations on U-turns. 
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district or at any intersection controlled by a traffic control signal; nor shall any driver so turn a vehicle upon any other street unless such movement can be made in safety without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1996, § 70.35; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 70.36. - School zones; school crossing zones. 
(a)  The intersections of streets to be designated as school crossing zones shall be as set forth in a schedule kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  Those portions of all streets extending 1,000 feet in each direction from the block upon which every school in the city is located (including the portions of such streets within such blocks where such schools are located) are hereby designated to be school zones. 
(c)  From 7:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m., on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday of each week from September 1 of each year until May 31 of the ensuing year, the following regulations shall be in effect and shall apply to all vehicles passing through the school crossing and school zones. 
(1)  The maximum prima facie reasonable and prudent speed within such school crossings and school zones shall be 20 miles per hour. 
(2)  Any vehicle approaching said school crossings at a time when a pedestrian is in said crossing, shall come to a full stop at least ten feet before reaching said crossing, and shall remain at a stop until all pedestrians then using said crossing have crossed through the same and have reached the side of such street toward which such pedestrian is proceeding. 
(3)  No vehicle shall pass any other vehicle, or commence or carry out any passing movement at any point within any such school zone. 
(Code 1996, § 70.39; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994) 
State Law reference— Public hearing to consider speed limits where certain schools are located, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.357.  
Sec. 70.37. - Speed limits. 
(a)  As the result of traffic and engineering surveys conducted as to each of the streets and thoroughfares referred to in this section, the maximum prima facie safe, reasonable, and prudent speed limits of this city are hereby determined to be 30 miles per hour, with the exception that on all streets public and private ways adjacent to or within 1,000 feet of any school, private or parochial, the prima facie maximum reasonable or prudent speed limit shall be 20 miles per hour when designated as a school zone. 
(b)  As the result of traffic and engineering surveys heretofore conducted by the state highway commission in accordance with its "Procedures for Establishing Speed Zones," it is determined that the prima facie maximum and minimum speed limits which are reasonable and prudent on U.S., state, and farm to market roads within the city are as posted by the state transportation commission. 
(Code 1996, § 70.41; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994) 
State Law reference— Speed restrictions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.351 et seq.  
Sec. 70.38. - Truck routes authorized. 
(a)  Designated. The city council may from time to time, by council action, designate truck routes within the city as may be necessary for the proper flow of traffic through the city. The designated truck routes are listed in a schedule on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  Posting of notice and signs. The public works director shall cause to be placed within the city limits appropriate signs indicating authorized truck routes as approved by the city council. 
(c)  Parking. Except in the event of loading, unloading, or in an emergency, local commercial vehicles or through commercial vehicles shall not be parked or left for any length of time upon any public street or public way in the city. 
(Code 1996, § 70.43; Ord. No. 190, 11-8-2001) 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of loads, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 621.302, 621.303.  
Sec. 70.39. - Hazardous materials cargo. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or stand any vehicle, trailer, or combination thereof which shall contain any compressed gas, flammable or corrosive material, or any material that tends to pollute the city's natural resources, within the city; provided, however, that if the point of origin or destination (for commercial purposes only) for any such vehicle shall be in the city, then such vehicle may park for only as long as necessary to transact official business. 
(Code 1996, § 70.44; Ord. No. 190, 11-8-2001)  
Sec. 70.40. - Truck routes. 
(a)  Through commercial vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a through commercial vehicle upon any street, boulevard, avenue, or alley within the limits of the city, except that such commercial vehicle may travel or be operated upon any street, boulevard, or avenue designated as a U.S. or state highway, or as a truck route. 
(b)  Local commercial vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any local commercial vehicle upon any street, boulevard, avenue, or alley within the limits of the city, except on designated U.S. or state highways or a designated truck route. A local commercial vehicle may leave any designated U.S. or state highway or a designated truck route and travel on any street, boulevard, avenue, or alley within the city for the purpose of delivering or picking up goods, wares, materials and/or merchandise. No diesel powered tractor or truck-tractor combination shall be operated on any predominantly residential street between the hours of 9:30 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. 
(c)  Maximum vehicle load limit. The maximum vehicle load limit on any street of the city, other than those streets designated as U.S. or state highways shall not exceed a gross vehicle weight of 26,000 pounds. 
(Code 1996, § 70.45; Ord. No. 190, 11-8-2001)  
Sec. 70.41. - Regulating the use of hand-held mobile communication devices while driving. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Engaging in a call means talking to, dialing, or listening on a hand-held mobile communication device, but does not include holding a mobile communication device to activate or deactivate the device. 
Hand-held mobile communication device means a text messaging device or other electronic, two-way communication device that uses a commercial mobile service, as defined by 47 USC 332, that is designed to receive and transmit voice communication, text message or pictorial communication, or both, whether by internet or other electronic means. The term "hand-held mobile communication device" includes a mobile telephone, and a personal digital assistant (PDA). 
Hands-free mobile telephone means a mobile telephone that has an internal feature or function or that is equipped with an attachment or addition, whether or not permanently part of the mobile telephone, by which a user engages in a call without the use of either hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person) whether or not the use of either hand (or prosthetic device) is necessary to activate or deactivate the mobile telephone. 
Park or parked means for the operator to completely cease movement of a motor vehicle in a lawful manner and location. For purposes of this section, the term "parked" does not include or mean a vehicle stopped in a lane of traffic due to either a lawful traffic control device, or the conditions on the roadway, or traffic congestion patterns then existing. 
Text message means a two-way communication (whether real-time or asynchronous) in which data (composed in whole or in part of text, numbers, images, or symbols) is sent, entered, or received by a method other than by voice and transmitted through either a short message service (SMS) or a computer network. The term does not include a communication transmitted through a global positioning or navigation system. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person uses a hand-held mobile communication device to: 
(1)  Engage in a call; 
(2)  Send, read, or write a text message; 
(3)  View pictures or written text whether transmitted by internet or other electronic means; 
(4)  Engage in gaming; or 
(5)  Engage in any other use of the device while operating a moving motor vehicle. 
(c)  This definition does not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle using a hand-held mobile communications device: 
(1)  While the vehicle is legally parked or is being driven on private property; 
(2)  That is affixed to the vehicle and used as a global positioning or navigation system; 
(3)  That is used with a hands-free mobile communication telephone or other such device; 
(4)  While operating an authorized emergency vehicle in an official capacity; or 
(5)  Who is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission while operating a radio frequency device other than a hand held mobile communication device. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the person was using a hand-held mobile communication device for the purpose of: 
(1)  Executing the person's official government duties; 
(2)  Reporting illegal activity to a law enforcement agency; 
(3)  Communicating with an emergency response operator, a fire department, a law enforcement agency, a hospital, a physician's office, or a health clinic regarding a medical or other emergency situation; or 
(4)  Preventing injury to a person or property. 
(e)  A person convicted of an offense under this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00. 
(f)  An offense under this section is not a moving violation and may not be made a part of a person's driving record or insurance record. 
(g)  In addition to enforcement by a peace officer of the city, this section may be enforced by a peace officer of another entity, including those employed by school districts, duly authorized to issue traffic citations within the city. 
(Code 1996, § 70.46; Ord. No. 2015-031, § 1, 11-19-2015) 
State Law reference— Use of wireless communication device while driving, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.424 et seq.  
SUBCHAPTER III. - ENGINE BRAKING 
 
Sec. 70.50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Engine braking means any method of slowing diesel trucks in a manner that produces a loud noise, particularly by venting the cylinder of the diesel engine midway through its cycle causing the engine, instead of producing power, to absorb power, thereby slowing the truck down dramatically. It shall also include the production of excessive noise produced by engine retarders due to a truck operating with improperly maintained, defective, or modified muffler systems or the use of straight exhaust pipes with no mufflers. 
(Ord. No. 287, exh. A, § 2, 5-10-2012)  
Sec. 70.51. - Prohibition. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engine brake within the city limits. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, employer, organization, or other entity to encourage or support the act of engine braking within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 287, exh. A, § 3, 5-10-2012)  
Sec. 70.52. - Enforcement. 
Civil and criminal penalties. The city and any law enforcement officer shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this subchapter as may be required by governing law. Any person violating any provision of this subchapter is subject to prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of this subchapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 287, exh. A, § 4, 5-10-2012)  
CHAPTER 71. - STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate standing and parking, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(2); stopping, standing and parking generally, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.301 et seq. 
 
Sec. 71.01. - Limitations on stopping, standing, and parking. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places within the city: 
(1)  In the center of the street. 
(2)  In front of moving picture and theater entrances during and within one hour of the beginning of any showing or performance therein. 
(Code 1996, § 71.01; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 71.02. - Parking in alleys. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand, or park any vehicle in an alley, unless such vehicle is being used to load or unload merchandise, and only so long as such loading or unloading of merchandise from or to said vehicle is being done. 
(Code 1996, § 71.02; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 71.03. - Parking of tractor trailers, buses, and the like. 
Regulations as to parking. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to park or permit to be parked any tractor trailer on a street, alley, other public way in any residential area, except for the immediate purpose of loading or unloading goods, merchandise, material or other haulage. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to detach a trailer from a tractor and to leave parked or permit to be parked a trailer on a street, alley, or other public way in any residential area, except for the immediate purpose of loading or unloading goods, merchandise, material or other haulage. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to park or permit to be parked any bus on a street, alley or other public way in any residential area, except for the immediate purpose of loading or unloading passengers. 
(4)  A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove or to require the driver, owner, or other person in charge of a tractor trailer to remove, a tractor trailer from a highway, street, or road to the nearest garage or other place of safety, to a garage designated or maintained by the governmental agency by which the officer is employed, or to a position off the paved or main-traveled part of the highway, street, or road. 
(Code 1996, § 71.04; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 71.04. - Parking in excess of 72 hours prohibited; towing authorized. 
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle, wheeled contrivance, scooter, automobile, truck, trailer, farm machinery, transport apparatus, horse, horse-drawn conveyance, animal, bicycle, motorcycle, motor, personal property whatsoever, to remain parked on any public street, roadway, parking lot or facility, or any public property whatsoever, in excess of 72 consecutive hours. Any such parking shall be prima facie evidence that the owner of such vehicle or property is using a public street for storage of such vehicle or property, and in addition to the other penalties prescribed in this chapter, such vehicle may be towed or removed to the city pound and stored at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1996, § 71.05; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 71.05. - Registered owner prima facie responsible. 
If any vehicle is found upon any street or highway in violation of any provision of this chapter, chapter 73 or any other ordinance regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner, or person in whose name such vehicle is registered, shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation. 
(Code 1996, § 71.06; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994) 
State Law reference— Authority for this section, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.308.  
CHAPTER 72. - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES 
 
Sec. 72.01. - One-way streets. 
Any person operating a motor vehicle along one-way streets listed on a schedule on file in the office of the city secretary shall operate such vehicle in the direction as designated by the city council and marked by appropriate signs installed by the city. 
(Code 1996, ch. 72, sched. I)  
Sec. 72.02. - Stop and yield streets. 
(a)  Designated. The streets designated as through streets at the intersections mentioned or listed on a schedule on file in the office of the city secretary and all streets mentioned or referred which intersect, cross or form junction with such designated through streets are designated as stop sign streets or yield streets. 
(b)  Intersections with railroads. Traffic yields at all the street crossings of certain railroads as listed on a schedule on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(c)  Three-way stops. There shall be three stops at the intersections listed on a schedule on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(d)  Four-way stops. The intersections formed by the streets designated to be intersections at which both of the intersecting or joining streets are stop sign streets are listed on a schedule on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, ch. 72, sched. II)  
Sec. 72.03. - School crossings and school zones. 
The intersections of streets in the city designated as school crossings are listed on a schedule on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, ch. 72, sched. III; Ord. No. 283, 12-8-2011; Ord. No. 2015-10, 5-14-2014)  
Sec. 72.04. - Speed limits. 
It has been determined by an engineering and traffic investigation that the maximum, reasonable, and prudent speed limits on the streets and in the locations designated should be as listed on a schedule on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, ch. 72, sched. IV)  
Sec. 72.05. - Bicycles prohibited on certain sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on the sidewalks within the corporate limits of the city that bound the streets listed on a schedule on file in the office of the city secretary, but a person may walk on such sidewalks with a bicycle along beside him guided by such person. 
(b)  If such person is under the age of 18 years, the parent or person standing in parental relation to said person under the age of 18 years, shall be responsible for the violation of this schedule by such person, and if such person under the age of 18 years shall violate this schedule, a complaint may be made against said parent or person standing in parental relation to said person under the age of 18 years, as a principal. 
(Code 1996, ch. 72, sched. V; Ord. No. 0041, 8-9-1973)  
Sec. 72.06. - Truck routes. 
The streets and highways, or portions thereof, designated as authorized truck routes are listed on a schedule on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, ch. 72, sched. VI)  
CHAPTER 73. - PARKING SCHEDULES 
 
Sec. 73.01. - Angle parking. 
The operator of a motor vehicle shall park at a 45-degree angle when parking said vehicle on the streets or highways listed on a schedule on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, ch. 73, sched. I)  
Sec. 73.02. - No parking zones. 
No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main-traveled part of the streets listed on a schedule on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, ch. 73, sched. II; Ord. No. 0024, 12-28-1978; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 73.03. - Loading zones. 
A "loading zone" shall be established at the described locations listed on a schedule on file in the office of the city secretary, and parking other than for the loading and unloading of merchandise at such locations is prohibited. 
(Code 1996, ch. 73, sched. III)  
Title IX - GENERAL REGULATIONS  
CHAPTER 90. - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate care and control of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033; health and safety of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 821.001—828.013; treatment and disposition of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq.; cruelty to animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.09 et seq. 
 
SUBCHAPTER I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 90.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means every nonhuman species of animal, both domestic and wild. 
Animal shelter means any premises designated by the city for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals under authority of this chapter. 
At large means off the premises of the owner or not under control of the owner or any member of his immediate family, either by fence of suitable repair, by leash, chain, cord, or other suitable material attached to a collar or harness. 
Harboring means the keeping of an animal. 
Normal work day means and includes any day other than weekends or holidays. 
Normal working hours means and includes all time from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. during a normal work day. 
Owner means any person, corporation, or any other entity keeping or harboring an animal. 
Public nuisance animal means any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, or endangers the life or health of another animal or a person, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens to enjoyment of life or property. The term "public nuisance animal" means and includes, but is not limited to, any animal that: 
(1)  Is repeatedly found at large. 
(2)  Damages the property of anyone other than its owners. 
(3)  Molests or intimidates pedestrians or passersby. 
(4)  Chases vehicles. 
(5)  Excessively makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored. 
(6)  Causes fowling of the air by odor and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored. 
(7)  Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored. 
(8)  Is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety, welfare by virtue of the number and/or type of animals maintained. 
(9)  Attacks other domestic animals or people. 
Residence means a place or the house where one resides. 
Restraint means an animal under restraint when securely caged or secured by a leash or lead and under the effective control of a responsible person and obedient to that person's commands, or within the confines of its owner's yard or home which is fully enclosed by a good, secure, and substantial fence. 
Vaccination means a rabies vaccination for an animal. 
(Code 1996, § 90.01; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.02. - Vaccination of dogs and cats required. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat to keep a dog or cat unless it shall have been vaccinated for rabies. This chapter shall not apply to dogs or cats under the age of four months. 
(Code 1996, § 90.02; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994) 
State Law reference— Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.021 et seq.  
Sec. 90.03. - Keeping livestock. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit the keeping of horses, mules, jacks, jennys, cattle, sheep, goats or similar animals on premises owned, occupied or under his control, on less than one acre. 
(Code 1996, § 90.03; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994; Ord. No. 219, 1-27-2005)  
Sec. 90.04. - Keeping poultry. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit the keeping of chickens, turkeys, ducks, guineas, other fowl, or poultry on premises in the city, provided that no more than 25 may be kept on a single lot of 3,200 square feet or less, a maximum of 50 on any lot, confined within a fenced area which is not less than 50 feet from any business, building or dwelling owned or occupied by a person other than the owner. 
(Code 1996, § 90.031; Ord. No. 219, 1-27-2005)  
Sec. 90.05. - Pens maintained in sanitary condition. 
Every stable or place where any animal is or may be kept shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be free and clear from decaying food and filth of any kind. All barns, pens, stables, and other areas shall be cleaned and disinfected on a regular schedule. The animal control officer shall have the right to inspect said premises from time to time. 
(Code 1996, § 90.04; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.06. - Inhumane treatment; endangering animals prohibited. 
(a)  Animals in the city will not be treated cruelly in any way. Any person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads or abandons any animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section. 
(b)  All owners must provide their animals with sufficient wholesome and nutritious food, water in sufficient quantities, proper air, shelter space and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and humane care and treatment. 
(c)  It is unlawful to crop a dog's ear or dock a dog's tail, except when a licensed veterinarian issues a signed certificate that the operation is necessary for the dog's health and comfort. In no event shall any person except a licensed veterinarian perform such an operation. 
(d)  It is unlawful to expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the poisonous substance could be eaten by any animal, with the exception that a person may expose common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substance on his own property. 
(Code 1996, § 90.05; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.09 et seq.  
Sec. 90.07. - Striking animal with vehicle; responsibility of motorist. 
Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency of animal control facility. 
(Code 1996, § 90.06; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.08. - Certain animals not to be kept within city; exception. 
Any person enrolled as a member of a high school agricultural science program under the supervision of a high school vocational agricultural teacher, or a 4H member under the supervision of the county agricultural agent, or designated as a breeder for said organizations may apply to the city manager for a permit to be exempted from the limitations of sections 90.03 and 90.04, which exemption shall not be unreasonably withheld and any individual denied the issuance of a permit may appeal said decision to the city council. A request for a permit must include type, sex, number or animals and time period of program. 
(Code 1996, § 90.08; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994; Ord. No. 219, 1-27-2005)  
Sec. 90.09. - Limitation on number of dogs permitted. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep on any one premises, owned or occupied by him, more than four dogs, if said dogs are more than six months old, unless said dogs are properly housed in kennels approved by the city operations director. 
(Code 1996, § 90.09; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.10. - Nuisance animals. 
All owners shall exercise proper care and control of their animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance, to include, but not be limited to, preventing excessive, continuous or untimely noises, molesting passersby, chasing vehicles, habitually attacking other animals, trespassing upon school grounds, trespassing upon public property, or trespassing upon private property. 
(Code 1996, § 90.10; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.11. - Restraint of animals required. 
All animals must be kept under restraint. Unrestrained animals may be taken by police, or any animal control officer designated by the city operations director, or any humane officer and impounded in an animal shelter, and there confined in a humane manner. 
(Code 1996, § 90.11; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994) 
State Law reference— Authority for this section, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033.  
Sec. 90.12. - Confinement of female dogs and cats in heat. 
Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or a secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding. 
(Code 1996, § 90.12; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.13. - Staking animals along street for grazing purposes prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to picket or tie any animals in or along any of the streets or alleyways of the city for the purpose of grazing or feeding. 
(Code 1996, § 90.13; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.14. - Proper disposal of animal waste. 
(a)  The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta (feces) deposited by his animals on public walks, recreation areas, or private property. 
(b)  Collection and removal of animal feces shall be in a container of such type that, when closed, is ratproof and flytight. Such container shall be kept closed after each collection. At least once a week, each such animal owner shall cause all feces so collected to be disposed of in such a way as not to permit fly breeding. 
(Code 1996, § 90.14; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.15. - Beekeeping. 
(a)  It shall be illegal for any individual, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity to operate a commercial bee keeping business within the city limits. 
(b)  Beekeeping shall be legal for personal use and enjoyment, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  All beekeepers are required to register with the city and obtain a beekeeping permit. This permit shall initially be in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. Prior to obtaining a permit, the requestor must provide contact information in the form of full name, address, telephone number, and email address, must present proof of residence, and must present proof of homeowner's insurance or other insurance policy covering beekeeping. There shall be a limit of one permit issued per lot. 
(2)  There shall be a limit of four beehives/colonies per lot. Such beehives/colonies shall be maintained in good order, and shall be located near a convenient water source on the same lot the beehives/colonies are kept. All beehives/colonies shall be no closer than 200 feet from a property line of the permitted lot, and in no event shall a beehive/colony be located closer than 400 feet from a school, playground, healthcare facility, elderly care facility, public park, or church. 
(3)  Any non-dangerous swarm resulting from a permitted beehive/colony shall be immediately identified, notice shall be given to the city, and the swarm shall be relocated at the permittee's expense. Any dangerous swarm, aggressive beehive/colony, or Africanized beehive/colony shall be immediately destroyed and notice of such destruction given to the city. Destruction shall be done at permittee's sole expense. Should permittee fail to perform its obligations in accordance with this section, then the city may undertake the relocation or destruction as appropriate, and all actual costs of such shall be billed to the permittee. 
(4)  All boxes where permitted beehives/colonies are located shall be clearly marked with the owner's name and address in a permanent manner. This may include, but not be limited to, permanent marker that is unaffected by weather, engraving into the wood, attaching an engraved metal plate, etc. 
(c)  It shall be deemed a nuisance if an individual takes possession of beehive boxes and places them in such a manner so as to become a potential location for unpermitted beehives/colonies without taking reasonable precautions to prevent habitation by bees. This shall encompass placement on a lot without intent to attract bees and improper disposal or dumping of boxes. 
(d)  Any commercial or recreational beekeeping in existence on August 1, 2016, shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) and/or (b)(2) of this section, except that a commercial beekeeping operation must present proof of insurance and pay applicable permit fees in accordance with subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(e)  Any violation of this section shall result in destruction of any offending boxes and imposition of penalties as set forth in this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1996, § 90.15)  
SUBCHAPTER II. - LICENSING/PERMIT PROVISIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority for dog and cat registration, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.031. 
 
Sec. 90.25. - Permit required; exception; fee. 
(a)  Any person owning, keeping, harboring, or having custody of any dog or cat over six months of age within the city must obtain a permit as herein provided. 
(b)  Permits shall be issued by the city, following payment of the applicable fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for each dog or cat plus a record of current vaccination. 
(c)  Licensing fees shall not be required for certified Seeing Eye dogs, hearing dogs, or other certified dogs that are trained to assist disabled persons. 
(d)  Licensing fees shall not be required for animals that are microchipped by a licensed veterinarian and proof of such microchipping and identifying information of such microchip is provided to the city along with the permit for such animal. 
(Code 1996, § 90.25; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994; Ord. No. 2017-009, 4-27-2017)  
Sec. 90.26. - Duration of permit; transferral. 
(a)  A permit, if not revoked, shall be valid for a period of one calendar year starting on the date of issue. All permits must be reissued at the end of the license period. If there is a change in ownership of the dogs or cats, the new owner may have the current license transferred to his name upon payment of a transfer fee per permit as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the village council from time to time. 
(b)  No person may use any license for any animal other than the animal for which it was issued. 
(Code 1996, § 90.26; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.27. - Issuance of tags; tags to be worn when animal off owner's premises. 
Upon issuing a permit to keep any dog or cat, the city shall issue to the owner a durable tag, stamped with an identifying number. The tags are designed so that they may be conveniently fastened to the dog's or cat's collar or harness. Dogs or cats must wear identification tags at all times when the animal is off the premises of the owner. The city shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers and shall make this record available to the public. 
(Code 1996, § 90.27; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.28. - Revocation of permit for noncompliance. 
The city may revoke any permit if the person holding the permit refuses or fails to comply with this chapter, or any state law governing cruelty to animals or the keeping of animals. Any person whose permit is revoked shall, within ten days thereafter, humanely dispose of animals, kept or harbored by such person, and no part of the permit fee be refunded. 
(Code 1996, § 90.28; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.29. - Provisions not applicable to nonresidents. 
The sections of this chapter requiring a permit shall not apply to nonresidents of the city who are keeping only domestic pets, provided such animals shall not be kept in the city longer than 30 days, and such animals are to be kept under restraint. 
(Code 1996, § 90.29; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
SUBCHAPTER III. - VICIOUS OR DISEASED ANIMALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Dangerous dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.041 et seq.; local regulation of dangerous dogs, non-breed specific, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.047. 
 
Sec. 90.40. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Unprovoked means, with respect to an attack by a dog, that the dog was not hit, kicked, or struck by a person with any object or part of a person's body nor was any part of the dog's body pulled, pinched, or squeezed by a person. 
Vicious conduct means, with respect to a dog, an attack by the dog on a person in which the dog initiated physical contact with the person and: 
(1)  The attack was unprovoked. 
(2)  The attack did not occur in a pen or other enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the pen or enclosure on its own. 
(3)  The attack resulted in bodily injury to the person. 
(Code 1996, § 90.40; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.41. - Restraint of animal; insurance requirements. 
(a)  A person who owns or keeps in his custody a dog that he knows has engaged in vicious conduct must immediately and continuously restrain the dog on a leash or similar device in the immediate control of the owner or other person at the direction of the owner or in a pen or other enclosure reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the pen or enclosure on its own; and as soon as possible but not later than 30 days after the vicious conduct, have insurance coverage in an amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the village council from time to time insuring against liability of the person for damages resulting from bodily injury to an individual caused by any dog belonging to or in the custody or control of the person. 
(b)  Every vicious animal shall be confined by the owner within a building or secure enclosure and be securely muzzled or caged whenever off the premises of its owners. 
(Code 1996, § 90.41; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.42. - Authority to take possession of or dispose of vicious animal. 
The animal control officer is authorized to take possession of and dispose of any animal with a record of vicious conduct if the owner fails to fulfill any of his responsibilities and obligations under this subchapter. 
(Code 1996, § 90.42; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.43. - Quarantine; diagnosis of rabies. 
Any animal which bites or scratches a person shall be quarantined for ten days. During quarantine such animal shall be securely confined and kept from contact with any other animal. At the discretion of the city operations director or animal control officer, the quarantine may be on the premises of the owner. If such officer requires other confinement, the owner shall surrender such animal for the quarantine period to an animal shelter, or shall, at his own expense, place it in the veterinary hospital. It shall be the discretion of the city operations director as to whether or not to kill, or cause to be killed, an animal suspected of being rabid. If a veterinarian diagnoses rabies in an animal in quarantine, then the animal shall be humanely killed and the head of such animal sent to the laboratory for pathological examination and confirmation of such diagnosis. 
(Code 1996, § 90.43; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.44. - Diseased animals running-at-large prohibited. 
It is unlawful to allow any animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease to run-at-large, or to be exposed in any public place whereby the health of man or beast may be affected. The city operations director or the animal control officer will seize and arrange treatment of the diseased animal and any affected premises so as to prevent spread of the contagion or infection. 
(Code 1996, § 90.44; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.45. - Report of rabies. 
It shall be the duty of the owner, the harborer or the practicing veterinarian to report to the city operations director or city secretary all cases of rabies with which he comes in contact or to which his attention has been directed. This report shall be made immediately upon either diagnosis or suspicion of rabies. 
(Code 1996, § 90.45; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994) 
State Law reference— Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.021 et seq.  
SUBCHAPTER IV. - IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 90.55. - Authority for enforcement; interference prohibited. 
(a)  Any officer acting in behalf of the city shall have police powers in the enforcement of this chapter, and no person shall interfere with, hinder, molest, or abuse such officer in exercise of such powers. 
(b)  It is unlawful to refuse to deliver any animal to an officer acting in behalf of the city upon grounds for impounding. 
(Code 1996, § 90.55; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.56. - Impoundment by private persons; complaints. 
Any person may seize and deliver to the city, or such officer acting in its behalf, any animal which should be impounded, and the city shall thereupon hold and dispose of such animal, as though such animal had been found running at large and impounded by the city. Any person who observes an animal in violation of any of the terms of this chapter shall have the right to file a written complaint against the owner of such animal with the municipal court or the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, § 90.56; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.57. - Duty of officers to impound. 
It shall be the duty of the city operations director or the animal control officer to apprehend and impound any animal not under control or in violation of this chapter. In the event any such animal cannot be safely seized and the animal is deemed to be a threat to any person or property, any city officer is hereby empowered to eliminate the animal. An impounded animal shall not be released until all expenses of apprehension, notification and impounding have been paid by the owner or harborer. 
(Code 1996, § 90.57; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.58. - Notification to owners; time period for claim of animal. 
(a)  Owners of animals which have a valid permit will be notified if their animals are impounded. The known owner or harborer of the impounded animal wearing a valid permit identification tag shall have five working days from the time of notification in which to claim the animal. Failure by the known owner or harborer to obtain release of the impounded animal within this time period shall be deemed an act of disclaiming and the city operations director or his agent shall consign said animal to a recognized animal humane society or licensed animal shelter, or otherwise dispose of the animal in accordance with state law. 
(b)  Owners of impounded animals which do not have a valid permit identification tag shall have two working days from the day of impoundment in which to claim the animal. The animal control officer is authorized to humanely dispose of any dog or cat not wearing a tag after one complete working day following the expiration of the claim period. 
(Code 1996, § 90.58; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.59. - Reclaim of animals; fees; vaccination and permit required. 
An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the village council from time to time for each day that the animal has been impounded. Repeat offenders within a period of six months will pay a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the village council from time to time. All fees shall be paid at city hall prior to the release of the impounded animal. All dogs and cats shall be vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian and have a current city permit. 
(Code 1996, § 90.59; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994; Ord. No. 129, 9-22-1994; Ord. No. 238, 1-11-2007)  
Sec. 90.60. - Disclaimer of ownership. 
If, for any reason, the owner or harborer of an animal chooses to disclaim ownership of same or voluntarily delivers the animal to be disclaimed to the city operations director or his representative, and executes formal acknowledgment of such an act, the city operations director or his representatives shall humanely dispose of the animal in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1996, § 90.60; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 90.61. - Penalty. 
If a person is found guilty by a court of violating any provision of this chapter, his permit to own, keep, harbor or have custody of dogs or cats shall be deemed automatically revoked, and no new permit may be issued for a period of one year. 
(Code 1996, § 90.99; Ord. No. 0001, 9-22-1994)  
CHAPTER 91. - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Public safety, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 341 et seq.; safety, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 751 et seq.; home rule municipality, fire department, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.011; appointment of fire protection, personnel, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 419.032; fire regulations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 791 et seq. 
 
SUBCHAPTER I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 91.01. - Uniform fire code adopted by reference. 
(a)  The Uniform Fire Code, 2015 edition, be and is hereby adopted as the fire code for the city, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said fire code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made part hereof, as if fully set out in this subsection. 
(b)  A copy of such adopted code shall be placed in an official file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1996, § 91.01; Ord. No. 0013, 11-29-1984; Ord. No. 0082, 4-23-1987; Ord. No. 229, 7-10-2003; Ord. No. 2017-028, § 5, 12-14-2017)  
Sec. 91.02. - Reward for information resulting in arrest for arson. 
A reward of $250.00 is offered to anyone who furnishes information which results in arrest and conviction of any person who commits the crime of arson within the city. This reward is a standing offer and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 91.02; Ord. No. 121, 5-13-1993) 
State Law reference— Crime of arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.02; crime stoppers, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 414.  
SUBCHAPTER II. - BURNING RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 91.10. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air contaminant means any solid, liquid, or gas or any combination thereof which if discharged into the atmosphere for sufficient duration and in sufficient quantity would injure or present a substantial danger of injuring human health, plant or animal life or health, or property, or would injure or endanger property values or enjoyment of property. 
Household or kitchen garbage means solid waste that is putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce and other food products. 
Offensive means nauseous, obnoxious, causing displeasure, discomfort to neighbors or surrounding residences that causes possible substantial or obvious offense to said persons, public or private property, or belongings. 
Open burning means the burning of combustible materials in such a manner that the products of combustion are emitted directly to the outside atmosphere. 
Refuse means the inclusive term for solid, liquid, or gaseous waste products which are composed wholly or partly of such materials as sweepings, cleanings, rubbish, litter, trade waste, agricultural waste, industrial, commercial and domestic solid, liquid or gaseous waste; trees or shrubs; tree or shrub trimmings; grass clippings; brick, plaster, lumber or other waste resulting from the demolition, alteration, or construction of buildings or structures; accumulated waste material, cans, containers, junk, or other such substances. 
Residence means a place where one actually lives, a unit or structure of dwelling. 
Smoke means any gas-borne or airborne particles resulting from combustion operations and consisting of carbon, ash, and other products of combustion any or all of which is present in sufficient quantity to be observable. 
(Code 1996, § 91.10; Ord. No. 33, 4-28-1988)  
Sec. 91.11. - Outdoor burning; emissions to be controlled; declaration of nuisance. 
(a)  No person shall cause or allow the discharge, emission, or release into the atmosphere from any refuse burning source whatsoever of such quantities of smoke, air contaminant, or other material as may cause injury, endanger health, damage property, or affect public health, wellbeing, or safety. Any and all emissions will be kept under control as to not be offensive or contaminant to surrounding neighbors, residences or persons, public or private properties or belongings. Such quantities shall be deemed a public nuisance and subject to penalty as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Inclusive of said burning with the same application of restrictions will be: 
(1)  Outdoor burning in connection with the preparation of food. 
(2)  Campfires and fires used solely for recreational purposes for ceremonial occasions. 
(3)  Fires set for the purpose of training public or private firefighting personnel, with the approval of the fire marshal. 
(4)  Outdoor burning in the preparation or cooking of food by use of natural wood will only be allowed until no later than 8:00 p.m. or no earlier than 6:00 a.m. except in the case of the preparation or cooking of food for commercial business purposes. Outdoor burning after said hours will be restricted to the use of charcoal or similar cooking products as not to be offensive or give off dense smoke as to become a public nuisance. 
(Code 1996, § 91.11; Ord. No. 33, 4-28-1988)  
Sec. 91.12. - Burning of household or kitchen garbage prohibited. 
The burning of household or kitchen garbage is prohibited and unlawful within the corporate limits of the city and shall be disposed of by regulated and established methods of normal garbage pickup as provided by the city. 
(Code 1996, § 91.12; Ord. No. 33, 4-28-1988)  
Sec. 91.13. - Open burning of empty pesticide containers, rubber, or tar. 
(a)  No person shall dispose of or permit the disposal of surplus pesticides and empty pesticide containers by open burning. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or use rubber tires, rubber products, tar, pitch, tar paper, or other refuse for fuel, or otherwise, in any form giving off or producing dense smoke or offensive odors. 
(Code 1996, § 91.13; Ord. No. 33, 4-28-1988)  
Sec. 91.14. - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit wood fires in fireplaces, stoves, heaters, or furnaces safely designed, constructed, and installed for such purposes and complying with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Code 1996, § 91.14; Ord. No. 33, 4-28-1988)  
Sec. 91.15. - Enforcement; right of entry for inspection. 
It shall be the duty of the officer, official, or employee representing the city, city operations director, or their deputies to have police powers in the enforcement of this chapter, and no person shall interfere with, hinder, molest, or abuse such officer in the exercise of such powers. The city operations director or officers, official or employee of the city after proper identification shall not be denied access at reasonable times in or upon any private or public property except private residences for the purpose of inspecting and investigating any condition which the city shall have reasonable cause to believe to be a nuisance or air contaminant source. If entry is refused, the authorized official shall have recourse to every remedy under law to secure entry or obtain such court orders as are necessary to obtain access. 
(Code 1996, § 91.15; Ord. No. 33, 4-28-1988)  
Sec. 91.16. - Establishment of rules and regulations. 
The city council may prepare standards, rules, and regulations which they deem necessary to protect the public health and safety and to carry out the requirements of this subchapter. Such standards, rules, and regulations shall be recommended to the city council for adoption by ordinance or amendments. 
(Code 1996, § 91.16; Ord. No. 33, 4-28-1988)  
CHAPTER 92. - NUISANCES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.011 et seq.; home rule municipal authority to enact more stringent health regulations than those of state, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.081; civil enforcement, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.092; regulation of nuisances by home rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.042; persons not to permit abandoned property to become public health nuisance, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.013(e). 
 
SUBCHAPTER I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 92.01. - Nuisance buildings or lots; abatement; lien. 
If the city council regards a building or lot as a public nuisance, it shall attempt to enter into a contract with the owner thereof, and if such contract cannot be entered into, it shall file suit in the district court of the county to abate such nuisance, and nuisance is defined so as to include attractive nuisances and as to such a nuisance, the city council, if it files suit in the district court of the county shall seek permission to abate such nuisance, and acquire an equitable lien on such property for the abatement of such nuisance, which equitable lien may be foreclosed in a court of competent jurisdiction in the county. 
(Code 1996, § 92.01; Ord. No. 0060, 9-25-1975)  
Sec. 92.02. - Shredding service; charges. 
(a)  The city shall provide shredding service for the owner of any tract, parcel, or lot located within the corporate limits of the city or within the extraterritorial jurisdictional limits of the city upon request of any such owner, provided however, that the city shall have the right to refuse to provide such service if the shredding equipment is in need of repair or unserviceable at the time such request is made, or such service would create a hardship upon the city, or if such tract, parcel, or lot is of such a condition that shredding such lot would likely cause a damage to shredding equipment. 
(b)  The city shall charge a sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for the shredding service performed, which charges shall begin to accrue when the operator begins actual shredding upon the lot. 
(c)  The city shall not shred more than two acres for any lot owner of the city within a 30-day period, nor shall the city shred any tract, parcel, or lot which contains more than two acres of land. 
(d)  Any charge made under this section shall be billed on or before the tenth of the month following the month in which such shredding services are performed. If such charges are not paid on or before the tenth of the month following the month the charges are billed, the city manager shall file a statement of expenses incurred stating the amount of such charges, the date on which such work was done and a description of the premises on which such work was performed with the county clerk. The city shall have a privileged lien on such lot or real estate upon which such work was done to secure the expenditures so made, which lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, and such amounts shall bear ten percent interest from the date the statement was filed. For any such expenditures and interest, as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of such lien may be had in the name of the city, and a statement of expenses so made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work. 
(Code 1996, § 92.02; Ord. No. 0061, 5-24-1979)  
Sec. 92.03. - Excessive noise. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create excessive noise at unreasonable hours as defined in this section. 
(1)  A noise is considered to be excessive if the noise exceeds a decibel level of 85 as measured from the front door of the nearest occupied structure (either residence or commercial establishment) from where the noise is being created. 
(2)  An unreasonable hour is any time falling between the following hours on the following days: 
a.  On any Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or the day after a legal holiday, between 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.; and 
b.  On any other day, between 12:01 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(3)  A legal holiday is as established by the city as a holiday for its employees. 
(Code 1996, § 92.03; Ord. No. 188, 10-25-2001) 
State Law reference— Presumption of unlawful noise, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.01(c).  
SUBCHAPTER II. - WEEDS, BRUSH, AND RUBBISH[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Weeds and unsanitary conditions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.004. 
 
Sec. 92.15. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Developed area means any block which is divided into two or more lots or parcels under separate ownership or occupancy, upon which buildings exist on more than 25 percent of such lots or parcels; and in addition, shall include any block not meeting the above definition of developed area if at least 50 percent of its perimeter is adjacent to or across a road, street or alley from any block which is divided into more than two lots or parcels under separate ownership or occupancy, upon which buildings exist on more than 25 percent of such lots or parcels. 
Lot has its ordinary meaning, but shall also include, in addition to the land within its boundaries, all land adjacent to and extending beyond the property line to the curb line of adjacent streets, and where no curb exists, to the existing street surface. The term "lot" shall also include all land lying between the property line of any lot and the center of adjacent alleys. 
Owner means and includes any tenant, lessee, or other occupant of property who is in control of the property under an existing agreement or understanding with the owner thereof. 
Parcel means any tract of land which lies within the corporate limits of the city and includes all land not defined herein as lot or developed area, but shall also include, in addition to the land within its boundaries, all land adjacent to and extending beyond the property line to the curb line of adjacent streets, and where no curb exists, or the surface of an adjacent public street or road. The term "parcel" shall also include all land lying between the property line and the center of any adjacent alley. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste (excluding ashes) consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste materials; cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard-trimmings, leaves, and similar materials (unless placed on property pursuant to and in compliance with other ordinances or regulations of the city); noncombustible rubbish includes glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and like materials which will not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 degrees Fahrenheit to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit). 
Weeds means all uncultivated plant or plant matter which has grown to more than 12 inches in height, other than trees. 
(Code 1996, § 92.15; Ord. No. 0034, 9-22-1977)  
Sec. 92.16. - Accumulation of weeds, brush, and rubbish declared nuisance; removal required. 
(a)  In developed areas of the city whenever and wherever weeds, brush, or rubbish shall exist, covering or partially covering the surface of such developed area, such condition is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the prompt abatement of which is a public necessity. All property within a developed area within the city shall be kept completely free and clear of weeds, brush, or rubbish. 
(b)  In other areas of the city, that portion of any lot or parcel of land within 50 feet of any open public street or road or which is within 75 feet of any building shall be kept completely free and clear of any weeds, brush, or rubbish. 
(c)  Whenever and wherever weeds, brush, or rubbish shall exist, covering or partially covering the portion of any lot or parcel in a city which is not a developed area, such condition is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the prompt abatement of which is a public necessity. 
(d)  It is the duty and responsibility of the owners of property within the city to keep and maintain their properties in compliance with the above standards. 
(Code 1996, § 92.16; Ord. No. 0034, 9-22-1977)  
Sec. 92.17. - Notice to owner; abatement required. 
(a)  Whenever the city manager receives information of the existence of any property not meeting the standards set out in section 92.16, he, or any health or fire inspector or sanitary officer assigned such responsibility, shall serve the owner of the property with a written notice informing the owner of such condition and directing that action be taken to bring the property into compliance with ten days. 
(b)  Such notice may be served by personal delivery to the owner if he can be located within the city limits, but if he cannot be so located or served after reasonable effort, notice may be served by certified letter addressed to such owner at his last known address, but if such address cannot be ascertained after reasonable effort, notice may be served by publication two times within ten consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. In the case of community property, service upon either the husband or the wife shall be deemed sufficient notice hereunder. 
(c)  If the owner is a corporation, service may be made by delivery of same to any office or place of business of such corporation or any officer of the corporation if such office, place of business, or officer can be located within the city limits, but if such office, place of business, or officer cannot be so located after reasonable effort, service may be made by certified letter addressed to the corporate headquarters address, but if such address cannot be ascertained after reasonable effort, the notice may be served upon the registered agent of the corporation or by publication two times within ten consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. 
(d)  Whether delivered personally, by mail, or by publication, the notice provided for above shall be addressed to the owner, but if the owner is not known, service may be had by publication addressed to the owner of (general description of the property involved). The notice shall give a general description of the property, state the condition which constitutes a violation hereof, and shall state that upon failure of the owner to rectify the situation within ten days from date the notice is delivered (or within ten days from date of the second publication, if notice is to be served by publication), a criminal complaint may be filed in the municipal court of the city for violation of this subchapter, stating the penalties for violation hereof as given below. In addition, the notice shall advise that the city may cause the correction and abatement work to be done on its own and charge the owner for the expense involved, and upon failure of the owner to pay the city for such expense, fix a lien on the property for the expense involved as provided for below. 
(Code 1996, § 92.17; Ord. No. 0034, 9-22-1977)  
Sec. 92.18. - Abatement by city; costs charged to owner; lien. 
(a)  In addition to the remedy provided for above, the city may also cause the work necessary to bring any property into compliance with this subchapter to be done if the owner has failed to either do such work or cause such work to be done within ten days from the date notice has been received (or published the second time), and to charge the owner for the costs incurred by the city. A statement of the costs incurred by the city to abate such condition shall be mailed to the owner of such premises, if the owner and mailing address is known, and if the address is not known or owner cannot be found, may be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The statement shall demand payment within 30 days from the date of receipt (or publication). 
(b)  In the event that such statement has not been paid within such period, the mayor and the city council may cause a statement to be filed with the county clerk of the expenses incurred to abate and correct such condition on the premises, such statement to be filed in the deed records, and such statement shall be and the city shall have a privileged lien upon the lot, parcel, or tract of land upon which such expenses were incurred, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, together with ten percent interest per annum on the delinquent amount from the date such payment was due. For any such expenditures and interest, as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and foreclosure had in the name of the city; and the statement so made, as aforesaid, or certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work. 
(Code 1996, § 92.18; Ord. No. 0034, 9-22-1977)  
Sec. 92.19. - Tree trimming or removal. 
Although large trees are not covered hereby, and are not felt to be a nuisance or a hazard, it may be necessary at times to remove trees or parts thereof in order for the city crews or city contractors to effect entry of mowing or clearing equipment to property or portions of property not meeting standards established in this subchapter. In such case, the removal of such trees or parts thereof as is found necessary shall be done and is hereby authorized, and the cost of this work shall be included in the cost charged to the owner. 
(Code 1996, § 92.19; Ord. No. 0034, 9-22-1977)  
Sec. 92.20. - Right to hearing. 
(a)  During the pendency of any of the above actions, any affected owner shall have the right to a public hearing to protest to the city council any of the following: 
(1)  The determination that the property is in violation of standards set out in this subchapter. 
(2)  The cost to rectify the situation. 
(3)  The adequacy of the notice. 
(4)  Whether a lien should be placed on the property. 
(b)  This protest may be made at any regular meeting of the city council. 
(Code 1996, § 92.20; Ord. No. 0034, 9-22-1977)  
Sec. 92.21. - List of contractors; bids for work; clearing by city. 
(a)  The city secretary shall maintain a list of independent lot clearing and cleaning contractors and shall make this list available to recipients of notices hereunder or other property owners to assist owners in complying with this subchapter. 
(b)  The city may award any quantity of work necessary to bring any property into compliance herewith to any person whose bid shall be accepted by the city council as being the best for doing such work during a stipulated time not exceeding one year. 
(c)  The city may use city resources to conduct the clearing of any lot deemed overgrown or a nuisance following the notice and hearing provisions of this section. In the event that city crews are used to clear such a lot, the cost of such clearing, as established in the city's fee schedule, shall be due and owing by the lot owner. If unpaid, the city shall have the authority to pursue any and all avenues of redress to collect such payment owed, including placing a lien upon the lot at issue. 
(Code 1996, § 92.21; Ord. No. 0034, 9-22-1977; Ord. No. 2017-010, 4-27-2017)  
Sec. 92.22. - Failure to comply; violation. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any land within the city to fail to have any weeds, brush, or rubbish mowed, cut, removed, or otherwise fail to bring the property into compliance with the standards set forth in section 92.16, within ten days after notice is received (or published the second time) directing that such standards be met. The employee of the city operations office or fire department assigned such duties or the city manager shall, whenever a violation is found, file a complaint with the municipal court and the prosecutor of the municipal court assigned such duties shall prosecute the case. 
(Code 1996, § 92.22; Ord. No. 0034, 9-22-1977)  
Sec. 92.23. - Remedies cumulative. 
The enumeration of remedies for the suppression of a public nuisance as provided in this subchapter are not to be deemed as exclusive, but as cumulative. 
(Code 1996, § 92.23; Ord. No. 0034, 9-22-1977)  
SUBCHAPTER III. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF BRUSH 
 
Sec. 92.35. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Brush means any plant, shrub, hedge, or tree, tree limbs, or any part thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 92.35; Ord. No. 0006, 4-25-1979)  
Sec. 92.36. - Unlawful deposits. 
It shall be unlawful for any resident, lot owner, or business to place or permit to be placed any brush along any drain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, street or vacant lot or upon any public or private premises within the city except as otherwise provided in this subchapter. 
(Code 1996, § 92.36; Ord. No. 0006, 4-25-1979)  
Sec. 92.37. - Placement for collection, length of cuttings. 
(a)  If a resident, lot owner, or business in the city has brush to be collected and removed from property within the corporate limits of the city, the owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of such premises shall keep all brush on the tract, parcel, or lot from which it is to be removed, and place such trash where it may be easily accessible to the person collecting and removing such brush. At no time shall brush be so placed that an alley, street, sidewalk or other public or private right-of-way will be blocked or obstructed. 
(b)  Tree limbs, trunks, hedge and shrub cuttings shall not exceed five feet in length and shall be stacked neatly so as to facilitate removal of same. 
(Code 1996, § 92.37; Ord. No. 0006, 4-25-1979)  
Sec. 92.38. - Duty of city to collect and remove. 
It shall be the duty of the city to collect and remove all brush from all premises in a reasonable and expeditious manner under the circumstances in accordance with regulations and charges incorporated in this subchapter. 
(Code 1996, § 92.38; Ord. No. 0006, 4-25-1979)  
Sec. 92.39. - Certain persons to provide own facilities for removal. 
It shall be the duty of all tree surgery operators, nurserymen, or public utility operators concerned to provide their own facilities and equipment for the removal of brush or other similar accumulations of trash created by them. 
(Code 1996, § 92.39; Ord. No. 0006, 4-25-1979)  
Sec. 92.40. - Charges for pickup service. 
There will be no charge for any lot owner or resident for one brush service call for each 30-day period which service does not require more than one hour by the brush pickup crew. If a service call requires more than one hour, a charge shall be made as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1996, § 92.40; Ord. No. 0006, 4-25-1979)  
Sec. 92.41. - Billing procedure; lien. 
Any charge made under this subchapter shall be billed on or before the tenth of the month following the month in which such services are performed. If such charges are not paid on or before the tenth of the month following the month the charges are billed, the city manager shall file a statement of expenses incurred stating the amount of such charges, the date on which such work was done and a description of the premises on which such work was performed with the county clerk. The city shall have a privileged lien on such lot or real estate upon which such work was done to secure the expenditures so made, which lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, and such amounts shall bear ten percent interest from the date the statement was filed. For any such expenditures and interest as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of such lien may be had, in the name of the city, and a statement of expenses so made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work. 
(Code 1996, § 92.41; Ord. No. 0006, 4-25-1979)  
CHAPTER 93. - JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Junked vehicles as nuisance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071 et seq. 
 
Sec. 93.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Demolisher means any person whose business is to convert the motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal or otherwise to wreck or dismantle motor vehicles. 
Junked vehicle. 
(1)  The term "junked vehicle" means a vehicle that: 
a.  Is self-propelled; and 
b.  Is: 
1.  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
2.  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
(i)  72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
(ii)  30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
(2)  For purposes of this subchapter, the term "junked vehicle" includes a motor vehicle, aircraft, or watercraft. This subchapter applies only to: 
a.  A motor vehicle that displays an expired license plate or does not display a license plate; 
b.  An aircraft that does not have lawfully printed on the aircraft an unexpired federal aircraft identification number registered under Federal Aviation Administration aircraft registration regulations in 14 CFR Part 47; or 
c.  A watercraft that: 
1.  Does not have lawfully on board an unexpired certificate of number; and 
2.  Is not a watercraft described by V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.055. 
Motor vehicle means any motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 502. 
(Code 1996, § 93.02; Ord. No. 0031, 10-27-1977) 
State Law reference— Junked vehicle defined, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071.  
Sec. 93.02. - Junked vehicles declared nuisance; creation and maintenance unlawful. 
(a)  A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible at any time of the year from a public place or public right-of-way: 
(1)  Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public; 
(2)  Tends to reduce the value of private property; 
(3)  Invites vandalism; 
(4)  Creates a fire hazard; 
(5)  Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; 
(6)  Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city; and 
(7)  Is a public nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any individual, company, or corporation to leave or permit to remain upon public or private property or public rights-of-way, except as hereinafter provided, within the city, any junked vehicle or parts or portion thereof, for any period of time in excess of ten days after notice. 
(Code 1996, § 93.03; Ord. No. 0031, 10-27-1977) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.072.  
Sec. 93.03. - Notice by chief of police. 
(a)  The procedures for the abatement and removal of a public nuisance under this chapter must provide not less than ten days' notice of the nature of the nuisance. The notice must be personally delivered, sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested, or delivered by the United States Postal Service with signature confirmation service to: 
(1)  The last known registered owner of the nuisance; 
(2)  Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and 
(3)  The owner or occupant of: 
a.  The property on which the nuisance is located; or 
b.  If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way. 
(b)  The notice must state that: 
(1)  The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered or mailed; and 
(2)  Any request for a hearing must be made before that ten-day period expires. 
(c)  If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, personally delivered. 
(d)  If notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return. 
(Code 1996, § 93.04; Ord. No. 0031, 10-27-1977) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.075.  
Sec. 93.04. - Public hearing prior to removal of vehicle. 
(a)  The municipal judge shall conduct hearings under the procedures adopted under this chapter. 
(b)  If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is required under section 93.03(a)(3), the hearing shall be held not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the service of notice. 
(c)  At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. 
(d)  If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, a resolution or order requiring removal of the nuisance must include: 
(1)  For a motor vehicle, the vehicle's: 
a.  Description; 
b.  Vehicle identification number; and 
c.  License plate number; 
(2)  For an aircraft, the aircraft's: 
a.  Description; and 
b.  Federal aircraft identification number as described by Federal Aviation Administration aircraft registration regulations in 14 CFR Part 47; and 
(3)  For a watercraft, the watercraft's: 
a.  Description; and 
b.  Identification number as set forth in the watercraft's certificate of number. 
(Code 1996, § 93.05; Ord. No. 0031, 10-27-1977) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 683.074(b)(2), 683.076.  
Sec. 93.05. - Abatement order by municipal judge; refusal to comply unlawful. 
(a)  After the hearing is held by the judge of the municipal court of the city as herein provided, if said municipal judge finds that such a nuisance as herein defined exists he shall order the owner or occupant of the premises on which said vehicle is located to remove such junked vehicle within ten days after said order is given to such owner or occupant of the premises on which said vehicle is located. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any such person to whom such order is given to fail or refuse to comply therewith and to remove such junked vehicle within the time provided by said order. 
(Code 1996, § 93.06; Ord. No. 0031, 10-27-1977) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.074(c).  
Sec. 93.06. - Duty of owner and occupant of premises. 
In the event the owner or occupant of the premises does not request a hearing as hereinabove provided it shall be his duty to comply with the provisions of the notice given him and to abate such nuisance within ten days after the date of the receipt of such notice. 
(Code 1996, § 93.07; Ord. No. 0031, 10-27-1977)  
Sec. 93.07. - Removed vehicles not to be made operable. 
After a vehicle has been removed in accordance with or under the terms and provisions of this chapter, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Code 1996, § 93.08; Ord. No. 0031, 10-27-1977) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.074(b)(1).  
Sec. 93.08. - Notice to state department of motor vehicles. 
Notice shall be given to the state department of motor vehicles within five days after the date of removal identifying the vehicle or part thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 93.09; Ord. No. 0031, 10-27-1977) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.074(b)(3).  
Sec. 93.09. - Removal of vehicle by city; storage; reclaiming by owner. 
Within ten days after notice has been delivered to the owner or occupant of the premises on which a junked vehicle is located if a hearing is not requested, or if a hearing is requested, within ten days after an order requiring the removal of such junked vehicle has been served upon or delivered to the owner or occupant of the premises on which said vehicle is located, the chief of police or members of the police department acting under the direction of the chief of police may, if said nuisance has not been abated, remove or cause to be removed the vehicle which was the subject of such notice to a suitable city storage area designated by the city manager. Such vehicle shall be stored in such storage area for a period of not less than ten days during which period any party owning or claiming any right, title, or interest therein shall be entitled to claim possession of same by the payment to the city, the actual cost of the city of abating such nuisance. The chief of police may in such cases, if he deems it necessary, require such person to post bond as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, conditioned that such person will not use said vehicle to create another nuisance in the city. 
(Code 1996, § 93.10; Ord. No. 0031, 10-27-1977)  
Sec. 93.10. - Sale or disposal of vehicles; proceeds pay for cost of removal. 
(a)  When any junked vehicle has remained in the storage area provided in section 93.09, for not less than ten days, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to dispose of same by removal to scrap yard or by sale to a demolisher for the highest bid or offer received therefor or to remove same to any suitable site operated by the city for processing as scrap or salvage. 
(b)  Out of the proceeds of same the chief of police shall pay for the cost of removal and storage and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the person entitled thereto (either owner or lienholder). 
(c)  If there is not a bid or offer for the junked vehicle, the chief of police may dispose of same by causing it to be demolished or removed to a place provided by the city council, or by permitting it to be removed by a demolisher who is willing to do so for the benefit of the junk or parts he can salvage. 
(Code 1996, § 93.11; Ord. No. 0031, 10-27-1977)  
Sec. 93.11. - Exemptions; application of provisions. 
(a)  Procedures adopted under this chapter may not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part: 
(1)  That is completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  That is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: 
a.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
b.  Not a health hazard; and 
c.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old. 
Motor vehicle collector means a person who: 
(1)  Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and 
(2)  Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
Special interest vehicle. 
(1)  The term "special interest vehicle" means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
(2)  It is not intended by this chapter to make provisions pertaining to abandoned motor vehicles as that term is defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.002. 
(Code 1996, § 93.12; Ord. No. 0031, 10-27-1977) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.077.  
Sec. 93.12. - Administration by city employees; exception. 
The administration of this chapter shall be by regularly salaried, full-time employees of the city, except that the removal of vehicles or parts thereof from property may be by any other duly authorized person. 
(Code 1996, § 93.13; Ord. No. 0031, 10-27-1977) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.074(d).  
Sec. 93.13. - Authority delegated by police chief. 
Whenever the chief of police is charged with the enforcement of this chapter he may delegate said authority to any regular salaried employee of the police department of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 93.14; Ord. No. 0031, 10-27-1977)  
CHAPTER 94. - CEMETERIES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Cemeteries, § 2.14. 
 
Sec. 94.01. - City cemetery designated. 
The cemetery of the city is hereby named Floresville City Cemetery (city cemetery) and is located on the northeasterly boundary of U.S. Business Highway 181 and being that same 13.41 acres of land described in deed dated February 11, 1982, from Jewel G. Woolsey, et al, to City of Floresville, of record in Volume 576, Page 243, Deed Records of Wilson County, Texas, and the burial of human remains or of a human corpse in the city cemetery in violation of this chapter, or any subsequent amendments thereto, or to the rules and regulations hereafter promulgated, is hereby declared to be unlawful. 
(Code 1996, § 94.01; Ord. No. 0007, 6-27-1985)  
Sec. 94.02. - Platting and sale of lots; recording fee. 
(a)  The city cemetery shall be platted into lots, blocks, and sections by the city manager, who shall prepare, maintain and keep at city hall a plat of the city cemetery as a public record. 
(b)  The sale of a cemetery lot or lots shall be sold for cash or by installment sale, for the consideration set forth in the rules and regulations established and approved by the city council. A deed of conveyance of any such lot shall be executed by the city manager, and all such lots shall be sold in strict accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(c)  There shall be a recording fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for recording any change in title or ownership of any lot after the initial conveyance of same by the city. 
(Code 1996, § 94.02; Ord. No. 0007, 6-27-1985)  
Sec. 94.03. - Payment for lot required prior to interment. 
No interment shall be made in any lot unless the payment thereof shall have been made in full to the city. 
(Code 1996, § 94.03; Ord. No. 0007, 6-27-1985)  
Sec. 94.04. - Interments. 
(a)  A permit in writing shall be obtained from the city manager for all interments. 
(b)  When an interment is to be made, the owner of the lot, or his agent shall locate the site of the grave on the plat in the office of the city manager and the city shall not be responsible for errors in location. 
(c)  All graves shall be prepared under the direction of the city manager, and each grave shall be a minimum of two feet below the surface of the ground. 
(d)  A 24-hour notice to the city manager shall be required for the preparation of a grave for burial. 
(e)  Fees for the excavation of graves shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(f)  No owner of any lot shall charge for any interment made thereon. 
(g)  No permits shall be issued during any other than normal working hours unless approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1996, § 94.04; Ord. No. 0007, 6-27-1985)  
Sec. 94.05. - Monuments and tombstones. 
(a)  All monuments and tombstones shall be set in concrete on a substantial concrete foundation. 
(b)  The size of monuments and tombstones and all lettering on tombstones or monuments shall be set forth in the rules and regulations established by the city council. 
(Code 1996, § 94.05; Ord. No. 0007, 6-27-1985)  
Sec. 94.06. - Concrete work in cemetery. 
(a)  Any person desiring to erect monuments or tombstones or perform concrete work in the city cemetery shall first obtain a written permit from the city manager and shall meet and comply with all rules, specifications, and requirements of the city in regard to the cemetery. 
(b)  A fee set forth in the rules and regulations by city council shall be paid for each permit issued under the terms of this section. 
(c)  Concrete for use on any lot shall be mixed and prepared in the streets of the city cemetery and the person performing such work shall, upon completion, immediately remove all remaining sand, gravel, tools, and other equipment from the cemetery and leave the streets in the same condition as before the work was performed and, in addition, shall thoroughly clean the lot upon which such work was done of all trash or litter and remove the same from the cemetery. 
(Code 1996, § 94.06; Ord. No. 0007, 6-27-1985)  
Sec. 94.07. - Authority of agents. 
The city manager may designate, from time to time, an agent to perform any of the duties or responsibilities assigned to the city manager which are set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 94.07; Ord. No. 0007, 6-27-1985)  
Sec. 94.08. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager shall prepare and submit to the city council for approval rules and regulations which shall cover the following areas: 
(1)  Price of cemetery lots. 
(2)  Terms of installment sales. 
(3)  Fee for excavation of graves. 
(4)  Size of monuments and tombstones. 
(5)  Lettering of monuments and tombstones. 
(6)  Fee for permit to perform concrete work. 
(7)  Opening and closing graves. 
(8)  Authorization forms. 
(9)  Planting of trees, shrubs or other plants. 
(10)  Any other area of operation of the city cemetery which is necessary to ensure the proper operation of the cemetery. 
(Code 1996, § 94.08; Ord. No. 0007, 6-27-1985)  
Sec. 94.09. - Prohibited acts in cemetery. 
(a)  It is unlawful to write upon, deface, or in any manner injure any monument, marker, or other structure in the city cemetery. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person other than the owner to remove flowers or plants from any lot in the city cemetery, provided, however, that the city manager may remove or destroy any flowers, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the cemetery if in his judgement, they are, or may become, detrimental to the cemetery. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, or commit any unlawful act in the city cemetery. 
(d)  No grave, vault, or tomb of any person buried in the city cemetery shall be opened except upon special written order from the city manager. 
(Code 1996, § 94.09; Ord. No. 0007, 6-27-1985)  
CHAPTER 95. - PARKS AND RECREATION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference— Public parks and playgrounds, § 2.11. 
State Law reference— Parks and recreation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 331 et seq. 
 
Sec. 95.01. - City parks designated. 
The city council shall create and establish city parks. This chapter shall apply to any public or city park area which is designated as a park by the city council. There shall remain on file at city hall a list of the city parks and their location. 
(Code 1996, §§ 95.01, 95.20; Ord. No. 0071, 12-12-1985; Ord. No. 0072, 12-12-1985)  
Sec. 95.02. - Management and control. 
The city parks shall be managed and controlled by the city manager, subject to the supervision and direction of the city council. If there is no city manager or acting city manager, then the city parks shall be managed by the mayor. 
(Code 1996, §§ 95.02, 95.21; Ord. No. 0071, 12-12-1985; Ord. No. 0072, 12-12-1985)  
Sec. 95.03. - Hours of operation. 
The city parks shall be open from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. each day. No one shall be allowed in the parks during the hours from 10:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. without written permission from the city manager. 
(Code 1996, §§ 95.03, 95.22; Ord. No. 0071, 12-12-1985; Ord. No. 0072, 12-12-1985)  
Sec. 95.04. - Purpose of parks. 
The city parks shall be used exclusively for park and recreation purposes only. 
(Code 1996, §§ 95.04, 95.23; Ord. No. 0071, 12-12-1985; Ord. No. 0072, 12-12-1985)  
Sec. 95.05. - Prohibited acts within parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts within the parks of the city: 
(1)  Allow livestock to graze in the city parks. 
(2)  Ride horses or other livestock in the parks. 
(3)  Play football, baseball, soccer, or other athletic sports in picnic areas, with the exception of volleyball. 
(4)  Litter the parks. 
(5)  Deface trees or property situated in the parks. 
(6)  Display or carry a gun in the parks, unless permitted under state law. 
(7)  Build or maintain a fire except in designated picnic areas. 
(8)  Operate a mini-bike, motorcycle, or other motorized bike or vehicle off the designated roads within the parks or in the case of Pecan Park, inside the park itself including the riding of a bicycle, scooter, or skateboard in and around the jogging/walking trail area. 
(9)  Operate a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(10)  Park in any area other than a designated parking area and in the case of Pecan Park, inside the park itself beside the picnic areas or in and around the jogging/walking trail area unless for emergency purposes only. 
(11)  Possess or bring into the park glass beverage containers. 
(12)  Bring into the park any pets, with the exception of service animals. In Floresville River Park, a pet may be on a leash in the designated area only which shall include and be limited to: 
a.  The picnic area along the river not to surpass the boundaries of the one-way road loop as indicated in the map on file in the office of the city secretary. 
b.  All other areas will be prohibited areas that pets may be brought into the park, with the exception of service animals. 
(13)  Erect or place in the parks any sign without written authority from the city manager. 
(14)  Discharge firearms or fireworks, firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes, air guns, BB guns, pellet guns, bows and arrows, or slingshots. 
(15)  Engage in gambling or games of chance. 
(16)  Cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, gravel, sand, or fertilizer without written authority from the city manager. 
(17)  Participate or engage in any activity where such activity will create a danger to the public or may be considered a public nuisance. 
(18)  Consume any alcoholic beverage in other than designated areas. 
a.  Prohibited areas where alcoholic beverages are disallowed will be as follows: 
1.  City River Park: Soccer and baseball field areas, swimming pool facility and playground area. 
2.  Pecan Park: All within the park property. 
3.  American Legion Park: Basketball and tennis courts area. 
4.  Lodi Park: Basketball courts area. 
b.  All other areas not mentioned in subsection (18)a of this section will be considered as designated areas to consume alcoholic beverages under this provision. 
(19)  Disturb in any manner any picnic, meeting, or gathering within the parks. 
(20)  Sell or offer for sale any food, drink, merchandise, or services, unless such person has written permission from the city manager. 
(21)  Practice, carry on, conduct, or solicit for any trade, occupation, business, or profession or to circulate any petition or whatsoever kind or character without approval of the city manager. 
(22)  Play music through an electric amplifier in a loud manner. 
(23)  Be in the park while intoxicated. For purposes of this section, the term "intoxicated" means substantial impairment of mental or physical capacity resulting from introduction of any substance into the body. 
(Code 1996, §§ 95.05, 95.24; Ord. No. 0071, 12-12-1985; Ord. No. 0072, 12-12-1985; Ord. No. 0088, 7-14-1988; Ord. No. 0095, 7-13-1989; Ord. No. 101, 5-24-1990; Ord. No. 109, 5-23-1991)  
Sec. 95.06. - Camping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep within the parks. Overnight camping shall be at the discretion of the city manager and written permit must first be obtained. 
(Code 1996, § 95.06; Ord. No. 0071, 12-12-1985; Ord. No. 0072, 12-12-1985)  
Sec. 95.07. - Charges. 
The city council may promulgate charges by resolution from time to time for the use of park facilities. 
(Code 1996, § 95.07; Ord. No. 0071, 12-12-1985; Ord. No. 0072, 12-12-1985)  
Sec. 95.08. - Rules and regulations. 
The city council may promulgate additional rules and regulations from time to time in order to set standards of conduct within the city parks. 
(Code 1996, § 95.08; Ord. No. 0071, 12-12-1985; Ord. No. 0072, 12-12-1985)  
Sec. 95.09. - Enforcement. 
The mayor, city manager, members of city council, municipal judge, and other peace officers shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 95.09; Ord. No. 0071, 12-12-1985; Ord. No. 0072, 12-12-1985)  
Sec. 95.10. - Budget; fees. 
(a)  The monthly recreational utility fee is as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time and shall be included with the monthly utility invoice issued for the city's services. 
(b)  The proceeds of said funds shall be accounted within the city's budget through the finance director, used for common areas, parks, health fairs/programs, and recreational purposes pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  Expenditures of budgeted funds, including the recreational utility fee, shall be made upon council approval and may include maintenance for existing recreational facilities and cemeteries. 
(d)  In passage of this section, the San Antonio River Authority's Master Plan (relating to parks) was referenced for purposes of the city's recreational initiative. 
(Ord. No. 285, §§ 1—3, 5-26-2011; Ord. No. 2015-11, 5-14-2015)  
CHAPTER 96. - FAIR HOUSING[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Fair Housing Act, V.T.C.A., Property Code ch. 301. 
 
Sec. 96.01. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about through fair, orderly, and lawful procedures, the opportunity of each person to obtain housing without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status, parenthood, or age. 
(b)  It is further declared that such policy is established upon a recognition of the inalienable rights of each individual to obtain housing without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status, parenthood, or age; and further that the denial of such rights through considerations based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status, parenthood, or age is detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable rights which is within the power and the proper responsibility of government to prevent. 
(Code 1996, § 96.01; Ord. No. 131, 1-12-1995)  
Sec. 96.02. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Age means the calendar age of an individual 18 years of age or over. 
Creed means any set of principles, rules, opinions, and precepts formally expressed and seriously adhered to or maintained by a person. 
Director means the director of the human relations department or authorized assistant. 
Discriminatory housing practice means an act which is unlawful under this chapter. 
Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more persons and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereof of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
Family means a single individual or a group of individuals living together under one common roof. 
Major life activities means functions such as, but not limited to, caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working. 
Marital status means an individual's status as a single, married, divorced, widowed, or separated person. 
Parenthood means a person's status as a parent or legal guardian of a child or children under the age of 18. 
Person means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries. 
Physical or mental disability means a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits at least one major life activity, a record of the impairment, or being regarded as having the impairment. The term does not include current illegal use or addiction to any drug or illegal or federally controlled substance and does not apply to an individual because of an individual's sexual orientation or because that individual is a transvestite. 
Physical or mental impairment means: 
(1)  Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting one of more of the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory including speech; organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or 
(2)  Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. 
Senior adult means a person 55 years of age or older. 
To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1996, § 96.02; Ord. No. 131, 1-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.003.  
Sec. 96.03. - Interpretation and effect. 
This chapter shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or remedy which is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended or the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 USC 1691). All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted to them to Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act. In construing this chapter, it is the intent of the city council that the courts shall be guided by Federal Court Interpretations of Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act, where appropriate. 
(Code 1996, § 96.03; Ord. No. 131, 1-12-1995)  
Sec. 96.04. - Discrimination in sale or rental of housing. 
Except as exempted by this chapter, it shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status, parenthood, or age. 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of a sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status, parenthood, or age. 
(3)  Make, print, or publish or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status, parenthood, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(4)  Represent to any person because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status, parenthood, or age that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  Induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status, parenthood, or age. 
(Code 1996, § 96.04; Ord. No. 131, 1-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Property Code §§ 301.021—301.024.  
Sec. 96.05. - Discrimination in housing financing. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company, or other person whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status, parenthood, or age of such person or such persons associated therewith or because of the race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status, parenthood, or age of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings for which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Code 1996, § 96.05; Ord. No. 131, 1-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.026.  
Sec. 96.06. - Discrimination in providing brokerage service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny another person access to membership in, or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling and renting dwellings or to discriminate against another person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status, parenthood, or age. 
(Code 1996, § 96.06; Ord. No. 131, 1-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.027.  
Sec. 96.07. - Unlawful intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage, or otherwise penalize any individual, group, or business because such individual, group, or business has complied with the provisions of this chapter or has exercised in good faith rights under this chapter, or has enjoyed the benefits of this chapter, or because such individual, group, or business has made a charge in good faith, testified in good faith or assisted in good faith in any manner in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or has made any report to the director. 
(Code 1996, § 96.07; Ord. No. 131, 1-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.171.  
Sec. 96.08. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall apply to: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that: 
a.  Such private individual owner does not own more than three single-family houses at any one time; 
b.  If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of the sale or was not the most recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this chapter shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; 
c.  Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on such person's behalf, under any express voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time; 
d.  The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and 
e.  The sale or rental is made without the publication, posting, or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this chapter; but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(2)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(b)  For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; 
(2)  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or a nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to a person of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood, or age. 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members, or from giving preference to its members. 
(e)  Nothing in this chapter shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which rooms are leased, subleased, or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation contains a common lavatory, kitchen, or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing accommodation. 
(f)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease, or occupancy of any dwelling designed and operated exclusively for senior adults and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease, or occupancy is further restricted on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability and marital status. 
(g)  Nothing in this chapter shall bar a person who owns, operates or controls rental dwellings whether located on the same property or on one or more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of dwellings for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; provided, however, in the event that said reserved area is completely leased or rented, the person owning, operating, or controlling said rental dwelling may not refuse to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the prospective tenant on the basis of the tenant's status as parent or any other of the protected classifications set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 96.08; Ord. No. 131, 1-12-1995)  
Sec. 96.09. - Violations. 
No person shall violate any provision of this chapter, or knowingly obstruct or prevent compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 96.09; Ord. No. 131, 1-12-1995)  
Sec. 96.10. - Enforcement by director of human relations department. 
The director of the human relations department shall have the responsibility of administering and implementing this chapter. The director may delegate the authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other designated city employees. 
(Code 1996, § 96.10; Ord. No. 131, 1-12-1995)  
Sec. 96.11. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereinafter referred to as the charging party) may file a complaint with the director. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The director shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request. 
(b)  The director shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  All complaints shall be filed within 180 days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the director shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the person named therein (hereinafter referred to as the respondent) who allegedly committed or threatened to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The respondent may file an answer to the complaint within 15 days of receipt of the written complaint. 
(d)  All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(e)  If at any time the director shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person has committed a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed or is about to be filed, the director may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(Code 1996, § 96.11; Ord. No. 131, 1-12-1995)  
Sec. 96.12. - Investigation and conciliation. 
(a)  Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the director shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint; provided, however, that before any charge becomes accepted for investigative purposes, the director or an investigator shall have personally reviewed with the charging party the allegations contained therein and shall have determined that said charge comes within the provisions of this chapter. In the event such review results in the determination that a particular charge does not come within the provisions of this chapter, the charging party shall be given a clear and concise explanation of the reasons why it does not. 
(b)  If the director determines that there is not probable cause to believe that a particular alleged discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the director shall take no further action with respect to that alleged offense. 
(c)  During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaint, the director shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and to obtain adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with provisions of this chapter. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the director, the commission, the investigator, the conciliator, the charging party, or the respondent, or be used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding without the written consent of all persons concerned. 
(d)  Upon completion of an investigation where the director has made a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, if the director is unable to secure from the respondent an acceptable conciliation agreement, then the human relations commission of the city must, upon a majority vote, refer the case to the city attorney for prosecution in municipal court or to other agencies as appropriate. With such recommendation of the director and the referral of the human relations commission, the director shall refer his entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall, after such referral, make a determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of such complaint in municipal court. 
(Code 1996, § 96.12; Ord. No. 131, 1-12-1995)  
CHAPTER 97. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Charter reference— Street powers, § 2.04. 
State Law reference— General authority of home rule municipalities concerning highways, streets and alleys, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.001; general authority of home rule municipality regarding sidewalks, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.004; use of municipal streets and sidewalks for public convenience and amenities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 316.001 et seq.; consent of governing body required for utility use of streets and ways, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175; public buildings and grounds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 281 et seq.; parks and other recreational and cultural resources, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 306 et seq. 
 
SUBCHAPTER I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 97.01. - Privately-owned driveways; expansion requirements; repair. 
The following applies to private driveways: 
(1)  If the private driveway shall be concrete extending across city utilities, the same shall have a two-foot expansion. 
(2)  All driveways must have sufficient drainage over or under the driveway. If the drainage is under the driveway it must be of sufficient capacity to carry the flow of water, and not cause a cross-over onto a street. 
(3)  The owner of any driveway shall be responsible for repair if it is necessary to cut into an existing driveway. 
(Code 1996, § 97.01; Ord. No. 0011, 12-2-1971)  
SUBCHAPTER II. - PARADES 
 
Sec. 97.10. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means any parade, demonstration, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display in or upon any street, park, or other place in the city. 
Parade permit means a permit as required by this subchapter. 
(Code 1996, § 97.10; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 97.11. - Permit required; contents; exceptions. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form, or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police. 
(b)  Contents. Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time. 
(2)  Minimum speed. 
(3)  Maximum speed. 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade. 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade. 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof. 
(7)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary for the enforcement of this subchapter. 
(c)  Exceptions. This subchapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions. 
(2)  Students going to and from school, classes, or participating in educational activities. 
(Code 1996, § 97.11; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 97.12. - Application; filing period; fee. 
(a)  A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by such officer. 
(b)  An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than five days, nor more than ten days, before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(c)  There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade permit, a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1996, § 97.12; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 97.13. - Contents of application. 
The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, email address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade. 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for or on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address, email address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organizations. 
(3)  The name, address, email address and the telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
(4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted. 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who, and the animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade, the type of animals and description of the vehicles. 
(7)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate. 
(8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traveled. 
(9)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade. 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas. 
(11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade. 
(12)  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of, or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
(13)  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(Code 1996, § 97.13; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 97.14. - Late applications. 
The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than five days before the date is proposed to be conducted. 
(Code 1996, § 97.14; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 97.15. - Standards for issuance. 
The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route. 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city. 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto. 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of fire-fighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to person or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance. 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(8)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods, or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Code 1996, § 97.15; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 97.16. - Rejection. 
The chief of police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within ten days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant within ten days after the date upon which application was filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Code 1996, § 97.16; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 97.17. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within ten days after notice. The city council shall act upon the appeal within 30 days after its receipt. 
(Code 1996, § 97.17; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 97.18. - Alternative permit. 
The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall within ten days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this subchapter. 
(Code 1996, § 97.18; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 97.19. - Notice to city and other officials. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The mayor. 
(2)  The city manager. 
(3)  The city attorney. 
(4)  The fire chief. 
(Code 1996, § 97.19; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 97.20. - Duties of permittee. 
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions, and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Code 1996, § 97.20; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 97.21. - Possession of permit. 
The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Code 1996, § 97.21; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 97.22. - Interference. 
No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle, or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(Code 1996, § 97.22; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 97.23. - Driving through parades; parking on parade route. 
(a)  No driver of a vehicle, street car, or trackless trolley shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designed as a parade. 
(b)  The chief of police shall have the authority when necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this section hereof. 
(Code 1996, § 97.23; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
Sec. 97.24. - Revocation of permit. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth. 
(Code 1996, § 97.24; Ord. No. 0046, 1-27-1994)  
CHAPTER 98. - PEANUT FESTIVAL 
 
Sec. 98.01. - Fire safety regulations. 
The city ordains the following fire safety regulations which shall be enforced at all venues of the Floresville Peanut Festival in the city during the dates established for the peanut festival. These regulations shall be enforced by the fire marshal, by his deputies, by the city health inspector, and by any city peace officer. Any person violating any of the following regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each transaction or violation of any of the following provisions shall be deemed a separate offense. The safety regulations provided for herein as follows: 
(1)  All cooking booths (i.e., all booths in which food is cooked or to be served hot) must have a fire extinguisher. 
(2)  All propane or gas appliances must be in good working order and all connections for all propane or gas appliances must be checked for leaks by the use of soapy water. Flames shall not be utilized to check for leaks. 
(3)  All flammable liquids must be stored in proper containers and kept away from heat and flames. 
(4)  Gasoline will not be used to start or rekindle cooking fires. If any liquid accelerant is used, it must be charcoal lighter fluid. 
(5)  Ashes from cooking fires will not be dumped into trash barrels or dumpsters, but rather will be disposed of safely (after all coals have been extinguished). 
(6)  All electrical currents in food booths will be operated with safety, and no electrical circuits will be overloaded or modified. 
(7)  All deep fat fryers must have a lid capable of covering the entire fryer. All deep fat fryers must be protected from contact with passersby. All deep fat fryers must be protected from any contact whatsoever with children. 
(8)  All cooking areas must be kept clear of accumulations of grease and paper trash or any other matters that constitute a fire hazard in the judgment of the fire marshal, any deputies, the city operations director or his deputies, or any city peace officer. 
(9)  Any fire-related incidents of any nature must be notified to the fire department, the fire marshal, any of his deputies, city peace officers, or city operations officials, immediately. 
(10)  All persons working in or operating any booth must be trained in emergency procedures, including the obligations contained in this chapter. 
(11)  All booths shall be open to inspection by any responsible officials of the city at all times. 
(12)  In the discretion of the appropriate official (fire marshal, city operations inspector, any deputy fire marshals or deputy city operations inspectors, or any city peace officers) a violation of any of these regulations may result in a reprimand or warning, in the issuance of a citation, or in the issuance of a citation and the shutting down of the booth for health or safety reasons. 
(Code 1996, § 98.01; Ord. No. 173, 8-11-2000)  
Sec. 98.02. - Temporary food service establishments. 
(a)  It is further ordained by the city that the following regulations as promulgated shall be enforced with respect to temporary food service establishments at all venues of the Floresville Peanut Festival, which regulations set forth minimum equipment and health requirements. These regulations, as set forth hereinafter, shall be enforceable by the authorized representatives of the city, including the city health inspector, city peace officers, city fire marshal, or any of their respective deputies. Any person who violates any of these regulations for minimum health requirements for temporary food service establishments shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each transaction or violation of any provision of these temporary food service establishment minimum health requirements shall be deemed a separate offense. The temporary food service establishment minimum health requirements are as forth herein. 
(b)  Operators of all food service booths shall be required to provide the following equipment, per booth, and observe the following health requirements: 
(1)  Two plastic or metal containers large enough to wash and sanitize utensils must be maintained in each stand or booth, one of which shall be utilized for hand washing, and a separate one shall be utilized for utensil washing. All hand washing and utensil washing shall be done with soap. 
(2)  Each booth shall maintain a minimum of one roll of paper towels, a minimum of three gallons of potable water, and a minimum of one bottle of chlorine bleach for sanitizing. 
(3)  All food service booths shall maintain facilities to heat or cook food at temperatures of at least 140 degrees Fahrenheit or above and to cool or preserve perishable foods at temperatures of 40 degrees Fahrenheit or below. 
(4)  Condiments and side items (onions, pickles, relish, etc.) may be maintained in containers with flip-top lids for self-service by customers. 
(5)  All persons handling food must wear plastic gloves at all times. 
(6)  Food booths will be inspected for compliance with these requirements. The inspector shall be entitled to charge an initial inspection fee, prior to the commencement of selling of any food as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. The fee shall be payable to the city. 
(Code 1996, § 98.02; Ord. No. 173, 8-11-2000)  
Sec. 98.03. - Vendor regulations. 
It is further ordained by the city that the regulations set forth in this chapter are promulgated as vendor regulations and shall apply to all venues during the Floresville Peanut Festival, and shall be enforceable by authorized representatives of the city, including the city health inspector, city peace officers, city fire marshal, or any of their respective deputies. Any person who violates any provision of these vendor's regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each transaction or violation of any provision of these vendor regulations shall be deemed a separate offense. The vendor regulations are as follows: 
(1)  All vendors operating on festival grounds are required to obtain a permit from the Floresville Peanut Festival Association and to comply with all rules of the association. 
(2)  All areas or venues will be maintained in an orderly, decent and lawful manner, and shall be operated without causing a breach of the peace. All laws of the state, ordinances of the county and ordinances of the city shall be complied with. 
(3)  All venues shall be inspected by city officials for health, fire safety and safety. 
(4)  All vendors shall be responsible for keeping the area around their venues free of trash and debris. Trash and debris shall be stored in dumpsters, except as expressly provided in this chapter. Upon completion of the vendors' participation at the peanut festival, each vendor is responsible for cleaning their booth area. 
(5)  Participation in a booth at the peanut festival shall be permitted only upon approval by the Floresville Peanut Festival Association. 
(Code 1996, § 98.03; Ord. No. 173, 8-11-2000)  
Title XI - BUSINESS REGULATIONS  
CHAPTER 110. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 1 et seq.; local regulation of alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.31 et seq.; local fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38; local license fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 61.36; local regulation of billboards and electric signs, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 108.55; local option elections, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 251.71 et seq. 
 
Sec. 110.01. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions in V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.04 shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
(Code 1996, § 110.01; Ord. No. 0093, 1-26-1989)  
Sec. 110.02. - Location and distance requirements. 
(a)  No person or other entity shall sell any alcoholic beverage or operate any business for the sale of any alcoholic beverage, within 300 feet of any church, public or private school, or public hospital. 
(b)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public or private school shall be: 
(1)  In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or 
(2)  If the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located. 
(Code 1996, § 110.02; Ord. No. 0093, 1-26-1989) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33.  
Sec. 110.03. - Consumption in public places. 
(a)  The possession of an open container or the public consumption of alcoholic beverages in the central business district of the city is a risk to the health and safety of the citizens of the city. The possession of an open container or the public consumption of alcoholic beverages in that central business district is prohibited. 
(b)  The city will adopt a map, plat, or diagram showing the central business district that is covered by the prohibition. 
(c)  This section does not prohibit the possession of an open container or the consumption of alcoholic beverages in motor vehicles, buildings not owned or controlled by the city, residential structures, or licensed premises located in the area of prohibition. 
(d)  In this section, the term "central business district" means a compact and contiguous geographical area of the city in which at least 90 percent of the land is used or zoned for commercial purposes and that is the area that has historically been the primary location in the city where business has been transacted. 
(e)  In this section, the term "open container" means a container that is no longer sealed. 
(Code 1996, § 110.03; Ord. No. 0093, 1-26-1989; Ord. No. 189, 10-25-2001) 
State Law reference— Authority for this section, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.35.  
Sec. 110.04. - Hours of sale. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity to sell or offer alcoholic beverages for sale except as permitted by V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 105. 
(Code 1996, § 110.04; Ord. No. 0093, 1-26-1989; Ord. No. 189, 10-25-2001; Ord. No. 197, 5-23-2002)  
CHAPTER 111. - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS; RETAIL FOOD STORES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Minimum standards of sanitation and health protection measures, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 341; Texas Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 431; food service establishments, retail food stores, mobile food units and roadside food vendors, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 437; public health measures relating to food, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 438; municipal regulatory authority concerning food service employees not preempted by state regulation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 438.037; municipality which is a member of public health district not prohibited from regulating or administering permit system concerning food service establishments, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 437.004(d). 
 
Sec. 111.01. - Adoption of Texas food establishment rules. 
The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rule as amended by the state department of health services found at 25 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 229 regarding the regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1996, § 111.01; Ord. No. 268, 7-30-2009)  
Sec. 111.02. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized agent or employee means the employees of the regulatory authority. 
Food establishment means a food service establishment, a retail food store, a temporary food establishment, a mobile food unit, and/or a roadside food vendor. 
Regulatory authority means the city and/or county. 
State rules means the state rules found at 25 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 229. These rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(Code 1996, § 111.02; Ord. No. 268, 7-30-2009)  
Sec. 111.03. - Permits and exemptions. 
(a)  A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferrable from one person to another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by this chapter. A valid permit must be posted in or on every food establishment regulated by this chapter. 
(b)  A food establishment operated solely by a nonprofit organization is exempt from the permitting requirements of this chapter, but is not exempt from compliance with state rules. The regulatory authority may require any information necessary to determine whether an organization is nonprofit for purposes of this exemption. 
(Code 1996, § 111.03; Ord. No. 268, 7-30-2009)  
Sec. 111.04. - Application for permit and fees. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name, address, email address and telephone number of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment and the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit. Renewals of permits are required on an annual basis and the same information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit. 
(b)  Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with state laws and rules. A food establishment that does not comply with state laws and rules will be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit. 
(c)  The fee schedule applicable to permits issued under this chapter shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1996, § 111.04; Ord. No. 268, 7-30-2009)  
Sec. 111.05. - Review of plans. 
(a)  Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that 20 percent or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The plans and specifications will be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by this chapter. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion. 
(b)  Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(Code 1996, § 111.05; Ord. No. 268, 7-30-2009)  
Sec. 111.06. - Suspension of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (b) of this section. When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within 20 days of receipt of a request for a hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(Code 1996, § 111.06; Ord. No. 268, 7-30-2009)  
Sec. 111.07. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period. 
(b)  If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(Code 1996, § 111.07; Ord. No. 268, 7-30-2009)  
Sec. 111.08. - Administrative process. 
(a)  A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(b)  The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority. 
(Code 1996, § 111.08; Ord. No. 268, 7-30-2009)  
Sec. 111.09. - Food safety and inspection fee. 
(a)  Each and every food service establishment within the jurisdictional limits of the city shall be subject to an annual food safety and inspection fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(b)  Failure to comply with this section shall result in the institution of penalties for violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 111.10; Ord. No. 2014-019, 11-20-2014)  
CHAPTER 113. - PEDDLERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate hawkers and peddlers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.031; regulation of sales and solicitation, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1801 et seq. 
 
SUBCHAPTER I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 113.01. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate house-to-house solicitation and sales within the city limits and along public rights of way of the city, in the interest of public safety, comfort, convenience, and protection of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 113.01; Ord. No. 0159, 5-14-1998)  
Sec. 113.02. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Peddler means and includes any person, whether resident of the city or not, offering goods, wares, merchandise, farm products or provisions for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or one who solicits orders as a separate transaction. 
(Code 1996, § 113.02; Ord. No. 0159, 5-14-1998)  
Sec. 113.03. - Hours allowed to sell. 
It shall be unlawful to sell or solicit in the city except during the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 1996, § 113.11; Ord. No. 0159, 5-14-1998)  
Sec. 113.04. - Excessive noise prohibited. 
No peddler, nor any person in his behalf, shall shout, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device or sound amplifying system upon any of the streets, allies, parks or other public places of said city or upon any private premises in said city where sound is emitted or produced to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such peddler proposes to sell. 
(Code 1996, § 113.17; Ord. No. 0159, 5-14-1998)  
Sec. 113.05. - Location of sales. 
(a)  Anyone wishing to sell, take orders for immediate or future delivery, take money or property, or attempt to do any of the foregoing, in exchange for a good or service, is prohibited from peddling, soliciting, vending or advertising from any public street or park in the city. It is also expressly prohibited to solicit anywhere a sign is posted that says "No soliciting" or words and/or symbols to that effect. 
(b)  Anyone wishing to peddle, solicit or vend from private property may do so as long as all applicable codes and ordinances of the city are met. There can be no such activity on vacant, unimproved property. On improved property, a vendor may set up an accessory as long as: 
(1)  The existing property and uses are in compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances. 
(2)  The accessory use of the vendor will be in compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances, e.g., vendor will meet zoning requirements for setbacks and permitted uses, fire codes, health codes. 
(Code 1996, § 113.18; Ord. No. 0159, 5-14-1998; Ord. No. 0160, 8-13-1998)  
Sec. 113.06. - Posting of no peddlers or no solicitors sign. 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to attempt doing business at any home or business that has a no peddlers or no solicitors sign posted on the property.  
SUBCHAPTER II. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 113.10. - Permits required. 
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to go from house to house or from place to place in the corporate limits of the city, or on the public streets or sidewalks of the city soliciting, selling, or taking orders for or offering for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines, or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines without having first applied for and obtained a permit from the police department. It shall also hereafter be unlawful to sell or solicit in the city as aforesaid without a valid permit in possession. A copy of the approved permit shall be forwarded by city hall to the city police department. 
(Code 1996, § 113.10; Ord. No. 0159, 5-14-1998)  
Sec. 113.11. - Application. 
(a)  Applicant for a permit under this chapter must show appropriate credentials for the profession or represented agency and file with city hall an application on the permit to be furnished, giving the following information: 
(1)  Name, permanent, local and email addresses and telephone number. 
(2)  Name, address, email address and telephone number of person that applicant represents or for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited. 
(3)  Description of goods offered for sale. 
(4)  Period of time applicant desires to sell or solicit in the city. 
(5)  Applicant's vehicle description (make, model, year); its license number and applicant's driver's license number or other means of identification. 
(6)  A copy of a valid sales tax permit. 
(b)  This information must be provided with an owner/vendor agreement and location map (see section 113.18). 
(Code 1996, § 113.12; Ord. No. 0159, 5-14-1998)  
Sec. 113.12. - Term of permit. 
Each permit shall be valid for one month from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1996, § 113.13; Ord. No. 0159, 5-14-1998)  
Sec. 113.13. - Permit fee. 
(a)  The permit fee shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, payable at time of issuance. The permit may be denied temporarily or permanently for inadequate or fraudulent credentials or fraudulent information on the application. 
(b)  The permit fee shall not apply to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business, nor to sales made under the authority and by order of law, nor to farmers, ranchers or persons selling farm, ranch or dairy products that they raise or produce themselves, nor to sales made by students of any county public school pursuant to a program endorsed by said school nor to sales made by members of a church pursuant to a legitimate fund raising activity or said church, nor to fundraising activities of county nonprofit organizations which are authorized by their charter or board of directors. 
(Code 1996, § 113.14; Ord. No. 0159, 5-14-1998; Ord. No. 0160, 8-13-1998)  
Sec. 113.14. - Non-assignment of permit. 
No permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferred or assigned. 
(Code 1996, § 113.15; Ord. No. 0159, 5-14-1998)  
Sec. 113.15. - Exhibition of permit. 
A peddler shall be required to exhibit his permit at the request of any law enforcement officer or any citizen. 
(Code 1996, § 113.19; Ord. No. 0159, 5-14-1998)  
Sec. 113.16. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  A permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the municipal judge of the city after notice of hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for permit; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as a peddler; 
(3)  Any violation of this chapter; 
(4)  Conducting the business of peddling in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of hearing for the revocation of a permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his address given in the application for license at least five days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(Code 1996, § 113.20; Ord. No. 0159, 5-14-1998)  
Sec. 113.17. - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of a city hall employee or that of the police department in the denial of an application for permit, or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a permit as provided herein, shall have the right to appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city secretary, within 14 days after notice of action complained of has been mailed to the persons' address given in the application, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The city council shall set a time and place for the hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant. The decision and order of the city council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1996, § 113.21; Ord. No. 0159, 5-14-1998)  
CHAPTER 114. - SALE OF NATURAL GAS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Oil and gas, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code ch. 81 et seq. 
 
Sec. 114.01. - Gas fitters; bond; certificate; fee. 
(a)  Any person, firm, or corporation, before engaging in the business of gas fittings, must file a bond, payable to the city for the sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, conditioned that all work shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner in accordance with the rules and regulations therefor and that the makers thereof will hold the city harmless from all damage which may arise from such work. Such bond must be approved by the city council. 
(b)  Furthermore, any person, firm, or corporation desiring to engage in the business of gas fitting in the city shall first prove himself competent to do such work through an examination by a board consisting of the mayor, the city gas inspector and a third member to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Each person examined if found competent, shall be issued a certificate for which a charge as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be made, provided, however, that at any time, the gas inspector, with the consent of the board above-named, after the preferring of proper charges before said board, and a hearing being granted, any for good causes, annul such certificate. It shall not be lawful for any person firm or corporation to engage to do a job of gas pipe fitting without such certificate. 
(c)  No certificate shall ever be issued for more than one year, but may be renewed from year to year upon proper application in writing, filed with said board and upon payment of $10.00, if said board is satisfied such applicant is entitled thereto. 
(d)  All certificates shall be nontransferable. Proper record shall be kept by said board of all certificates issued, their dates and the names, post office addresses, email addresses and telephone numbers of those to whom issued. 
(Code 1996, § 114.02; Ord. No. 0014, 4-26-1984)  
Sec. 114.02. - Permit required. 
No gas fitter shall install gas piping in any new or old building within the limits of the city, without first making application for and receiving a permit from the city gas inspector for the construction of said work. These permits shall be made in triplicate: one for the city, one for the gas company and one for the party doing the work. 
(Code 1996, § 114.03; Ord. No. 0014, 4-26-1984)  
Sec. 114.03. - Compliance with specifications. 
The specifications of the International Mechanical Code and city ordinance requirements shall be observed in order to secure gas. 
(Code 1996, § 114.15; Ord. No. 0014, 4-26-1984)  
CHAPTER 116. - INCIDENT MANAGEMENT TOWING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Towing and Booting Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2308; tow truck regulation by political subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2308.201 et seq.; Vehicle Storage Facility Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2303; accidents and accident reports, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 550; authority of governor to have wreckage removed in disasters, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.023; unlawful interception, use or disclosure of wire or oral communications, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 16.02; theft of wrecked motor vehicle, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 31.03; motor carrier registration, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 643; salvage vehicle dealers, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2302. 
 
Sec. 116.01. - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to all incident management tows performed by tow truck companies inside the corporate boundaries of the city, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 2, 2-11-2010)  
Sec. 116.02. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accident-related tow means any incident management tow of a vehicle by a towing company in which the tow truck is summoned by the city police department because of a traffic accident. 
Consent tow means any tow of a motor vehicle in which the tow truck is summoned by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody, or control of the vehicle. The term "consent tow" does not include an incident management tow or a private property tow. 
Incident management tow means any tow of a vehicle by a towing company in which the tow truck is summoned by the city police department because of a traffic accident or to an incident. The phrase "incident management tow" includes an "accident-related tow" and a "non-accident related tow." 
Nonconsent tow means any tow of a motor vehicle that is not a consent tow, including: 
(1)  An incident management tow; and 
(2)  A private property tow. 
Non-accident-related tow means any incident management tow of a vehicle by a towing company in which the tow truck is summoned by the city police department for reasons other than a traffic accident. 
Towing company means an individual, association, corporation, or other legal entity that controls, operates, or directs the operation of one or more tow trucks over a public roadway in this state but does not include a political subdivision of the state. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 3, 2-11-2010)  
Sec. 116.03. - Towing rotation list. 
(a)  City police department. The city police department is responsible for establishing, maintaining, and supervising the administration of a towing rotation list for tow truck companies capable of responding to requests by the city police department for incident management tows within the corporate boundaries of the city within 20 minutes of receiving a request, 24 hours per day, seven days per week. The city police department is authorized to adopt administrative policies, consistent with this chapter, for the purpose of implementing this chapter. 
(b)  Delegation of administration of towing rotation list. All tow truck companies placed on the towing rotation list in accordance with this chapter are hereby charged with the responsibility of adopting and administering a central dispatching procedure in a manner approved by the city police chief or designee. The central dispatching procedure must be administered at no cost to the city or the city police department and must ensure consistent rotation of tow truck companies on the towing rotation list. 
(c)  Pre-approved central dispatching procedure (default procedure). Unless the city police chief or designee approves an alternative central dispatching procedure, the central dispatching procedure effective at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is as follows: All tow truck companies on the towing rotation list shall agree to purchase one cellular telephone to be shared among one another at their own collective cost. On March 1, 2010, the cellular phone shall be initially placed in the possession of one towing company, who shall maintain possession of the cellular phone until 12:00 p.m. the following Monday, when it shall be tendered to the next towing company on the towing rotation list. The cell phone shall then be passed from towing company to towing company, in consecutive order according to the towing rotation list, on a weekly basis, beginning at 12:00 p.m. Monday and ending at 12:00 p.m. the following Monday. The city police department shall make all requests for incident management tows by calling the telephone number assigned to the cellular phone. Whichever towing company is in possession of the cellular phone is responsible for responding to the city police department's request for an incident management tow. 
(d)  Application for placement on towing rotation list. The city police chief may only place a towing company on the towing rotation list who: 
(1)  Submits a written application to the city police department to be placed on the towing rotation list; 
(2)  States in its application that the towing company is capable of responding to requests for incident management tows within 20 minutes of receiving a request, 24 hours per day, seven days per week; and 
(3)  Provides, in the application, one central phone number that the city police chief may use to contact the applicant 24 hours per day, seven days per week, and one cell phone number that the city police chief may use to contact the applicant. 
The city police chief is authorized to adopt a mandatory form for the referenced application. The city police department must require applicants to execute an acknowledgment and consent of conditions for placement on the towing rotation list, detailing the conditions imposed by this chapter, prior to placing any applicant on the towing rotation list. 
(e)  Voluntary removal from towing rotation list. The city police department may remove any towing company from the towing rotation list upon receiving a written request from the towing company to be removed from the towing rotation list. 
(f)  Involuntary removal from towing rotation list. 
(1)  The city police department may remove the towing company from the towing rotation list if the city police department determines that a towing company on the towing rotation list has: 
a.  Failed to respond to requests for incident management tows on three or more occasions; 
b.  Failed to follow the central dispatching procedure approved by the city police department; 
c.  Failed to follow other administrative polices established by the city police department; 
d.  Failed to maintain or update licenses required by state law; 
e.  Failed to comply with standards required by state law; or 
f.  Failed to maintain insurance required by state law. 
(2)  The city police chief must send any towing company removed from the towing rotation list notice of the city police department's removal decision within five days after the date the towing company is removed from the towing rotation list. 
a.  Appeal of removal decision. Any towing company involuntarily removed from the towing rotation list may appeal the city police department's removal decision to the city council by filing with the city secretary, within 14 calendar days from the date the towing company received notice of removal, a written request for a hearing before the city council. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the city secretary shall schedule the hearing for the date of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. If a towing company fails to request a hearing before the city council in accordance with this section, the towing company is precluded from filing a new application for placement on the towing rotation list for one year from the date the towing company received notice of removal. 
b.  City council determination. The city council, in its sole and absolute discretion, may affirm or reverse the decision of the city police department. The city council's decision is a final, legislative decision, and each towing company acknowledges by its participation that the council's decision cannot be appealed to any court of law. 
(g)  Independent contractors. All tow truck companies on the towing rotation list are independent contractors with respect to the city and shall not be deemed to be employees or agents of the city. 
(h)  Insurance. Any towing company on the towing rotation list must maintain liability insurance in accordance with state law. 
(i)  Indemnity. Each towing company on the towing rotation list must, as a condition to being placed on towing rotation list, indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all claims or causes of action asserted against the city that arise out of or relate to the towing company's performance of any acts authorized by this chapter. As a condition for participation, each towing company must provide the city proof of insurance and list the city as an additional insured and file a copy of proof of insurance with the city's police chief or designee. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 4, 2-11-2010)  
Sec. 116.04. - Fee schedule. 
(a)  The city council is authorized to impose and amend fees that may be charged for in connection with performing incident management tows within the city's corporate boundaries that ensure tow truck companies performing incident management tows within the city's corporate boundaries receive fair value for services performed. 
(b)  As a condition to being placed on the towing rotation list, each towing company whose name is placed on the towing rotation list may only charge fees established by the city council in connection with performing an incident management tow. 
(c)  Upon determining that a towing company on the towing rotation list has failed to charge the fees established by the city council, the city police department shall immediately remove the towing company from the towing rotation list in accordance with section 116.03. 
(d)  The fees shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 5, 2-11-2010)  
Sec. 116.05. - Towing fee studies. 
(a)  Request for towing fee studies. On or before May 30 of each year, any towing company on the towing rotation list may request the city to perform a towing fee study. The request must be made in writing and must set forth specific facts establishing that market conditions that have resulted in the towing company's inability to receive fair value for services performed in connection with responding to requests for incident management tows. 
(b)  Public hearing on fee schedule. Upon receipt of a request for fee study, the city council shall schedule a public hearing not sooner than 60 days after receipt of the request and not later than 90 days after receipt of the request to determine whether allowable fees for incident management tows represent the fair value of the services performed by tow truck companies on the towing rotation list. The city shall solicit and accept public comment during the period preceding the public hearing. The determination made by the city council at the public hearing is a final, legislative decision, and cannot be appealed to any court of law. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 6, 2-11-2010)  
CHAPTER 117. - COIN-OPERATED MACHINES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Coin-operated machines, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2153. 
 
Sec. 117.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business owner or permit holder means and includes a person or sole individual, owning or having the care, control, management or possession of any "coin and/or slot operated machine" who exhibits, displays or permits to be exhibited or displayed, in his location of business or upon premises under his control, any coin- and/or slot-operated machine in this city. 
Coin-operated or slot machine means any kind of machine or device operated by or with a coin or other United States currency, metal slug, token, electronic card, or check, including a music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine. 
Excluded machines means: 
(1)  A stamp vending machine; 
(2)  A service coin-operated machine; or 
(3)  If subject to an occupation or gross receipts tax, a: 
a.  Gas meter; 
b.  Food vending machine; 
c.  Confection vending machine; 
d.  Beverage vending machine; 
e.  Merchandise vending machine; or 
f.  Cigarette vending machine. 
Gambling device means any electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical contrivance not excluded under subsection (2) of this section that, for a consideration, affords the player an opportunity to obtain anything of value, the award of which is determined solely or partially by chance, even though accompanied by some skill, whether or not the prize is automatically paid by the contrivance. 
(1)  The term "gambling device" includes, but is not limited to, gambling device versions of bingo, keno, blackjack, lottery, roulette, video poker, or similar electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical games, or facsimiles thereof, that operate by chance or partially so, that as a result of the play or operation of the game award credits or free games, and that record the number of free games or credits so awarded and the cancellation or removal of the free games or credits; and 
(2)  The term "gambling device" does not include any electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical contrivance designed, made, and adapted solely for bona fide amusement purposes if the contrivance rewards the player exclusively with non-cash merchandise prizes, toys, or novelties, or a presentation of value redeemable for those items, that have a wholesale value available from a single play of the game or device of not more than ten times the amount charged to play the game or device once or $5.00, whichever is less. 
Manager means and includes a person or sole individual having the care, control, or management of any coin- and/or slot-operated machine in his location of business or upon premises under his control within this city. 
Property owner means and includes a person, individual, firm, company, association or corporation owning a building, property or facility on which a business will operate within the confines of all laws regulating the business in local, state or federal laws. 
Service coin-operated machine means and includes every pay toilet, pay telephone, and all other machines or devices, which dispense services and merchandise. 
Skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine means any kind of coin-operated machine that dispenses, or is used or is capable of being used to dispense or afford, amusement, skill, or pleasure or is operated for any purpose, other than for dispensing only merchandise, music, or service. 
(1)  The term "skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine" includes a marble machine, marble table machine, marble shooting machine, miniature racetrack machine, miniature football machine, miniature golf machine, miniature bowling machine, billiard or pool game, or machine or device that dispenses merchandise or commodities or plays music in connection with or in addition to dispensing skill or pleasure; and 
(2)  The term "skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine" does not include an amusement machine designed exclusively for a child. 
(Ord. No. 2015-033, § 1, 12-10-2015; Ord. of 1-11-2016, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.002.  
Sec. 117.02. - Limit of permits allowed. 
To regulate the amount of locations of skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine businesses within the incorporated city, no more than five total locations may operate skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine businesses within the city, allowing for one licensed location per person or business entity. Each location shall be limited to a maximum of 25 skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machines. 
(Ord. No. 2015-033, § 2, 12-10-2015; Ord. of 1-11-2016, § 2)  
Sec. 117.03. - Requirements, local permit fees, expirations and renewals, restrictions and exemptions for coin-operated machine premises permit. 
(a)  Requirements. 
(1)  All persons, owning, possessing, maintaining, or operating skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machines for use by the general public, private clubs, associations, fraternities or orders shall apply for a license and registration from the city. The license application must contain a complete statement about the identity of the owner of the business seeking to install skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine: to include name, date of birth, social security number, business name, D.B.A. information, comptroller tax I.D. number, mailing address, email address and telephone number of owner, address of residence; address of business; the location where the business will operate; the number of machines at the location; a list of serial numbers, one assigned to each machine; the nature of any current business being operated at the location; the date when each skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine was placed at the location; the owner of the location where the skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine will operate; and any other pertinent information that may be required by the city in the licensing and registration of skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machines. Information provided for records will be updated on a monthly basis. If there is a change in any type of information that is observed and/or completed by the permit holder, property owner and/or manager the information will be immediately advised and/or relayed to the permit office. 
(2)  A license issued for skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machines under this chapter: 
a.  Is required for each location and is personal to the applicant and may not be sold, bargained, conveyed, transferred or assigned to any other individual; with the exemptions as noted in subsections (c)(5) and (3) of this section. 
b.  May only be issued to a single individual, to be referred to herein as "business owner"; 
c.  Does not vest any property or right in the licensee, except for the right to conduct the licensed business; 
d.  No firms, clubs, corporations, or other legal entities including private clubs or associations shall be allowed to obtain a license to operate a coin-operated skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine. 
(b)  Fees. A business owner, manager or lessee of premises on which a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine is made available to others shall be required to secure a permit for each machine at such location by paying to the city. 
(1)  An initial new permit fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time at time of application for each machine; 
(2)  All state-regulated tax permit fees; 
(3)  An occupation tax fee per skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine in an amount set at one-fourth of the State Occupation Tax as set in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.401; 
(4)  And any other fees required by city ordinance. Thereafter a per annual renewal inspection and coin-operated machine permit fee for each machine will be as follows; 
a.  A business renewal permit fee in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time; 
b.  An occupation tax fee per skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine in an amount set at one-fourth of the State Occupation Tax as set in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.401; 
c.  All other fees as required by state regulated tax permit fees. If a permit holder, business owner, manager or lessee is found to be operating more machines than previously reported, a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time per machine, over the original reported machines, shall be levied against the permit holder, business owner, manager or lessee. 
(c)  Expiration and renewal. Permits issued at any point of the calendar year shall automatically expire upon the following: 
(1)  On December 31 of each calendar year; 
(2)  On the change of ownership of the building where the skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machines are located; 
(3)  Upon removal or sealing of a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine from a licensed location; 
(4)  Upon revocation of license by the city or its designees; 
(5)  Upon surrender of license by registered business owner; or 
(6)  Upon the death of the applicant. 
All permits shall be up for renewal by December 31 of each calendar year. All businesses in operation in accordance with this chapter are required to have the renewal-permit for each machine paid in full prior to January 31 of the renewal year. The city shall not refund any portion of a coin-operated machine permit fee after the permit has been issued, nor shall it prorate or reduce in the amount any fee due to the city. If in the event, fees are not paid in full by January 31 of each calendar year, the permit holder, business owner, manager or lessee shall be allowed ten business days, not including official holidays, to pay in full at a rate of 1.5 times the original amount. If fees are not paid within time allotted, permit shall be revoked. 
(d)  Restrictions. 
(1)  Persons under 18 prohibited. The presence of persons under 18 years of age on premises subject to coin-operated machine location licenses, is prohibited. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this chapter that the person under 18 years of age was a bona fide employee of the establishment subject to a coin-operated machine premises permit. A sign notice, informing the public of said restriction, shall be placed at the entrance of the location. 
(2)  Alcoholic beverages prohibited. The presence of any alcoholic beverages on premise of a coin-operated machine businesses is prohibited unless such are contained in retail packaging and sold for consumption off-premises. No individual, person, owner or manager shall allow or be allowed to consume any alcoholic beverage on premise of a coin-operated machine business location. No individual, person, owner or manager shall give, sell, bring to or allow the bringing of any alcoholic beverage on said premises of a coin-operated machine business. 
(3)  Posting of permits. The location license shall be posted conspicuously, noticeable to common view. Permits for each machine shall be affixed within easy view of the public and inspectors. 
(4)  License and permit limitations. Solely one license to operate a location with a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machines shall be issued to any one person, business, or individual. No more than 25 skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machines shall be allowable at any single licensed location. A transfer of permit shall not be allowed except as allowed in subsection (3) of this section. A new permit may only be issued to replace a permit that has been voluntarily relinquished or revoked. New permits may only be issued to qualified registrants on the city's waiting list, in the order of their registration, or first qualified applicant if there are no applicants on the waiting list. 
(5)  Window visibility. Windows shall be unobstructed and/or unpainted, as to allow for visibility. All windows sun screened or tinted must allow light transmission of 20 percent or more. No luminous reflectance, mirror, or reflective type material shall be allowed to be placed on same windows. 
(6)  Sign requirements. All signs for advertisement, shall comply with city zoning ordinances. No unauthorized signs shall be placed or allowed to be placed on the permitted business property without prior approval from the city. Any signs deemed to be out of compliance with chapter 153 shall be grounds for revocation of skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine location license. 
(e)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Exemption arising under subsection (c)(5) of this section. Upon the death of the holder of a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine permit, the executor/administrator of the estate, business successor, or immediate next of kin may continue operations of the a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine business and have the permit transferred over to said entity's name. All requirements still apply and continued operation must conform with this and other city ordinances that apply to business operations. 
(2)  Locations which, at the time of passage of this chapter, do not meet the distance requirements as set forth in section 117.05(a) or exceed the maximum number of machines or number of locations as set forth in section 117.02 shall not be required to comply with those sections of this chapter until one of the events as outlined in subsection (c)(2)—(6) of this section occurs or additional machines are installed at a subject location, whichever is first. At such time the subject location shall immediately lose its exempted status and become subject to all other provisions of this chapter as though it was a new application. During the term of this exemption, each of the locations subject to this section must comply with all other terms of this chapter, including, but not limited to, permit fees, sale of alcoholic beverages, age limits, and other restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 2015-033, § 3, 12-10-2015; Ord. of 1-11-2016, § 3)  
Sec. 117.04. - Waiting list and maintaining of list. 
The waiting list, comprised of all applicants, resident and nonresident both, shall be one single waiting list. The waiting list shall not be utilized until the number of locations in the city exempt from this chapter under section 117.03(e)(2) is reduced to an amount less than the total number of locations allowed under section 117.02 and no new locations shall be licensed or permitted until such time. The list will be on a first come, first serve basis, based on the initial application dates that are filed. This shall be a continuous working list to not allow for any modifications or advantages to solely benefit any one person. This is to allow for all persons a fair, balanced and reasonable opportunity to receive a permit. 
(1)  All persons, or sole individuals, who are not eligible for an initial permit under section 117.03 on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but who desire to obtain a permit when the opportunity to do so becomes available, shall register with the city code enforcement department and be placed on a single waiting list by preparing the appropriate forms required by the city's code compliance department. 
(2)  The city shall create and maintain one waiting list. This waiting list shall be for resident applicants and for nonresident applicants. A place on this waiting list for permits is on a first-come, first served basis. 
(3)  The total number of location licenses issued to residents and nonresidents is as defined in section 117.02. 
(4)  The waiting list shall be comprised of the business owner or sole individual that will hold the location license, and shall not differ from that person. 
(Ord. No. 2015-033, § 4, 12-10-2015; Ord. of 1-11-2016, § 4)  
Sec. 117.05. - Business location restrictions and relocation requirements. 
(a)  The city may not issue a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine location license for use within 1,500 feet from door entry of business to property line of the following: 
(1)  All places of education or higher learning, to include pre-school facilities, child day care, elementary, middle or intermediate schools, high schools, places of higher learning colleges, technical schools or universities; 
(2)  Hospitals or places where medical attention is received or pharmaceuticals are dispensed, to include pharmacies, clinics, night clinics, adult day care, veteran hospitals, hospitals, major trauma units, or where ambulatory services are stationed; 
(3)  Any place of religious worship, to include any established building of gathering for worship, to include, but not be limited to, a building of a denomination or other location where a group of people (a congregation) comes to perform acts of religious praise, honor, or devotion; 
(4)  Any city, county, school district, or other property owned or operated by a political subdivision of the state or the federal government; or 
(5)  Any location where children congregate, to include, but not be limited to, playgrounds, parks, city maintained swimming pools, restaurants or eateries that facilitate a playground area or day care centers. 
(b)  In accordance with city zoning ordinances, the city may only issue a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine location license in zoned areas as follows: a commercial or industrial zone. 
(c)  There shall be required to be an amount of parking spaces for each location as calculated under the ordinances of the city for commercial property locations. 
(d)  Relocation of premises. Active business permit holders who wish to relocate the licensed establishment for which they are permitted to another location must notify the city's code compliance department immediately and receive an amended permit prior to relocating. Upon immediate notice to the city's code compliance department, the business owner shall be allowed 45 days to move all operations to new location. The 45 days shall commence at 12:00 midnight on the same day after notice was received, and shall continue to 12:00 midnight on the 45th day. The city reserves the right to deny the relocation in the event that it finds significant negative impact for the surrounding properties or is a violation of this subsection (a) or (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-033, § 5, 12-10-2015; Ord. of 1-11-2016, § 5)  
Sec. 117.06. - Issuance of permits and licenses. 
The following section shall apply specifically to all skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine locations in accordance with this chapter as well as state and federal laws. Those skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machines herein not specifically mentioned are not exempt from state and federal laws as applied to tax fees. 
(1)  Every location which owns, controls, possesses, exhibits, or displays any skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine, shall require a location license issued by the city in accordance with this chapter. 
(2)  Every owner hereinabove, who owns, controls, possesses, exhibits, displays, or who permits to be exhibited or displayed in the city any skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine, shall pay and there is hereby levied on every coin-operated and/or slot machine as defined in this chapter, except such as are exempted herein, an annual permit fee as set forth in section 117.03. 
(3)  All permits for skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machines are payable annually in advance. Prior to the placement by an owner of a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine, there shall be attached or affixed thereto a valid permit for the machine. 
(4)  Machines defined in this chapter as skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machines, capable of independent operation with separate activating coin mechanisms whether placed separately or in series and regardless of any electrical mechanical or manual component, shall be considered separate machines in regard to permitting. 
(Ord. No. 2015-033, § 6, 12-10-2015; Ord. of 1-11-2016, § 6)  
Sec. 117.07. - Replacement of lost, stolen and destroyed valid permits. 
The city shall not make a cash refund of the permit fee paid on any skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine. The city shall provide a duplicate permit if a valid permit has been lost, stolen, or destroyed. The fee for each duplicate permit is as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. An original permit for which a duplicate permit has been issued is void. 
(Ord. No. 2015-033, § 7, 12-10-2015; Ord. of 1-11-2016, § 7)  
Sec. 117.08. - Registration of machines. 
Each skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine shall be registered with the city by make, type and serial number. A permit issued by the city or state shall be affixed to each such registered machine. Each skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine shall have a serial number, which is clearly visible on the outside surface of the machine. If a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine is not manufactured with a serial number, an owner shall assign a serial number to the machine and either stamp or engrave the assigned number on the machine. 
(Ord. No. 2015-033, § 8, 12-10-2015; Ord. of 1-11-2016, § 8)  
Sec. 117.09. - Attachment of permits to coin-operated machines. 
A permit shall be securely affixed to any permanent surface of a machine in such a manner that the permit may be clearly seen by the public. A permit issued for a certain skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine shall not be transferred to another machine. 
(Ord. No. 2015-033, § 9, 12-10-2015; Ord. of 1-11-2016, § 9)  
Sec. 117.10. - Sealing of machines. 
(a)  The city may seal any skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine on which the initial premises permit fee or the yearly renewal premises permit fee has not been paid. The city shall charge an administrative fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for the release of any machine sealed as provided herein for nonpayment of fees. It shall be unlawful for any person to break the seal affixed in the name of the city or exhibit, display, or remove from location any machine on which the seal has been broken. 
(b)  Every skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine subject to the payment of the fees levied in this chapter, and upon which the fee has not been paid as provided herein, is herby declared to be a public nuisance, and the business displaying said machines may be denied operation by the city, as well as denying the continued operation of said business. All permits allowing said business, as referred to in this chapter, to operate may be denied and/or discontinued. 
(c)  Upon proof that all fees have been paid in full and an inspection of the location of business has been completed any and/or all sealed machines may be unsealed by the code compliance department, police department or their designees. 
(Ord. No. 2015-033, § 10, 12-10-2015; Ord. of 1-11-2016, § 10)  
Sec. 117.11. - Existing laws and inspections. 
(a)  Nothing herein shall be construed or have the effect to license, permit, authorize or legalize any machine, device, table or coin-operated or slot machine, the keeping, exhibition, operation, display or maintenance of which is now illegal or in violation of any article of the penal code of the state and of any federal laws of the United States of America. 
(b)  "Gambling devices," as defined by V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 47, and as interpreted by judicial decision (Hardy v. State, No 01-0779, Tex. 2003 and One Super Cherry Master Video 8-Liner Machine v. State, No. 01-0673, Tex. 2003), are prohibited from use as coin-operated or slot machines or any machine for which a permit may be lawfully issued. 
(c)  In addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by law, violation of this chapter shall be cause for revocation of a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine location license issued pursuant to this chapter. The city reserves the right to inspect the premises of any skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine business establishment in order to investigate compliance with this chapter. The owner of a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine business or their employees shall not prohibit city inspectors, police or fire personnel, at any time, to enter the premise of operation of the permit to ensure there are no violations of city, state or federal laws to include correct machine count issued to the permit, correct licenses or permits per machine, fire code violations or penal code violations. The entries and exits shall be maintained as to allow unobstructed, unregulated, free entry into said location by inspectors, police or fire personnel without any delay of entry. Any violations of this section shall be considered a violation of this chapter and will be considered grounds for revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-033, § 11, 12-10-2015; Ord. of 1-11-2016, § 11)  
Sec. 117.12. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person, business owner, manager violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction of such violation, be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. The unlawful operation of any single skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine shall constitute a distinct and separate offense for each day that the same is operated, or exhibited and is punishable by a fine not to exceed that as set forth in this section. In addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by law, violation of this section shall be cause for revocation of a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine premises permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  The city council, or its designees, reserves the right to revoke any location license or permit to maintain and operate a skill or pleasure coin-operated or slot machine business of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-033, § 12, 12-10-2015; Ord. of 1-11-2016, § 12)  
Title XIII - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
CHAPTER 130. - GENERAL OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 1 et seq. 
 
SUBCHAPTER I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 130.01. - Loitering; window peeping prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on any private property situated within the city limits without the consent of the owner of such property. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Loiter means the action of a person who shall remain at any given location without having any legitimate business at that location for an unreasonable length of time. 
Owner means any person in lawful possession of the property or dwelling house involved. 
(b)  The chief of police and his deputies, and any other duly authorized peace officer acting under county or state authority is hereby empowered to arrest any person suspected of loitering on private property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to look, peer, or peep into, or be found loitering around, or within view of any window not on his own property, with the intent of looking through such window in such a manner as would be likely to interfere with the occupants reasonable expectation of privacy without the occupant's express or implied consent. 
(Code 1996, § 130.02; Ord. No. 0027, 8-4-1960)  
Sec. 130.02. - Cutting across private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cross over or through in an automobile or other vehicle public or private real property in the city without the consent of the owner, proprietor, occupant, lessee, or agent in charge of such property unless such passage be made upon the right-of-way of a public road, or a private right-of-way, and in such case the person shall first receive the permission of the owner, proprietor, occupant, lessee, or agent in charge of such private right-of-way. 
(Code 1996, § 130.03; Ord. No. 0023, 12-19-1973)  
Sec. 130.03. - Hunting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to take, kill, wound, shoot at, or hunt any wild game animal or wild game bird, or for that matter, any bird or fowl within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 130.04; Ord. No. 0023, 12-19-1973) 
State Law reference— V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 1 et seq.  
Sec. 130.04. - Discharge of firearms or fireworks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any type of firearm within the corporate limits of the city except at an approved shooting range. It shall also be unlawful for any person to sell, possess, discharge, ignite or explode any fireworks within the corporate limits of the city except as part of an city-approved public display. Fireworks shall include sparklers. 
(Code 1996, § 130.05; Ord. No. 0023, 12-19-1973) 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to regulate the discharge of firearms, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 229.001 et seq.; authority of municipality to regulate the use of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.003; state law does not preempt municipal authority to prohibit or regulate use of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.004; regulation of fireworks and fireworks displays, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.001 et seq.; fireworks use, displays and regulations, 28 Tex. Admin. Code § 34.801 et seq.  
SUBCHAPTER II. - CURFEW FOR MINORS 
 
Sec. 130.20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consent means actual consent by a parent to the minor's presence in public as provided in this subchapter. 
Knowledge means knowledge that the minor is not at home and that the minor is not under the adequate supervision of another responsible adult. It need not be acknowledged that the minor is in any particular place at any particular time, but rather solely knowledge that the minor is unsupervised. 
Minor means anyone under the age of 16 other than a minor who has had his disabilities removed for general purposes or a person under the age of 16 who is legally married. 
Parent means any adult having the legal or actual responsibility for the care, custody, and control of a minor, including the natural parent, the managing conservator, the joint managing conservator, the possessory conservator, a non-parent managing conservator, joint managing conservator, or possessory conservator, a grandparent with established access rights, a legal guardian of the person of a minor, or an authorized agent of any of the above. In this regard, a parent is any person who has a legal right to possession of the child greater than that of the general public at the time of the offense charged. 
Public place means any location within the city limits other than a private home or the appurtenances of a private home (such as porch or driveway) of the parent of the minor. The term "public place" expressly includes any road, street, highway, parking lot, or other location for vehicle traffic upon which any vehicle (including a truck) is traveling without any parent of the minor in the automobile. 
(Code 1996, § 130.20; Ord. No. 0022, 1-27-1983; Ord. No. 203, 6-12-2003; Ord. No. 244, 4-12-2007; Ord. No. 2014-007, § 130.20, 5-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-003, § 130.20, 2-22-2018)  
Sec. 130.21. - Curfew imposed. 
(a)  Established. It shall be unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. without the actual presence of a parent (which term includes the authorized agent of a parent) of the minor. 
(b)  Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution of this section that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by another minor whose parent was present; 
(2)  In a motor vehicle with another minor whose parent was present; 
(3)  Engaged in any employment activity, official school activity, at a public school and pursuant to any school activities, or going to or from any employment or school activity without any detour or stop; 
(4)  Involved in an emergency; 
(5)  Attending any official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by any civic organization, political organization, or religious organization, or going to or returning home from any such activity; 
(6)  Engaged in exercising their rights under the United States Constitution providing for the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, right of assembly, or petition to the government; 
(7)  Engaged in an errand for the minor's parent and continuing on such errand without detour or unnecessary stopping. 
(c)  Negligent supervision. It shall be a defense to prosecution for the minor that the minor was unable to obtain transportation from an event ending after 11:00 p.m. where a parent (which term includes the authorized agent of a parent) had obligated himself or herself to retrieve the child at the appointed time but failed to appear, and the minor was continuing home without detour or unnecessary stopping. The obligated parent shall be subject to the provisions of section 130.23. 
(Code 1996, § 130.21; Ord. No. 203, 6-12-2003; Ord. No. 244, 4-12-2007; Ord. No. 2014-007, § 130.21, 5-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-003, § 130.21, 2-22-2018)  
Sec. 130.22. - Enforcement. 
(a)  In the event that any minor be found in a public place during prohibited hours as provided for in section 130.21, the minor shall be transported by the law enforcement officer to a secure place (which may include the minor's home). If the law enforcement officer is unable to locate a parent of the minor, or if no parent of the minor is willing to take responsibility for the minor, the officer shall, as appropriate, deliver the minor into the custody of: 
(1)  A child protective service worker with the state department of protective and regulatory services; 
(2)  A juvenile probation officer; or 
(3)  Any other suitable adult whom the officer deems appropriate. 
(b)  At the time of the release of the minor to one of the individuals named above, the officer shall cite the minor for a violation of this subchapter. 
(Code 1996, § 130.22; Ord. No. 0022, 1-27-1983; Ord. No. 203, 6-12-2003; Ord. No. 244, 4-12-2007; Ord. No. 2014-007, § 130.22, 5-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-003, § 130.22, 2-22-2018)  
Sec. 130.23. - Negligent supervision. 
(a)  Any parent who shall knowingly permit a minor to remain in a public place during prohibited hours without the parent providing adequate supervision for the minor shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any parent who shall otherwise allow a minor to remain in a public place during prohibited hours without the parent providing adequate supervision for the minor shall be issued a warning for the first such occurrence. Any subsequent occurrence shall result in the parent being guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. 
(Code 1996, § 130.23; Ord. No. 0022, 1-27-1983; Ord. No. 203, 6-12-2003; Ord. No. 244, 4-12-2007; Ord. No. 2014-007, § 130.22, 5-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-003, § 130.23, 2-22-2018)  
Sec. 130.24. - Review period. 
In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 370.002, the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived shall be reviewed at a public hearing no later than the third anniversary of the effective date of said ordinance, and before every third anniversary thereafter. At such hearing, the ordinance's effect on the community shall be taken into consideration, and a determination shall be made by the city council on whether to abolish, continue, or modify the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2014-007, § 130.24, 5-21-2014; Ord. No. 2018-003, § 130.24, 2-22-2018)  
CHAPTER 131. - LITTERING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Litter Abatement Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 365. 
 
Sec. 131.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aircraft means any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used, or designed for navigation or for flight in the air. The term "aircraft" includes helicopters and lighter-than-air powered craft and balloons. 
Authorized private receptacle means a container of watertight construction with a tight fitting lid or cover capable of preventing the escape of contents within. Such receptacles shall have handles or other means for safe and convenient handling and be of such size or sufficient capacity to hold all litter generated between collections and shall be in compliance with the regulations promulgated. 
Construction site means any private or public property upon which repairs to existing buildings, construction of new buildings, or demolition of existing structures is taking place. 
Handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed matter of literature which is not delivered by United States mail. 
Litter means: 
(1)  Decayable waste from a public or private establishment, residence, or restaurant, including animal and vegetable waste material from a market or storage facility handling or storing produce or other food products, or the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, but not including sewage, body wastes, or industrial by-products; or 
(2)  Nondecayable solid waste, except ashes, that consists of: 
a.  Combustible waste material, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, or similar materials; 
b.  Noncombustible waste material, including glass, crockery, tin or aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures of 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit or less; and 
c.  Discarded or worn-out manufactured materials and machinery, including motor vehicles and parts of motor vehicles, tires, aircraft, farm implements, building or construction materials, appliances, and scrap metal. 
Loading and unloading dock means any dock space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping, and transporting goods, wares, commodities, and persons located on or adjacent to any stream, river, or land. 
Private premises means all property, including, but not limited to, vacant land or any land, building, or other structure designed or used for residential, commercial, business, industrial, institutional, or religious purposes, together with any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, fence, porch, steps, vestibule, mailbox, and other structure appurtenant thereto. 
Public place means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or other public ways, lakes, rivers, watercourses, or fountains and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and buildings. 
Public receptacles means any receptacles provided by or authorized by the city. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon land or water, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1996, § 131.01; Ord. No. 0077, 5-22-1986)  
Sec. 131.02. - Littering; unlawful deposit of waste prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall deposit any litter within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection or in any duly licensed disposal facility. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or dispose of in any manner any litter along or near or on any land adjoining any public road or highway or ditch except in a properly maintained landfill operated by the city or licensed by the city council. 
(Code 1996, § 131.02; Ord. No. 0077, 5-22-1986)  
Sec. 131.03. - Prevention of scattering. 
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such manner as to prevent litter from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or private premises. 
(Code 1996, § 131.03; Ord. No. 0077, 5-22-1986)  
Sec. 131.04. - Upsetting or tampering with receptacles. 
No person shall upset or tamper with a public or private receptacle designed or used for the deposit of litter or cause or permit its contents to be deposited or strewn in or upon any public place or private premises. 
(Code 1996, § 131.04; Ord. No. 0077, 5-22-1986)  
Sec. 131.05. - Sidewalks and alleys to be kept clear. 
The person owning, occupying, or in control of any public place or private premises shall keep the sidewalks and alleys adjacent thereto free of litter. 
(Code 1996, § 131.05; Ord. No. 0077, 5-22-1986)  
Sec. 131.06. - Owner to maintain private premises. 
(a)  The owner or person in control of any private premises shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. 
(b)  The owner or person in control of private premises shall, if public receptacles are unavailable, maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or private premises. 
(Code 1996, § 131.06; Ord. No. 0077, 5-22-1986)  
Sec. 131.07. - Littering from vehicles or aircraft. 
(a)  No person, while the operator of or passenger in a vehicle, shall deposit litter upon any public place or private premises. 
(b)  No person shall drive or move any loaded or partly loaded truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any part of its load, contents, or litter from being blown or deposited upon any public place or private premises. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any public place or private premises, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter of any kind. 
(c)  No person shall transport junk, refuse, or garbage in any manner over and upon any street, alley, road, parkway, park drive, or public highway in such a manner that it is strewn upon and along such street, alley, road, or public highway. 
(d)  No person in any aircraft shall throw out, drop, or deposit any litter within the city. 
(Code 1996, § 131.07; Ord. No. 0077, 5-22-1986)  
Sec. 131.08. - Litter in parks. 
No person shall deposit litter in any park within the city except in receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any other public place or private premises. Where receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be removed from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere in a lawful manner. 
(Code 1996, § 131.08; Ord. No. 0077, 5-22-1986)  
Sec. 131.09. - Litter at construction sites; loading and unloading docks. 
(a)  Each contractor shall be responsible for the job site so that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or other private premises. 
(b)  Litter or other debris, including dirt and mud, deposited as the result of normal construction process upon any public place or private premises, shall be removed by the contractor. 
(c)  The person owning, operating or in control of a loading or unloading dock shall maintain private receptacles for collection of litter, and shall at all times maintain the dock area free of litter in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or other private premises. 
(Code 1996, § 131.09; Ord. No. 0077, 5-22-1986)  
Sec. 131.10. - Parking lots. 
(a)  Litter receptacles required. Any public place or private premises containing any provision for parking vehicles shall be equipped with litter receptacles in compliance with this section. Such premises shall include, but not be limited to, such places as shopping centers, outdoor theaters, drive-in restaurants, gasoline service stations, apartment developments, parking lots, and any other place where provision is made for vehicles to stop or park in a designated area for any purpose. 
(b)  Number of receptacles. All premises having parking lots shall provide in an easily accessible location, a minimum of one refuse container for every 50 parking spaces. 
(c)  Specifications. Litter receptacles shall have tight fitting lids or tops and shall be weighted or attached to the ground or other fixed structures as necessary to prevent spillage. A minimum container size of 20 gallons or 75.7 liters shall be used. 
(d)  Cleanliness. Premises used for the purpose designated herein shall be kept in a litter-free condition and all litter shall be removed periodically from the receptacles. 
(e)  Obligation to use receptacles. It shall be the duty and obligation of all persons using parking areas to use such litter receptacles as hereinabove provided for the purposes intended and it shall be unlawful for any person to deposit upon any such parking lot any litter. 
(Code 1996, § 131.10; Ord. No. 0077, 5-22-1986)  
Sec. 131.11. - Distribution of handbills. 
(a)  Public places. No person shall deposit or sell any handbill in or upon any public place provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any public place for any person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver, any handbill to any person willing to accept it. 
(b)  Private premises. 
(1)  Regulation. No person shall deposit or unlawfully distribute any handbill in or upon private premises, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the occupant of such private premises, provided, however, that in case of private premises which are not posted against the receiving of handbills or similar material, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so may securely place any such handbill in such a manner as to prevent such handbill from being deposited by the elements upon any public place or other private premises, except mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. 
(2)  Exemption for newspapers and political literature. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution upon private premises only of newspapers or political literature; except that newspapers and political literature shall be placed in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or other private premises. 
(c)  Placing handbills on vehicles. No person shall deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle unless the occupant of a vehicle is willing to accept it. 
(d)  Cleanup. It shall be the responsibility of any person distributing handbills to maintain the area which they are utilizing free of any litter caused by or related to said handbill distribution. 
(Code 1996, § 131.11; Ord. No. 0077, 5-22-1986)  
Sec. 131.12. - Posting notices prohibited. 
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster, or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public upon any public place, except as may be authorized or required by law. No person except the owner or tenant shall post any such notice on private property, without the permission of the owner or tenant. 
(Code 1996, § 131.12; Ord. No. 0077, 5-22-1986)  
Sec. 131.13. - Clearing of litter on private property by city. 
The procedure for the removal of litter from private premises and the charging of expense thereof as a lien upon such property to be collected shall be in accordance with the state statutes. The city manager shall be responsible for the implementation of this enforcement program. 
(Code 1996, § 131.13; Ord. No. 0077, 5-22-1986)  
Title XV - LAND USAGE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal planning, zoning and annexation of property, § VIII. 
State Law reference— Regulation of land use, structures, businesses and related activities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211 et seq.; planning and development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 371 et seq. 
 
CHAPTER 150. - BUILDING REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of housing and other structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 214. 
 
SUBCHAPTER I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 150.01. - Chief building official. 
(a)  The city manager or his designated representative shall serve as chief building official. Reference to the chief building official in any of the adopted codes shall be deemed to be the city manager or his designated representative. 
(b)  The chief building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter. For such purposes, he shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer. The chief building official may appoint such technical officers and inspectors and other employees as he deems necessary from time to time. 
(c)  The chief building official, designated representative or appointed authority, shall have the authority to issue building code violation citations to any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions and not in proper compliance of this chapter and exercise his enforcement powers as may be deemed necessary for the regulation of such. Citations issued for any such violations, accompanied with the filing of a criminal complaint against the violators will be filed in the municipal court. 
(Code 1996, § 150.02; Ord. No. 0013, 11-29-1984; Ord. No. 0083, 9-10-1987)  
Sec. 150.02. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 150.03; Ord. No. 0083, 9-10-1987)  
SUBCHAPTER II. - TECHNICAL CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE 
 
Sec. 150.15. - International Building Code. 
The International Building Code, 2015 edition, excluding any appendices, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the building code of the city, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said building code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section. 
(Code 1996, § 150.15; Ord. No. 0013, 11-29-1984; Ord. No. 107, 2-28-1991; Ord. No. 229, 7-10-2003; Ord. No. 2017-028, § 1, 12-14-2017)  
Sec. 150.16. - One- and two-family dwelling code. 
Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall not be governed by the International Building Code, but instead shall be governed by the One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, 2015 edition. 
(Code 1996, § 150.16; Ord. No. 0013, 11-29-1984; Ord. No. 107, 2-28-1991; Ord. No. 229, 7-10-2003; Ord. No. 2017-028, § 1, 12-14-2017)  
Sec. 150.17. - Plumbing code. 
There is hereby adopted by reference the plumbing code passed by the city council on November 29, 1984, as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1996, § 150.17; Ord. No. 0013, 11-29-1984; Ord. No. 229, 7-10-2003)  
Sec. 150.18. - International Mechanical Code. 
There is hereby adopted that certain code known as the current edition of the International Mechanical Code and the whole thereof, except as hereinafter amended.  
Sec. 150.19. - Copy of codes in official file. 
A copy of each adopted code shall be placed in an official file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1996, § 150.18; Ord. No. 0013, 11-29-1984)  
Sec. 150.20. - Standard specifications for construction. 
(a)  The city council hereby adopts by reference the City of San Antonio Standards and Specifications for Construction (June 2008) with respect to sections 100 through 695 (Excepting Project Scheduling and Management) as an applicable guidance document for construction and subdivision project review. 
(b)  It is further provided that the adoption of this section as guidance shall further authorize the city public works or utilities director to recommend and the city manager to approve (with information copies to the city council) such exceptions as may be deemed necessary and expedient which shall be reasonably adopted to make application and implementation practical and effective for the benefit of the city and its residents. 
(c)  It is further provided that the standard specifications here adopted are a technical resource and criteria for engineering professionals for use in design and construction within and for the city. As design professionals, the designer assumes responsibility for the selection, reference and appropriate application of a proposed project development and implementation. The standard specifications referenced may be augmented by supplemental specifications or modified details produced by a contracted design professional as required by the city. Use of the information hereby adopted is for purpose of setting a standard that shall be reviewed by design professionals and is not intended as a substitute for professional judgment and an appropriate review of design documents with the city's public works or utilities director and consulting professionals. 
(d)  Specifications and drawings for city-sponsored projects may be modified in accordance with these principles. 
(Code 1996, § 150.19; Ord. No. 276, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 150.21. - Specifications for water and sanitary sewer construction. 
(a)  The city council hereby adopts by reference the San Antonio Water System Specifications for Water and Sanitary Sewer Construction (March 2008) as revised June 2009 (with respect to applicable sized installations and excluding references to water reuse requirements or specifications) as an applicable guidance document for construction and subdivision project review. 
(b)  It is further provided that the adoption by this section as guidance shall further authorize the city public works or utilities director to recommend and the city manager to approve (with information copies to the city council) such exceptions as may be deemed necessary and expedient shall be reasonably adopted to make application and implementation practical and effective for the benefit of the city and its residents. 
(c)  It is further provided that the specifications here adopted are a technical resource and criteria for engineering professionals for use in design and construction within and for the city. As design professionals, the designer assumes responsibility for the selection, reference and appropriate application of proposed project development and implementation. The specifications referenced may be augmented by supplemental specifications or modified details produced by a contracted design professional as required by the city. Use of the information hereby adopted is for purpose of setting a standard that shall be reviewed by design professionals and is not intended as a substitute for professional judgment and an appropriate review of design documents with the city's public works or utilities director and consulting professionals. 
(d)  Specifications and drawings for city-sponsored projects may be modified in accordance with these principles. 
(Code 1996, § 150.20; Ord. No. 275, 9-23-2010)  
SUBCHAPTER III. - ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 150.30. - National electric code adopted by reference; amendments. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted that certain code known as the current edition of the National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association Number 701981 as approved by the American Standards Association, the whole thereof, except as hereinafter amended. 
(b)  Amendments to National Electrical Code. 
(1)  Article 3362, paragraph one, is revised to read as follows: 
Nonmetallic sheathed cable shall be an approved Type NM or NMC in sizes number 12 through two copper conductors. Aluminum or copper clad aluminum conductors shall not be allowed. In addition to the insulated conductors, the cable shall have an approved size of insulated or bare conductors for equipment grounding purposes only. 
(2)  Article 21023 is revised to read as follows: 
21023. Permissible loads. In no case shall the load exceed the branch circuit ampere rating. It shall be acceptable for an individual branch circuit to supply any load for which it is rated. A branch circuit supplying two or more outlets shall supply only the loads specified according to its size in (a) through (c) below and summarized in section 21024 and table 21024, but shall never exceed more than eight outlets or end devices per circuit. 
(Code 1996, § 150.30; Ord. No. 0013, 11-29-1984; Ord. No. 107, 2-28-1991)  
Sec. 150.31. - Electrical code for one- and two-family dwellings adopted by reference. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted that certain code known as the current edition of the Electrical Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, the whole thereof, except as hereinafter amended. 
(b)  Permit fees shall be as specified in section 150.46. 
(Code 1996, § 150.31; Ord. No. 0013, 11-29-1984; Ord. No. 107, 2-28-1991)  
Sec. 150.32. - Wiring; specifications for materials. 
(a)  Electrical cables, lines, wires, and other methods of transmission of electricity installed by Floresville Electric Light and Power, or any other electrical utility that currently or in the future provides electrical service within the jurisdiction of the city ("utility"), may use aluminum or copper materials so long as the usage of such material is limited to utility owned wire on the electric distribution supply side of the customer's service entrance in order to provide electrical service to both residential and commercial establishments. 
(b)  All other wiring done within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, all wiring in residences, commercial buildings, and any and all wiring installed on the customer side of an electric meter, shall be done with copper materials only. 
(Code 1996, § 150.32; Ord. No. 107, 2-28-1991; Ord. No. 2014-21, 12-11-2014)  
SUBCHAPTER IV. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 150.45. - Permit required; exception for local churches. 
(a)  A permit shall be required prior to commencement of any construction, alterations, installations to include HUD-code manufactured homes, mobile homes, buildings, plumbing, electrical or gas. 
(b)  All local churches established in a permanent structure within the corporate limits or extra-territorial jurisdiction of the city are exempt from the electrical, plumbing, and mechanical (A/C) permit fees but in all cases, are required to pay the flat commercial fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time prior to commencement. This provision does not forego the need for the building inspector to conduct all required inspections as are normally required under the adopted building code and compliances met as required in the rules and regulation for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration and repair of buildings, structures, and mobile homes. 
(c)  A permit shall be required prior to the delivery and use of any temporary construction roll-off waste bin or other temporary waste disposal system intended for use in removing construction and/or demolition debris and which is larger than a standard residential solid waste bin. Permits issued that utilize the temporary waste disposal systems of the city's contracted service provider providing municipal solid waste disposal to the city shall be exempted from any fee for such permit established pursuant to section 150.46. 
(Code 1996, § 150.45; Ord. No. 0013, 11-29-1984; Ord. No. 83-B, 9-10-1987; Ord. No. 2014-22, 12-11-2014)  
Sec. 150.46. - Permit fee schedule. 
(a)  Where the review of proposed plans and inspection to ensure compliance with the city's zoning requirements and building codes is conducted by a contracted third party, the permit fee charged to build a new building, to add on to an existing building, to remodel, or to alter an existing building, whether residential or commercial, shall be based on the declared valuation of the proposed work. Permit fees based upon such valuation shall be set forth as contained in the table as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(b)  The city may require the applicant to verify the declared valuation. 
(c)  An additional permit fee shall be required for plumbing, electrical, and mechanical work in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time per each trade applicable. 
(d)  When submittal documents are required, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. The plan review fees specified in this section are in addition to the building permit fee. Plan review fee shall be 65 percent of the building permit fee as established in subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Where the review of proposed plans and inspection to ensure compliance with the city's zoning requirements and building codes is conducted by the city itself, the permit fees charged shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(f)  Special inspection fees shall be set at the rates as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(g)  For use of outside consultants, when required, the applicant shall be responsible for the actual costs or the total hourly cost to the city, whichever is the greatest. This cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages and fringe benefits of the employees involved. 
(Code 1996, § 150.46; Ord. No. 0013, 11-29-1984; Ord. No. 0081, 11-13-1986; Ord. No. 108, 2-28-1991; Ord. No. 128, 9-8-1994; Ord. No. 247, 8-23-2007; Ord. No. 2014-006, 5-8-2014; Ord. No. 2014-22, 12-11-2014; Ord. No. 2015-19, 8-13-2015)  
Sec. 150.47. - Stop-work orders. 
(a)  Upon the issuance of a statement by the city's code enforcement office or city manager of any violation of a federal law, state law, county regulation, city regulation, city ordinance, building code, zoning requirement or municipal franchise agreement, waste and demolition removal, relating to the new construction, alteration, demolition or installation of any construction project, a stop-work order shall be placed upon the subject property. Such stop-work order shall list the violation giving rise to the stop-work order, the date and time of issuance, and the contact information for the city's code enforcement office. 
(b)  A written copy of the stop-work order shall be prominently placed on the main entrance to the subject property, or in any other prominent location, in such a manner as to provide notice to the owner of the property, along with any contractors, subcontractors, agents, or employees thereof, that while the stop-work order is in place, it shall be illegal for any further new construction, alteration, demolition or installation to proceed on the property. 
(c)  The stop-work order shall remain in effect until it is either: 
(1)  Lifted by the city's code enforcement office or city manager; 
(2)  The violation is remedied to the satisfaction of the code enforcement office or city manager; or 
(3)  The matter is appealed to the city council and, following a hearing, the city council lifts the stop-work order. 
(d)  A stop-work order may be appealed to the city council. Upon written notice of appeal delivered to the city's code enforcement office or to the city manager, the recipient of such appeal shall submit such to the city secretary for inclusion on the next regularly scheduled city council meeting (as the Texas Open Meetings Act will allow), or at a regularly scheduled city council meeting of the appellant's choice. Thereupon, a hearing shall be held on the matter, and the city council shall review all information provided by appellant and the details of the alleged violation, and thereupon make a determination as to whether the stop-work order shall be lifted or remain in force until remedied. 
(e)  A violation of a stop-work order is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(f)  Each day of a violation of a stop-work order shall be considered a separate violation, and subject to the penalty set forth in subsection (e) of this section. 
(g)  Compliance with the stop-work order shall be a defense to any prosecution pursuant to subsections (e) and (f) of this section. 
(Code 1996, § 150.47; Ord. No. 2014-10, 12-11-2014)  
Sec. 150.48. - Registration of contractors. 
(a)  Definitions. Words and phrases used in this subchapter shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Words and phrases that are not defined in this subchapter but are defined in other ordinances of the city shall be given the meanings set forth in those ordinances. Other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Headings and captions are for reference purposes only, and shall not be used in the interpretation of this subchapter. 
Building inspector means the person appointed by the city council to inspect building activities to ensure compliance with applicable codes, permits and ordinances. The city's building inspector can be a volunteer, employee, agent of another political subdivision, company, corporation, or independent contractor retained by the city. The term "building inspector" includes the code enforcement officer. 
Building official means the person appointed by the city council to receive and review registration applications and ensure compliance with this subchapter. The city's building official can be a volunteer, employee, police officer, agent of another political subdivision, company, corporation, or independent contractor retained by the city. The term includes the code enforcement officer. The city manager shall act as the city's default building official in the absence of a board-appointed person or firm. 
City means the City of Floresville, an incorporated municipality located in Wilson County, Texas, its agents and employees. 
Person means any human individual or corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, and any other legal entity. 
(b)  Registration required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform or contract to perform for compensation a construction operation within the city limits without first having registered with the city in compliance with this subchapter. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform for compensation a construction operation within the city limits without displaying proof of registration with the city upon request. The only acceptable proof of registration shall be a completed application that is approved and signed by the building official. 
(3)  Exception. Work done by a property owner in a building owned and occupied by the property owner as the property owner's homestead is exempt from this subchapter. 
(c)  Contractors required to register. This subchapter shall apply to persons providing construction services for projects for which a permit is required under city ordinances. Specifically, the following contractors must register with the city: general contractors, plumbing contractors, electrical contractors, and mechanical contractors. 
(d)  Registration. 
(1)  Registration does not substitute for any permit required by law. Nor does registration substitute for any license required by law. 
(2)  In order to register in compliance with this subchapter, contractors must complete the standard contractor registration application designated by the building official. At a minimum, the application form shall contain the following: 
a.  Applicant's name. 
b.  Applicant's place of business address, email address and telephone number. 
c.  Name of owner. 
d.  Type of construction licenses held by applicant. 
e.  License numbers from state department of licensing and regulation, or other applicable state or federal agencies. 
f.  Certificate of Insurance currently in effect demonstrating a minimum general liability coverage level as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
g.  Copy of sales tax certificate. 
(3)  Registration shall not be approved by the building official until the fee prescribed by the city council has been paid. 
(4)  Persons registered in accordance with this subchapter shall maintain for public inspection a certificate of registration provided by the city. 
(5)  Each permit issued pursuant to this subchapter is subject to annual renewal and payment of renewal fees, as indicated on the attached fee schedule, on January 1 of each year. 
(e)  Enforcement. 
(1)  The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this subchapter and the codes adopted by this subchapter as may be required by governing law. Any person violating any provision of this subchapter or the codes herein adopted is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of this subchapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(2)  Any person violating any provision of this subchapter or the codes herein adopted shall be guilty of a Class "C" misdemeanor. 
(3)  Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this subchapter and the codes herein adopted, and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates this subchapter or to require specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with this subchapter; 
b.  A civil penalty up to $100.00 a day when it is shown that the defendant was actually notified of the provisions of this subchapter and after receiving notice committed acts in violation of this subchapter or failed to take action necessary for compliance with this subchapter. 
(f)  Conflict of provisions. If any provision of this subchapter shall be interpreted as conflicting with or being contrary to a provision in any of the codes adopted by this subchapter, the more stringent requirement shall govern. If it in case of a conflict it is not easily discernible which provision is more stringent, the requirements stated in the text of this subchapter shall govern. 
(Code 1996, § 150.47; Ord. No. 2015-023, § 5, 8-27-2015)  
SUBCHAPTER V. - SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority concerning substandard buildings, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq.; additional authority to secure substandard building, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 214.0011, 214.0015. 
 
Sec. 150.54. - Adoption of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 214, subch. A. 
The city hereby adopts V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 214, subch. A, and the following minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all buildings regardless of the date of their construction; the following provisions for giving proper notice to the owner of a building; and the following provisions for a public hearing to determine compliance of real property, buildings, structures, premises and vacant lots. In the event that any provision of this subchapter conflicts with said chapter 214, subchapter A, or in the event that any provision of said chapter 214, subchapter A has been omitted from this subchapter, the city shall be entitled to pursue its remedies in conformity with said state law, as hereafter amended.  
Sec. 150.55. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Substandard buildings means any unoccupied residences or buildings, or occupied buildings or structures which has any or all of the following conditions or defects existing to the extent that the life, health, property, or safety of the public, including unoccupied residences or occupants of buildings or structures are endangered: 
(1)  Whenever any doorway or means of exit is not sufficient to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire. 
(2)  Whenever any walking surface is so unsafe as to not provide adequate means of exit. 
(3)  Whenever the stress in any materials due to all live and dead loads is more than one times the working stress allowed in the adopted International Building Code for new buildings of similar structural purpose or location. 
(4)  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, wind, flood, or dilapidation, decay or deterioration to such an extent that the structural strength or stability is materially less than before such occurrence. 
(5)  Whenever any portion thereof is likely to become detached, collapse, fall, or become dislodged and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(6)  Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled, or settled to such an extent that walls or other portions have materially less resistance to winds than is required in similar new construction. 
(7)  Whenever for any reason the unoccupied residences or buildings, or occupied buildings or structures or portions thereof is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(8)  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base. 
(9)  Whenever the unoccupied residences or buildings, or occupied buildings or structures exclusive of foundation shows 33 percent or more damage of its supporting members or 50 percent of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls, or coverings. 
(10)  Whenever an unoccupied residence or building, or occupied building or structure used or intending to be used for inhabitation because of inadequate light, air, or sanitary facilities is determined by the city operations director to be unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
(11)  Whenever any unoccupied residences or buildings, or occupied buildings or structures, because of any reason is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire hazard. 
(Code 1996, § 150.55; Ord. No. 97, 9-25-1975; Ord. No. 137, 9-12-1996)  
Sec. 150.56. - Standards for ordering repair, vacation, or demolition. 
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the authorized official and the city council in ordering repair, vacation, or demolition: 
(1)  If the substandard building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this subchapter, it shall be ordered repaired. 
(2)  If the substandard building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public around an unoccupied residence or occupants of an occupied building or structure it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(3)  In any case where a substandard building is 50 percent damaged or decayed, or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished and in all cases where an unoccupied residence or occupied building or structure cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this section, it shall be demolished. In all cases where a substandard building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this section or any ordinance of the city or statute of the state, it shall be demolished or repaired to the extent that the fire hazard will be eliminated. 
(Code 1996, § 150.56; Ord. No. 97, 9-25-1975)  
Sec. 150.57. - Enforcement by city manager; inspections; right-of-entry. 
(a)  General administration. The city manager or his designee (building official, fire marshal or authorized official) is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. 
(b)  Inspections. The city manager or his designee is authorized to make such inspections as may be deemed necessary to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. A written notice of inspection will be mailed to the owners advising of the inspections and may accompany the authorized official during his inspection, if the owner so chooses, to be conducted not less than seven calendar days from the date of such notice. 
(c)  Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make inspections the authorized official must make reasonable effort to gain permission from the unoccupied residence owner or occupants of an occupied building or structure which must include notification once by certified, return receipt requested mail or by publication once in the local newspaper. If entry is refused, the authorized official shall have recourse to every remedy under law to secure entry. 
(Code 1996, § 150.57; Ord. No. 97, 9-25-1975)  
Sec. 150.58. - Declaration of nuisance; abatement required. 
All unoccupied residences, or occupied buildings and structures or portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the city manager or his designee to be dangerous as defined in this subchapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removed in accordance with the procedure specified in sections 150.59 and 150.62. A building which was not a nuisance, and was in fact in compliance with the then building code at the time of its construction may now be a nuisance by reason of its use, deterioration, unsafe or unsanitary conditions, the permitting of its harboring of birds or rodents, occupation by drunkards or other undesirable characters, or becoming obnoxious by reason of odors or looks. 
(Code 1996, § 150.58; Ord. No. 97, 9-25-1975)  
Sec. 150.59. - Investigation; notice to owner; hearing. 
(a)  Investigation. 
(1)  Whenever it shall come to the attention of the city manager, or any officer of the city, or by reason of complaint of any citizen of the city or city council, that a nuisance or substandard building exists, as herein defined, the authorized official shall upon receipt of such complaint, make a thorough inspection of such alleged nuisance. 
(2)  After such due inspection has been made by the authorized official, he shall make a report for permanent records explaining the circumstances, and his conclusions and/or recommendations. 
(b)  Notice to owner. If, in the opinion of the authorized official, that a building is in fact a nuisance or a substandard building as set out in section 150.55 then the authorized official shall notify the owner in writing in the following manner: 
(1)  Such notice may be served by personal delivery to the owner if he can be located within the city limits, but if he cannot be so located or served after reasonable effort, notice may be served by certified letter addressed to such owner at his last known address, but if such address cannot be ascertained after reasonable effort, notice may be served by publication two times within ten consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. In the case of community property, service upon either the husband or the wife shall be deemed sufficient notice hereunder. 
(2)  If the owner is a corporation, service may be made by delivery of same to any office or place of business of such corporation or any officer of the corporation if such office, place of business, or officer can be located within the city limits, but if such office, place of business, or officer cannot be so located after reasonable effort, service may be made by certified letter addressed to the corporate headquarters address, but if such address cannot be ascertained after reasonable effort, the notice may be served upon the registered agent of the corporation or by publication two times within ten consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. 
(3)  In all cases, if the ownership of the building is unknown, then the notice shall be considered served in addition with other prescribed methods by attaching a copy of it in a place of prominence on such unoccupied residence or occupied building or structure. 
(c)  Hearing. Whether delivered personally, by mail, or by publication, the notice provided for above shall be addressed to the owner, but if the owner is not known, service may be had by publication addressed To the owner of (general description of the property involved.) The notice shall give a general description of the property, state the condition which constitutes a public nuisance, and shall command the owner, or his authorized agent, to appear before the city council and show cause why his unoccupied residence or occupied building or structure should not be declared a nuisance or substandard building and show cause why he should not be ordered to vacate, repair, or destroy such unoccupied residence or occupied building or structure. The date of the hearing shall not be less than ten calendar days after the notice shall have been served. The hearing shall be held at the regular meeting place of the city council during a regular meeting. 
(Code 1996, § 150.59; Ord. No. 97, 9-14-1989)  
Sec. 150.60. - Abatement judgment; order. 
(a)  On the day set in the notice for hearing, the hearing shall be had and on the basis of the hearing, the city council shall make its decision to the effect that the unoccupied residence or occupied building or structure is in fact a nuisance or substandard building or not. The judgment shall further contain an order, as the facts may justify, requiring the owner to either repair such unoccupied residence or occupied building and structure in compliance with the adopted International Building Code (see section 150.15) of the city, or to remove or tear down such unoccupied residences or occupied buildings and structures that such repairs or removal shall be completed within a reasonable time not exceeding 45 calendar days. 
(b)  An extension of 15 calendar days from the 45-day period may be granted, if it is determined by the city manager that a reasonable attempt has been made by the owner or circumstances beyond the owner's control have prevented him from remedying the nuisance or substandard building. Such judgment shall also contain an order to cause a notice of dangerous condition of the building to be affixed in one or more conspicuous places on the exterior of the unoccupied residences, or occupied buildings and structures, and no person shall remove or deface such notice under penalty of law, as herein set out or as set out in other ordinances of the city, as the same exists as the date of such notice. 
(Code 1996, § 150.60; Ord. No. 97, 9-14-1989)  
Sec. 150.61. - Abatement by city; assessment; lien. 
(a)  Assessment. If the owner has failed to comply with the order to repair or remove such unoccupied residence, or occupied building and structure, then the city may cause the unoccupied residence or occupied building and structure to be repaired or removed without delay, and the expenses of such procedure shall be charged against the owner and shall thereupon become a valid and enforceable personal obligation of the owner. A statement of the costs incurred by the city to abate such condition shall be mailed to the owner of such premises, if the owner and mailing address is known, and, if address is not known or owner cannot be found, may be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The statement shall demand payment within 30 calendar days from the date of receipt (or publication). 
(b)  Nonpayment of statement. In the event that such statement has not been paid within such period, the city manager or his designee may cause a statement to be filed with the county clerk of the expenses incurred to abate and correct such condition of the premises, such statement to be filed in the deed records, and such statement shall be and the city shall have a lien upon the unoccupied residences, or occupied buildings, structure, lot, parcel, or tract of land upon which such expenses were incurred, together with ten percent interest per annum on the delinquent amount from the date such payment was due. For any such expenditures and interest, as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and foreclosure had in the name of the city; and the statement so made, as aforesaid, or certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work; as provided for in Texas Health and Safety Code, sections 342.001 through 342.008. 
(Code 1996, § 150.61; Ord. No. 97, 9-14-1989)  
Sec. 150.62. - Violation; failure to abate; filing of complaint. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of property determined to contain a dangerous unoccupied residence or occupied building or structure not to abate or arrange to abate such dangerous condition as set forth in section 150.55. 
(b)  If owner does not abate cited dangerous condition or to make arrangement to do so, the city manager or his designee shall file a complaint with municipal court and the prosecutor of the municipal court assigned such duties shall prosecute the case. Such complaint may be filed each 60 days until abatement or arrangement is accomplished. 
(Code 1996, § 150.62; Ord. No. 97, 9-14-1989)  
Sec. 150.63. - Refusal to comply with order; interference with enforcement. 
Any person who shall willfully refuse or fail to leave an unoccupied residence, or occupied building or structure which has been ordered vacated under the terms of this subchapter, or who shall enter an unoccupied residence, or occupied building or structure which has been ordered vacated under the terms of this subchapter, or who shall enter an area around such unoccupied residence, or occupied building or structure that has been declared to be dangerous and notice of which declaration shall have been posted, and any person who shall interfere with or hinder the vacation, repair, or demolition of any unoccupied residence, or occupied building or structure under the terms of this subchapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. In case the owner or occupant of any substandard building ordered vacated, repaired, or demolished under the terms of this subchapter shall be a corporation, the president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of such corporation, or any manager, agent, or employee of such corporation, shall be also severally liable for the penalties herein provided. 
(Code 1996, § 150.63; Ord. No. 97, 9-25-1975)  
Sec. 150.64. - Resort to courts. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed as abridging the right of the city to resort to the courts of this state for the enforcement of this subchapter, or of the rights of any owner to resort to the courts of this state in an attempt to enjoin the enforcement of this subchapter. 
(Code 1996, § 150.64; Ord. No. 97, 9-25-1975)  
Sec. 150.65. - Duty of city attorney. 
It shall be the duty of the city attorney to enforce the orders of the city council or the authorized official, upon appeal, by filing action in the appropriate court of the state when so authorized by the city council. 
(Code 1996, § 150.65; Ord. No. 97, 9-25-1975)  
Sec. 150.66. - Remedies cumulative. 
The enumeration of remedies for the suppression of a public nuisance as provided in this subchapter are not to be deemed as exclusive, but as cumulative. 
(Code 1996, § 150.66; Ord. No. 97, 9-25-1975)  
CHAPTER 151. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Soil and water conservation, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code ch. 201; emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 418; Flood Control and Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.311 et seq.; local rules, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.318; local governments must adopt ordinances necessary for jurisdiction to qualify for National Flood Insurance Program, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.3145; political subdivision to comply with Federal requirements, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315. 
 
SUBCHAPTER I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 151.01. - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council does ordain this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 151.01; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 196, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.02. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Code 1996, § 151.02; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 196, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.03. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health. 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects. 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions. 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains. 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas. 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1996, § 151.03; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 196, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.04. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities. 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage. 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 1996, § 151.04; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 196, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.05. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one percent annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A130, AE, A99, AR, AR/A130, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V130, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1A30, AR, V1V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year also called the base flood. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. The term "existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood related erosion hazards. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS). See Flood elevation study. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of Flooding ). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term "floodplain management regulations" describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway. See Regulatory floodway. 
Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include longterm storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or subdivision a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Special flood hazard area. See Area of special flood hazard. 
Start of construction , for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Code 1996, § 151.05; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 196, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.06. - Application; jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 151.06; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 196, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.07. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Floresville, dated November 26, 2010, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Boundary Floodway Maps (FIRM and FBFM) dated November 26, 2010 and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 151.07; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 196, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.08. - Establishment of development permit. 
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 151.08; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 196, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.09. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1996, § 151.09; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 196, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1996, § 151.10; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 196, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.11. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements. 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city council. 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1996, § 151.11; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 196, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.12. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Code 1996, § 151.12; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 196, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
SUBCHAPTER II. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 151.30. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Code 1996, § 151.30; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 196, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.31. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 151.07, 151.46(8), or 151.32(c), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subchapter as proposed in section 151.47(a)(1) is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this section. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A130, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A130, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of this subsection (4) be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. 
a.  Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A130, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
3.  Meet the permit requirements of section 151.47(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection (4) of this section. 
b.  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Code 1996, § 151.31; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 196, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.32. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 151.02 through 151.04. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of sections 151.08, 151.47, and the provisions of sections 151.30 through 151.34. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 151.07 or 151.46(8). 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Code 1996, § 151.32; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 196, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.33. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 151.07, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 151.47 are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Code 1996, § 151.33; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.34. - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 151.07, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 151.30 through 151.34. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by CFR section 65.12. 
(Code 1996, § 151.34; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
SUBCHAPTER III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 151.45. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The floodplain administrator, i.e., code enforcement officer, is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Code 1996, § 151.45; Ord. No. 0087, 12-17-1987; Ord. No. 196, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.46. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 151.07, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of sections 151.30 through 151.34. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A130 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A130, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by CFR section 65.12. 
(Code 1996, § 151.46; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.47. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 151.31(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 151.46(1). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; and 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Code 1996, § 151.47; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.48. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 151.47(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (section 151.03). 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that: 
(1)  The criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) of this section are met; and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Code 1996, § 151.48; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
Sec. 151.49. - Penalty. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this court order and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this court order by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 1996, § 151.99; Ord. No. 278, 9-23-2010)  
CHAPTER 152. - SUBDIVISIONS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of subdivision and property development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212. 
 
SUBCHAPTER I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 152.01. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly, safe, and healthful development of the area within the city and within the area surrounding the city and to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community. 
(Code 1996, § 152.01; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.02. - Statutory authority. 
This chapter is adopted under the authority of the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, including particularly V.T.C.A., Local Government Code chs. 42 and 212. 
(Code 1996, § 152.02; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.03. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley means a minor public right-of-way, not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Building setback line means the line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building and the adjacent street line. 
Cul-de-sac means a street having but one outlet to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turnaround. 
Dead-end street means a street, other than cul-de-sac, with only one outlet. 
Engineer means a person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Practice Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1001, to practice the profession of engineering. 
Extraterritorial jurisdiction means all continuous unincorporated area within a prescribed distance of the corporate limits of the city as defined by state law except where such land is within the prior and exclusive extraterritorial jurisdiction of same municipal corporation. 
Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Lot means an undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street and which is, or in the future may be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer, or improvement; which is designated as a distinct and separate tract; and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed on record. 
Officer means, when any officer is referred to in this chapter by title, the person employed or appointed by the city in that position, or his duly authorized representation. 
Pavement width means the portion of a street available for vehicular traffic. Where curbs are laid, is the portion between the face of curbs. 
Plat means a complete and exact plan for the subdivision which, if approved, may be submitted to the county clerk for recording, 
Right-of-way means the right given to the general public or groups of the general public to utilize in the future, property or right of another without compensation of any kind at anytime. Rights-of-way are created by private instrument, plat, or law, utilization when such future time arrives of such right-of-way will be by ordinance, resolution, statute, conveyance of an easement, or through any act of the planning and zoning commission, declaring that such right-of-way shall therefore be utilized by the general public or groups of the general public after which the city shall be responsible for all improvements and maintenance on such right-of-way. 
Street means a public right-of-way, however designated, which provides vehicular circulation to various sections of the city. 
(1)  Arterial street. Primarily provides vehicular circulation to various sections of the city. 
(2)  Collector street. Primarily provides circulation within neighborhoods, to carry traffic from minor street to arterial street, or to carry traffic through or adjacent to commercial or industrial areas. 
(3)  Marginal access street. A street which is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street, which primarily provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(4)  Minor street. One used primarily for access to abutting residential property. 
Subdivider means any person or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as that term is defined herein. In any event, the term "subdivider" shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner or authorized agent of such owner or equitable owner, of land sought to be subdivided. 
Subdivision means a division of any tract of land situated within the corporate city limits, or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, into two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any development of any tract of land or for laying out of suburban lots or building lots, or any lots or streets, alleys, or parts or other portions intended for public use or the use by purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. The term "subdivision" includes any resubdivision, but it does not include the division of land for agricultural purposes in parcels or tracts of five acres or more, and not involving any new street, alley, or easement of access. The term "subdivision" further does not include a division of a tract of land into four or fewer tracts for gift or sale by the owner thereof to immediate family members (which term shall be taken to include, only, parents, children, grandchildren, spouses, or former spouses of such owner). However, to fit within this exception to the definition of subdivision, any such division into four or fewer tracts must be such that each tract so remaining has an adequate road frontage of not less than 75 feet on a public road, and each such lot conforms to the minimum lot sizes (i.e., 75 feet by 100 feet) as specified herein. In the event that such division by an owner into four or fewer tracts for gift or sale to immediate family members shall have inadequate road frontage, or shall be of inadequate size, or any lot therein shall have either inadequate road frontage or inadequate size, or any such lot shall be given or sold to any persons other than immediate family members, then, in such event, such division shall constitute a subdivision under the terms of this section and this section shall apply to such division. 
Surveyor means a licensed state land surveyor or a registered public surveyor, as authorized by state statute to practice the profession of surveying. 
Utility easement means an interest in land granted to the city, to the public generally, and/or to a private utility corporation, for installing or maintaining utilities across, over, or under private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance of said utilities. 
(Code 1996, § 152.03; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983; Ord. No. 149, 4-24-1997)  
Sec. 152.04. - Application of provisions; compliance required. 
No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is located within the city, or within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The subdivision plans and plats and all procedures relating thereto, shall in all respects, be in full compliance with the regulations herein. 
(Code 1996, § 152.04; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.05. - Policies and special provisions. 
(a)  No subdivision plat utilizing septic tanks will be accepted. 
(b)  No building, repair, plumbing, or electrical permit shall be issued by the city for any structure on a lot in a subdivision of which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor for any structure on a lot within a subdivision in which the standards contained herein have not been complied with in full. 
(c)  The city shall not repair, maintain, install, or provide any streets or public utility services in any subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved or filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
(d)  The city shall not sell or supply any water, gas, electricity, or sewage service within a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved or filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
(Code 1996, § 152.05; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.06. - Effect on existing subdivisions. 
If any subdivision exists for which a final plat has not been approved or in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full, and the city council shall pass a resolution reciting the fact of such noncompliance or failure to secure final plat approval, and reciting the fact that the provisions of section 152.05 will apply to the subdivision and the lots therefor, the city secretary shall when directed by the city council of the city, cause a certified copy of such resolution under the corporate seal of the city to be filed in the deed records of the county in which such subdivision or part thereof lies. If full compliance and final plat approval are secured after the filing of such resolution, the city secretary shall forthwith file an instrument in the deed records of such county stating that section 152.05 no longer applies. 
(Code 1996, § 152.06; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.07. - Preliminary conference. 
Prior to the official filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider should consult with and present a proposed plan of subdivision to the planning and zoning commission for comments and advice on the procedures, specifications, and standards required by the city for the subdivision of land. 
(Code 1996, § 152.07; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.08. - Layout required when subdivision is unit of larger tract. 
(a)  Where the proposed subdivision constitutes a unit of a larger tract owned by the subdivider, which is intended to be subsequently subdivided as additional units of the same subdivision, the preliminary and final plats shall be accompanied by a layout of the entire area at a scale of 100 feet to one inch showing the tentative proposed layout of streets, blocks, lots, drainage, drainage calculations, water, sewerage, and other improvements for such areas. 
(b)  The overall layout, if approved by the planning and zoning commission, shall be attached to and filed with a copy of the approved subdivision plat in the permanent files of the commission. Thereafter, plats of subsequent units of such subdivision shall conform to such approved overall layout, unless changed by the planning and zoning commission. However, except where the subdivider agrees to such change, the planning and zoning commission may change such approved overall layout only when the commission finds: 
(1)  Adherence to the previously approved overall layout will hinder the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; or 
(2)  Adherence to the previously approved overall layout will be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or will be injurious to other property in the area. 
(c)  The purpose of this section is to ensure that the planning and zoning commission is adequately advised as to the subdivider's plans in order to more adequately promote the orderly development of surrounding land. 
(Code 1996, § 152.08; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.09. - Subdivision plat fee schedule. 
Subdivision fees shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1996, § 152.09; Ord. No. 249, 4-12-2007)  
SUBCHAPTER II. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 
 
Sec. 152.20. - Preliminary plat required. 
The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat by a surveyor or engineer in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 152.20; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.21. - Time for filing; copies required. 
The subdivider shall file five blue or black line copies of the plat together with the original with the planning and zoning commission not less than 14 days prior to the date at which formal application for the preliminary plat approval is made to the commission. 
(Code 1996, § 152.21; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.22. - Formal application. 
Formal application for preliminary plat approval shall be made by the subdivider in writing to the planning and zoning commission at an official meeting. 
(Code 1996, § 152.22; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.23. - Form and content. 
(a)  The plat shall be drawn on sheets 18 inches wide and 24 inches long, with a binding margin of not less than two inches on the left side of the sheet and margins on the other three sides of not less than three-eighths-inch. The plat shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to one inch. 
(b)  When more than one sheet showing the entire subdivision at an appropriate scale shall be attached to the plat, the plat shall show the following: 
(1)  Names, addresses, email addresses and telephone numbers of the subdivider, record owner, engineer and/or surveyor. 
(2)  Proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not have the same spelling as or be pronounced similar to the name of any other subdivision located within the city or within five miles of the city. 
(3)  Names of contiguous subdivisions and the owners of contiguous parcels of unsubdivided land, and an indication of whether or not contiguous properties are platted. 
(4)  Description, by metes and bounds, of the subdivision. 
(5)  Primary control points or descriptions, and ties to such control points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, block numbers, and similar data shall be referred. 
(6)  Subdivision boundary lines, indicated by heavy lines, and the computed acreage of the subdivision. 
(7)  Existing sites as follows: 
a.  The exact location, dimensions, name, and description of all existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements, or other public rights-of-way within the subdivision, intersecting or contiguous with its boundaries or forming such boundaries. 
b.  The exact location, dimensions, description, and name of all existing or recorded residential lots, parks, public areas, permanent structures, and other sites within or contiguous with the subdivision. 
c.  The exact location, dimensions, description, and flow line of existing water courses and drainage structures within the subdivision or on contiguous tracts. 
d.  Regulatory flood elevations and boundaries of floodprone areas, including floodways, if known. 
(8)  The exact location, dimensions, description and name of all proposed streets, alleys, parks, other public areas, reservations, easements, or other rights-of-way, blocks, lots, and other sites within the subdivision. 
(9)  A preliminary plan for onsite sewage disposal systems, including disposal sites for lands subject to flooding or sanitary sewers with grade, pipe size, and points of discharge. 
(10)  A preliminary plan of the drainage system with grade, pipe size, and location of outlet. 
(11)  A preliminary plan for proposed fills or other structure-elevating techniques, levees, channel modifications, and other methods to overcome flood or erosion-related hazards. 
(12)  Date of preparation, scale of plat, and north arrow. 
(13)  Topographical information shall include contour lines on a basis of two vertical feet in terrain with a slope of five percent or more, and on a basis of one vertical foot in terrain with a slope of less than five percent. 
(14)  A number or letter to identify each lot or site and each block. 
(15)  Front building setback lines on all lots and sites; side yard building setback lines at street intersections and crosswalk ways. 
(16)  Location of city limits lines, the outer border of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, and the zoning district boundaries, if they traverse the subdivision, from part of the boundary of the subdivision, or all contiguous to such boundary. 
(17)  Location map at a scale of not more than 4,000 feet to an inch which shall show existing adjacent subdivisions and major streets. 
(Code 1996, § 152.23; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.24. - Processing of preliminary plat; conditional approval or disapproval. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall check the preliminary plat as to its conformity with the standards and specifications set forth herein or referred to herein. 
(b)  Within 30 days after the preliminary plat is formally filed, the city council shall conditionally approve or disapprove such plat or conditionally approve the plat with modifications. If it is conditionally disapproved, or conditionally approved with modifications, the city council shall inform the subdivider, in writing, of the reasons at the time such action is taken. 
(c)  Conditional approval of a preliminary plat by the city council shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the installation of streets, water, sewer, and other required improvements and utilities and to the preparation of the final or record plat. Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute automatic approval of the final plat. 
(d)  Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for two years unless reviewed by the planning and zoning commission in the light of new or significant information which would necessitate a revision of the preliminary plat. If the planning and zoning commission should deem changes in a preliminary plat as necessary, it shall so inform the subdivider in writing. 
(e)  If no development has occurred which would affect the proposed plat after one year of effective approval, the planning and zoning commission may, upon the application of the subdivider, extend the approval an additional one year. 
(Code 1996, § 152.24; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
SUBCHAPTER III. - FINAL PLAT 
 
Sec. 152.35. - Form and content. 
(a)  The final plat and accompanying data shall conform to the preliminary plat as conditionally approved by the city council, incorporating any and all changes, modifications, alterations, corrections, and conditions imposed by the city council. 
(b)  The final plat shall be submitted in such number as is required by the city council and shall contain all of the features required for preliminary plats in sections 152.20 through 152.24. 
(c)  When submitted, the final plat shall be accompanied by the following site improvement data. All plans and engineering calculations shall bear the seal and signature of an engineer. 
(1)  Streets, alleys, sidewalks, crosswalk ways, and monuments. Five copies of plans and specifications of all streets, alleys, sidewalks, crosswalk ways, and monuments, and five copies of detailed cost estimates. 
(2)  Sanitary sewers. 
a.  Five copies of the proposed plat, showing two-foot contours and the proposed location, and location and dimensions of existing sanitary sewer lines. 
b.  Five copies of plans and specifications of proposed sanitary sewer lines, indicating depths and grades of lines. 
c.  When a separate sewer system or treatment plant is proposed, five copies of proposed plans and specifications. 
d.  Five copies of detailed cost estimates. 
(3)  Water lines. 
a.  Five copies of the proposed plat showing two-foot contours and the location and size of existing water lines and fire hydrants. 
b.  Five copies of plans and specifications all proposed water lines and fire hydrants, showing type and size of line. 
c.  When a separate water system is planned, or when connection is proposed to a water system other than to the city water system, five copies of the plans, including fire hydrants, of the proposed system. 
d.  Five copies of detailed cost estimates. 
(4)  Storm drainage. 
a.  Five copies of the proposed plat, indicating two-foot contours. All street widths and grades shall be indicated on the plat, and runoff figures shall be indicated on the outlet and inlet side of all drainage ditches and storm sewers, and at all points in the street at changes of grade or where the water enters another street or storm sewer or drainage ditch. Drainage easements shall be indicated. 
b.  When a drainage channel or storm sewer is proposed, complete plans, profiles, and specifications shall be submitted, showing complete construction details. 
c.  Five copies of detailed cost estimates. 
(d)  The final plat shall also include the following: 
(1)  Owner's acknowledgment of the dedication to public use of all streets, alleys, parks, and other public places shown on such final plat. 
(2)  A statement from the planning and zoning commission that the final plat has been approved by such commission. 
(3)  The certifications of the surveyor responsible for surveying the subdivision area, attesting to its accuracy. 
(4)  A certification by the engineer responsible for the preparation of the final plat and supporting data, attesting to its accuracy. 
(Code 1996, § 152.35; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.36. - Processing of final plat; approval or disapproval. 
(a)  If desired by the subdivider and approved by the city council, the final plat may constitute only the portion of the preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop. However, such portion shall conform to all the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  As soon as practical after the subdivider is notified of the approval of the preliminary plat, his engineer shall submit to the planning and zoning commission at an official meeting the final plat of the subdivision or portion thereof. 
(c)  No final plat will be considered unless a preliminary plat has been submitted. However, if an approved plat has been duly recorded and the subdivider wishes to increase the size of the lots by combining two or more lots or by combining one lot with any portion of the adjacent lot in such manner that no portion of lot remains smaller than the original lots, no preliminary plat will be necessary. 
(d)  A final plat of an approved preliminary plat or a portion thereof shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission within one year of the date of approval of preliminary plat, otherwise the approval of the commission shall become null and void, unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the city council. 
(e)  Within 30 days after the final plat is formally filed, the city council shall approve or disapprove such plat. If the final plat is disapproved, the city council shall inform the subdivider in writing of the reasons at the time such action is taken. 
(f)  After the final plat has been finally approved and the subdivider has constructed all the required improvements and such improvements have been approved and maintenance bond filed, or cashier's check deposited as hereafter provided, the city council shall cause the final plat to be recorded with the county clerk. No plat shall be filed for record without written consent of the subdivider. If the subdivider fails to give such written consent within 30 days of the date of final approval of the plat the city council may at any time thereafter cancel such approval. 
(Code 1996, § 152.36; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.37. - Construction improvements; guarantee of performance. 
(a)  No final plat may be approved until the subdivider shall have either: 
(1)  Completed construction of all required improvements with such construction having been inspected and accepted by the city as hereinafter provided for, and filed with the city the required maintenance guarantee by either bond or cashier's check; or 
(2)  Filed with the city an agreement in the form in Exhibit "E" (attached to the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived, on file in the office of the city secretary) to provide a security and a maintenance bond or other authorized security in lieu thereof. 
(b)  If under section 152.36(f), the subdivider chooses to construct the required improvements prior to recordation of the final plat, all such construction shall be inspected while in progress by the city engineer, and must be accepted upon completion by the city engineer stating that the construction conforms to the specifications and standards contained in or referred to herein must be presented to the city council prior to acceptance and before the city council approves the final plat. Prior to such approval, the subdivider shall file with the city council a bond, executed by a surety company holding a license to do business in the state, and acceptable to the city council, or a cashier's check, in an amount equal to ten percent of the cost of the improvements required, as estimated improvements in good condition for a period of one year after approval of the final plat, or until such time as said improvements have been accepted by the city for maintenance, whichever is the later. Such bond shall be in the form in Exhibit "D" (attached to the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived, on file in the office of the city secretary) or be approved as to form and legality by the city attorney. 
(c)  If under section 152.36, the subdivider chooses to file security and a maintenance bond in lieu of completing construction prior to final plat approval, he may utilize either of the following methods of posting security. If the subdivider chooses to file security, the plat shall not be approved unless the subdivider has done one of the following: 
(1)  Has filed with the city council a bond executed by a surety company holding a license to do business in the state, and acceptable to the city council, in an amount equal to the cost of the improvements required by this subchapter as estimated by the city engineer, conditioned that the subdivider will construct the improvements in accordance with the specifications approved by the city council and will complete such improvements within two years after approval of such plat, such bond to be in form in Exhibit "B" (attached to the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived, on file in the office of the city secretary) or be approved as to form and legality by the city attorney; 
(2)  Has placed on deposit in a bank or trust company selected by the subdivider and approved by the planning and zoning commission in a trust account a sum of money equal to the estimated cost of all site improvements required by this subchapter. The estimated cost of such improvements shall be the cost as estimated by the city engineer. Selection of the trustees shall be subject to approval by the city council, and the trust agreement shall be in the form in Exhibit "C" (attached to the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived, on file in the office of the city secretary) or approved as to form and legality by the city attorney; or 
(3)  Has deposited with the city secretary a cashier's check in an amount equal to the estimated cost of all site improvements required by this subchapter. The estimated cost of such improvements shall be the cost as estimated by the city engineer; such deposit to be made under same conditions as outlined in subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(d)  If either type of security is filed by the subdivider under subsection (c) of this section, the filing of such security shall be accompanied by a bond, executed by a surety company holding a license to do business in the state and acceptable to the city council, or a cashier's check, in an amount equal to ten percent of the cost of the improvements required as estimated by the city engineer, conditioned that the subdivider will maintain such improvements in good condition for a period of one year after acceptance of the completed construction by the city council, as provided in subsection (e) of this section, or until such time as the improvements shall be accepted (final) by the city, whichever is the later. Such bond shall be in form in Exhibit "D" (attached to the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived, on file in the office of the city secretary) or approved as to form and legality by the city attorney. 
(e)  If either type of security is filed by the subdivider under subsection (c) of this section, the city engineer shall inspect the construction of the improvements while in progress, and he shall inspect such improvements upon completion of construction. After final inspection, he shall notify the subdivider, city secretary, and the city attorney in writing as to his recommended acceptance or rejection of the construction. He shall reject such construction only if it fails to comply with the standards and specifications contained or referred to herein. If he rejects such construction, the city attorney shall, on direction of the city council, proceed to enforce the guarantee provided in this chapter. 
(f)  Where good cause exists, the city council may extend the period of time for completion under subsection (c) of this section for an additional period of time not to exceed six months if the subdivider has not completed the required site improvements in compliance with this subchapter. No such extension shall be granted unless security as provided by the subdivider covering the extended period of time. 
(g)  Upon completion of the required improvements the subdivider shall petition the city council for acceptance. Said petition shall be in the form and format in Exhibit "F" (attached to the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived, on file in the office of the city secretary). Necessary petition forms may be secured from the city secretary and will be forwarded in three copies to the city engineer for his certification of inspection and recommendation. 
(Code 1996, § 152.37; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
SUBCHAPTER IV. - STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 152.50. - Conformity required for approval. 
No preliminary or final plat shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission unless they conform to the following standards and specifications of this subchapter. 
(Code 1996, § 152.50; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.51. - Conformity with comprehensive plan. 
The subdivision shall conform to the comprehensive plan of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 152.51; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.52. - Provision for future subdivisions. 
If a tract is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged to allow the opening of future streets. 
(Code 1996, § 152.52; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.53. - Streets. 
(a)  Street layout. Adequate streets shall be provided by the subdivider and the arrangements, character, extent, width, grade, and location of each shall conform to the comprehensive plan of the city and shall be considered in the relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public safety and convenience, and in their appropriate relationship to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets. The street layout shall be devised for the most advantageous development of the entire neighborhood. 
(b)  Relation to adjoining street system. Where necessary to the neighborhood pattern, existing streets in adjoining areas shall be continued, and shall be at least as wide as such existing streets and in alignment therewith. 
(c)  Projection of streets. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall make provision for the proper projection of streets into such unsubdivided areas. 
(d)  Street jogs. Whenever possible, street jogs with centerline offsets of less than four feet shall be avoided. 
(e)  Half-streets or adjacent streets. In the case of collector, minor, or marginal access streets, no new half-streets shall be platted. 
(f)  Street intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable, giving due regard to terrain and topography. 
(g)  Dead end streets. Dead end streets shall be prohibited except as short stubs to permit future expansion. 
(h)  Cul-de-sacs. In general, cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 500 feet in length, and shall have a turnaround of not less than 100 feet in diameter, with 80 feet in diameter of pavement turnaround, in residential areas, and not less than 200 feet in diameter, right-of-way with 180 feet in diameter pavement in turnaround in commercial and industrial areas. 
(i)  Marginal access streets. Where a subdivision has frontage on an arterial street, there shall be provided a marginal access street on both sides or on the subdivision side of the arterial street, if the arterial street borders the subdivision, unless the adjacent lots back up to the arterial street, or unless the planning and zoning commission determines that such marginal access streets are not desirable under the facts of a particular case for adequate protection of the lost and separation of through and local traffic. 
(j)  Pavement widths and rights-of-way. Pavement widths and rights-of-way shall be as follows: 
(1)  Arterial streets shall have a right-of-way width of at least 86 feet, with a pavement width of at least 62 feet. 
(2)  Collector streets shall have a right-of-way of at least 60 feet and pavement width of at least 42 feet. 
(3)  Minor streets shall have a right-of-way width of at least 60 feet and pavement width of at least 30 feet. 
(k)  Street names. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or cause confusion with the names of existing streets, unless the new streets are a continuation of or in alignment with existing streets, in which case names of existing streets shall be used. 
(l)  Curbs. Curbs shall be installed by the subdivider on both sides of all interior streets, and on the subdivision side of all streets forming part of the boundary of the subdivision. 
(Code 1996, § 152.53; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983; Ord. No. 213, 2-12-2004)  
Sec. 152.54. - Alleys. 
(a)  Width and paving. Alleys of not less than 18 feet in right-of-way width and pavement width shall be installed by the subdivider in all business and industrial areas. In residential areas, alleys not less than 12 feet in width, shall be optional. All alley paving shall be done in accordance with city standards. Alleys shall be approximately parallel to the frontage of the street. 
(b)  Intersecting alleys of utility easements. Where two alleys or utility easements intersect or turn at a right angle, a cutoff of not less than ten feet from the normal intersection of the property or easement lines shall be provided along each property or easement line. 
(c)  Dead-end alleys. Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted. 
(d)  Overhang easements. In all alleys, overhang easements for electric and telephone lines of at least four feet on each side of the alley strip at a height at or above 18 feet shall be provided. 
(e)  Alleys which do not connect on a straight course. If alleys are not themselves straight within each block, or if the same do not connect on a straight course through the alleys of adjoining blocks, then an easement shall be provided for the placing of guy wires on lot division lines in order to support poles set on the curving or deviating of right-of-way alleys. 
(Code 1996, § 152.54; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.55. - Driveways. 
All driveways on any new home or lot in any subdivision shall be brought out to the city street or curb. In addition, construction of the driveway shall conform to the following: 
(1)  The driveway shall be no wider than 12 feet from property line to city street or curb. 
(2)  All driveways should have sufficient drainage over or under the driveway. 
a.  If drainage is over the driveway, the driveway shall be at least six inches above bar ditch grade or at curb height. 
b.  If drainage is under the driveway it must be of sufficient capacity to carry the flow of water and not cause a crossover onto a street. 
c.  If the driveway extends across city utilities, the same shall have expansion joints put in accordance with city specifications. 
(Code 1996, § 152.55; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.56. - Utility easements. 
(a)  Where public utility lines, conduits, and/or equipment cannot be located within the street or alley right-of-way, utility easements shall be provided therefor. The utility easements shall be not less than 16 feet in width and shall be continuous for the entire length of the block. 
(b)  Overhang easements of at least four feet on each side of the 16 foot easement strip, at a height at or above 18 feet shall be provided in all utility easements. 
(c)  Where utility easements are not themselves straight within each block, or if the same do not connect on a straight course with the utility easements of adjoining blocks, then additional easements may be provided for the placing of guy wires on lot division lines in order to support poles set on curving or deviating rights-of-way or alleys. 
(Code 1996, § 152.56; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.57. - Water installations. 
(a)  Water supply and distribution. All subdivisions shall be provided with water supply and water distribution systems approved by the city engineer or his designated representative. 
(b)  Fire hydrants. Standard fire hydrants shall be installed as part of the water distribution system per specifications of the city engineer and of the state board of insurance. 
(Code 1996, § 152.57; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.58. - Sewers. 
(a)  All subdivisions shall be provided with an approved sewer disposal system. 
(b)  Connection with the sanitary sewer system shall be required except where the city council determines that such connection will require unreasonable expenditure when compared with other methods of sewage disposal. Where septic tanks are installed, the subdivider shall conduct percolation test under the supervision of the city engineer in order for the city to determine lot sizes. If a sanitary sewage disposal system is to be installed, the plans for such system must be approved by the state city operations director, prior to approval of the final plat by the city council. 
(Code 1996, § 152.58; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.59. - Utility lines. 
All utility lines that pass under a street or alley shall be installed before the street or alley is paved. When it is necessary that utility lines pass under the street or alley pavement, they shall be installed to a point at least four feet beyond the edge of the pavement. 
(Code 1996, § 152.59; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.60. - Drainage. 
(a)  Easement. Where subdivision traversed by a water course, drainage way, or natural channel or stream, there shall be provided an easement or right-of-way conforming substantially to the limit of such water course, plus additional width or accommodate future needs. 
(b)  Drainage facilities. Drainage facilities shall be provided and constructed as specified by the city engineer. 
(Code 1996, § 152.60; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.61. - Lots. 
All lots shall comply with the zoning requirements of chapter 153. 
(Code 1996, § 152.61; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
SUBCHAPTER V. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 152.70. - Authority of city attorney. 
In behalf of the city, the city attorney shall, when directed by the city council, institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this chapter or the standards referred to herein with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within the city, within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, or within any areas subject to all or a part of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 152.70; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.71. - Variances. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission may recommend a variance from these regulations when, in their opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In recommending a variance, the planning and zoning commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable in the public interest. In making the findings herein below required, the commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience, and welfare in the vicinity. 
(b)  No variance shall be approved unless the planning and zoning commission finds: 
(1)  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land. 
(2)  The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant. 
(3)  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or injurious to other property in the area. 
(4)  The granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Such findings of the planning and zoning commission, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the commission meeting at which such variance is granted. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter so that the public health, safety, and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. 
(d)  Pecuniary hardship to the subdivider, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. 
(Code 1996, § 152.71; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
Sec. 152.72. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
Whenever the standards and specifications of this chapter conflict with those contained in another ordinance, the most stringent or restrictive provisions shall govern. 
(Code 1996, § 152.72; Ord. No. 0035, 8-25-1983)  
CHAPTER 153. - ZONING[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal planning, zoning and annexation of property, § VIII. 
State Law reference— Regulation of land use, structures, businesses and related activities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211 et seq.; planning and development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 371 et seq. 
 
SUBCHAPTER I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 153.001. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the term "building" shall include the term "structure"; the term "shall" is mandatory and not directive; the term "lot" includes the term "plot"; and the term "used for" includes the meaning "designed for" or "intended for." 
(Code 1996, 153.001; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.002. - Minimum requirements. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the requirement that is most restrictive or that imposes the higher standards, as determined by the zoning administrator shall govern. 
(Code 1996, 153.002; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.003. - Approval required to connect to public utility. 
All plans, plats or replats of land laid out into streets, alleys or other portions of the same, intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjoining the located within the corporate limits of the city or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for approval before any connection shall be permitted with any public utility, such as water or sewers, owned and operated by the city; provided, however, that in case of disapproved shall communicate the reason for disapproval to the city council, and thereupon, by majority vote, the city council shall have the power of overruling such disapproval. No water or sewer improvements shall be voted on or made, nor shall any public money be expended within any lands laid out in building lots, streets or alleys until the plan, plat or replat of such lands shall have been recommended by the zoning administrator and approved by the city council. Subdivisions shall be reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning commission in accordance with the subdivision ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1996, 153.003; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.004. - Existing permits and private agreements. 
This chapter is not intended to abrogate or annul: 
(1)  Any permits issued before the original effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; or 
(2)  Any easement, covenant or any other private agreement. 
(Code 1996, 153.004; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.005. - Pending legislation; completion of authorized buildings. 
(a)  By the original passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless specifically such use falls within a use district where the actual use is a nonconforming use. Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. It is the further intent and declared purpose of this chapter that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, shall be discharged or affected by the original adoption of this chapter; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities or penalties, forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending be proceeded with in all respects as if such prior ordinance had not been repealed. 
(b)  Nothing in these regulations nor in any amendments hereto which change district boundaries shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building which shall be completed in its entirety within two years from the date of the original passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, provided such building was authorized by building permit before the original passage of said ordinance, and further provided, that construction shall have been started within 90 days of the original passage of said ordinance. Commitments with reference to construction of public utility buildings necessary for proposed expansion of the city made prior to the original passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be observed. 
(Code 1996, 153.005; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.006. - Future land use plan. 
That the future land use plan, on file in the office of the city secretary, is hereby adopted as the guiding document for land use and development regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 2-27-2014) 
Charter reference— Comprehensive plan, § 8.04.  
SUBCHAPTER II. - ZONING MAP; DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES 
 
Sec. 153.015. - Establishment of districts and boundaries. 
(a)  For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into five districts as follows: 
(1)  District R-1: Single-Family Residential District. 
(2)  District R-2: Multiple-Family Residential District. 
(3)  District B: Business District. 
(4)  District C: Commercial District. 
(5)  District M: Industrial District. 
(b)  The location and boundaries of the districts herein established are shown upon the official zoning map, which is hereby incorporated into this chapter. Said zoning map, together with all notations, references and other information shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully set forth and described herein. Said zoning map, properly attested, is on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, 153.015; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.016. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines, such center lines, street lines or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be said boundaries; 
(2)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries; 
(3)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the center lines or street lines of streets, or the center lines of right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale of said zoning map; 
(4)  In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the zoning map shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the map; 
(5)  In the case of a district boundary line dividing a property into two parts, the district boundary line shall be construed to be the property line nearest the district boundary line as shown; 
(6)  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the city council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts; and 
(7)  Where the streets or alleys on the ground differ from the streets or alleys as shown on the zoning map, the streets or alleys on the ground shall control. 
(Code 1996, 153.016; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.017. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  The official zoning map shall be kept in the office of the city secretary and one copy shall be maintained in the office of the building inspector. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city secretary to keep the official map current and the copies thereof, therein provided for, by entering on such maps any changes which the city council may from time to time order by amendments to the zoning regulations and map. 
(c)  The city secretary, upon the original adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall affix a certificate identifying the map in his office as official zoning map of the city. He shall likewise officially identify the copies directed to be kept by the zoning administrator and in the office of the city secretary. All amendments of the map shall be made immediately after their enactment and the date of the change shall be noted on the certificate. 
(Code 1996, 153.017; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.018. - Zoning newly annexed areas. 
(a)  All territory annexed to the city hereafter shall be temporarily classified as District R-1, Single-Family Residential, only until permanently zoned by the city council. The city manager shall, within 60 days after annexation of any territory, recommend to the city council a plan for permanent zoning in the area. The procedure to be followed for adoption shall be the same as is provided by law for the adoption of original zoning regulations. 
(b)  In an area temporarily classified as District R-1, Single-Family Residential, no permit for the construction of a building or use of land other than types of buildings or land use allowed in said district under these zoning regulations shall be issued by the building inspector until such permit has been specifically authorized by the city council after receipt of recommendation from the zoning administrator. Permits for the construction of buildings in a newly annexed territory prior to permanent zoning may be authorized under the following conditions. An application for any use shall be made to the building inspector, said application to show the use contemplated, and a plat showing the size and type of buildings to be constructed; and if such application is for other than a building allowed in District R-1, Single-Family Residential, it shall be referred to the zoning administrator for recommendation to the city council, which shall grant or deny the permit, provided that favorable vote of a three-fourths majority of all members of the city council shall be required if the recommendations of the zoning administrator are not followed. 
(c)  The zoning administrator shall not approve any plat or any subdivision within the city limits or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction until the area covered by the proposed plat shall have been permanently zoned by the city council. 
(Code 1996, 153.018; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
SUBCHAPTER III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 153.030. - Compliance with regulations required. 
Except as hereinafter specifically provided: 
(1)  No land shall be used except for a purpose permitting in the district in which it is located; 
(2)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, nor shall any building be used, except for a use permitted in the district in which such building is located; 
(3)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which such building is located; 
(4)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered except in conformity with the area regulations of the district in which such building is located; 
(5)  No building shall be erected or structurally altered to the extent specifically provided hereinafter except in conformity with the off-street parking and loading regulations of the district in which such building is located; 
(6)  The minimum yards, parking spaces and open spaces, including lot area per family, required by this chapter for each and every building existing at the time of original passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or for any building hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as part of the yard or parking space or open space required for any other building, nor shall any lot area be reduced below the requirements for the district in which such lot is located; 
(7)  Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined, and, except as hereinafter provided, there shall not be more than one main building on one lot; 
(8)  Every HUD-code manufactured home hereafter installed shall be located on a lot as herein defined and must comply with this Code of Ordinances and must be properly tied down and skirted. HUD-code manufactured homes must be a minimum of 1,000 square feet in area and not older than 20 years old; 
provided, however, that any HUD-code manufactured home proposed for relocation, qualifying within the 20-year age requirement, and located within the city, may be relocated to a properly zoned site upon inspection and securing any appropriate permit and complying with requirements of the Code. 
(Code 1996, 153.030; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995; Ord. No. 215, 7-8-2004; Ord. No. 2015-002, 2-23-2015)  
Sec. 153.031. - District R-1, Single-Family Residential. 
(a)  Permitted uses. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes. 
(1)  One-family dwellings; 
(2)  Churches or other places of worship; 
(3)  Colleges, universities or other institutions of higher learning; 
(4)  Community homes for disabled persons, as required by V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code ch. 123; 
(5)  Country clubs or golf courses, but not including miniature golf courses, driving ranges or similar forms of commercial amusement; 
(6)  Farms, nurseries, green houses or truck gardens, limited to the propagation and cultivation of plants, provided no retail or wholesale business is conducted on the premises; 
(7)  Parks, playgrounds, community buildings and other public recreational facilities, owned and/or operated by the municipality or other public agency; 
(8)  Public buildings, including libraries, museums, police and fire stations; 
(9)  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions, but not to exceed two years; 
(10)  Schools, public, elementary or high; 
(11)  Schools, private, with curriculum equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school; 
(12)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work; 
(13)  Water supply reservoirs, pumping plants and towers; 
(14)  Accessory buildings and uses, customary incident to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business: 
a.  The term accessory use shall include customary home occupations such as the office of a milliner, dressmaker, musician or artist, provided that such uses are located in the dwelling used by such a person as his private residence, and that person may display a nameplate on the face of the building or porch. The nameplate may contain only the name and occupation of the resident. It shall be attached directly to, and parallel to the face of the building or porch. It may not exceed eight square feet in area, be illuminated in any way, or project more than six inches beyond the face of the building; 
b.  A private garage with or without storeroom and/or utility room shall be permitted as an accessory building, provided, that such garage shall be located not less than 60 feet from the front lot line nor less than five feet from any side or rear lot line and in the case of corner lots not less than the distance required for residences from side streets. A garage or servants' quarters constructed as an integral part of the main building shall be subject to the regulations affecting the main building; and 
(15)  Such uses as may be permitted under the provisions of section 153.066. 
(b)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed 45 feet or three stories in height without a special permit from the city council. 
(c)  Area regulations. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet. Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. No parking shall be allowed within the required front yard. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than ten feet. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than 15 feet. No side yard for allowable nonresidential uses shall be less than 25 feet. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot of less than 7,500 square feet. 
b.  Lot width. The width of the lot shall not be less than 75 feet at the front street building line, nor shall its average width be less than 50 feet. 
c.  Lot depth. The average depth of the lot shall not be less than 125 feet, except that a corner lot, having a minimum width of not less than 80 feet may have an average depth of less than 120 feet provided that the minimum depth is no less than 90 feet. 
d.  Existing lots. Where a lot having less area, width and/or depth than herein required existed in separate ownership upon the original effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the above regulations shall not prohibit the erection of a one-family dwelling thereon. 
(3)  Lot coverage. In no case shall more than 40 percent of the total lot area be covered by the combined area of the main buildings and accessory buildings. 
(d)  Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in sections 153.050 through 153.054. 
(Code 1996, 153.031; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.032. - District R-2, Multi-Family Residential. 
(a)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in district R-1; 
(2)  Two-family dwellings or duplexes; 
(3)  Multi-family dwellings; 
(4)  Boardinghouses and lodginghouses; 
(5)  Day nurseries; 
(6)  Dormitories for students; 
(7)  Fraternity or sorority houses; 
(8)  Hospitals, clinics and sanitariums, except a criminal, mental or animal hospital; 
(9)  Institutions of a religious, educational, charitable or philanthropic nature, but not a penal or mental institution; 
(10)  Nursing and convalescent homes; 
(11)  Private clubs and fraternal orders when not operated for private profit; 
(12)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business; and 
(13)  Such uses as may be permitted under the provisions of section 153.066. 
(b)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed 45 feet or three stories in height without a special permit from the city council. 
(c)  Area regulations. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. Same as district R-1. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than ten feet. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than 15 feet. No side yard for allowable nonresidential uses shall be less than 15 feet. 
c.  Rear yard. Same as district R-1. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot of less than 5,000 square feet. No building containing two or more dwelling units shall be constructed on any lot of less than 6,000 square feet. No lot shall contain less than 1,500 square feet per dwelling unit, providing, however, that this regulation shall not apply to hotels, apartment hotels or motels where no cooking is done in any individual room. 
b.  Lot width. The width of the lot shall not be less than 50 feet at the front street building line, nor shall its average width be less than 50 feet. 
c.  Lot depth. The average depth of the lot shall not be less than 100 feet, except that a corner lot, having a minimum width of not less than 80 feet may have an average depth of less than 100 feet provided that the minimum depth is no less than 80 feet. 
d.  Existing lot. Where a lot having less area, width and/or depth than herein required existed in separate ownership upon the original effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the above regulations shall not prohibit the erection of a one-family dwelling thereon, or a two-family or three-family dwelling on a lot containing not less than 5,000 square feet. 
(3)  Lot coverage. In no case shall more than 40 percent of the total lot area be covered by the combined area of the main buildings and accessory buildings. 
(d)  Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in sections 153.050 through 153.054. 
(Code 1996, 153.032; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.033. - District B, Business. 
(a)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in district R-2; 
(2)  Automobile parking lots; 
(3)  Bakeries, retail sales only; 
(4)  Banks; 
(5)  Bowling alleys, drive-in restaurants, other similar places of entertainment or amusement, provide such use is located no less than 100 feet from any R district; 
(6)  Dancing or music academies; 
(7)  Florist shops or greenhouses; 
(8)  Frozen food lockers, for individual or family use; 
(9)  Gasoline service station, provided that the activities permitted do not include major automobile repairs, the storage or dismantling of old or wrecked motor vehicles, the sale of used automobile parts or the sale of new or used motor vehicles; 
(10)  Hotels and motels; 
(11)  Laundries, self-service; 
(12)  Offices and office buildings; 
(13)  Personal service uses including barber shops, beauty parlors, photographic or artist studios, messengers, drycleaning and pressing, dressmaking, tailoring, shoe repairing, repair of household appliances and bicycles, catering, restaurants and other personal service uses of a similar character; 
(14)  Retail stores and other local business uses, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  That it may be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. Use of owned parking area is permitted for display of seasonal merchandise provided compliance is maintained with parking and loading regulations (sections 153.050 through 153.054); 
b.  That sidewalk is not used for display, sale or storage of vehicles, equipment, containers or waste material; and 
c.  That such use is not objectionable because of odor, excessive light, smoke, dust, noise, vibration or similar nuisance; 
(15)  Signs (advertising used in connection with and on the same lot as the business establishments to which they refer); 
(16)  Theaters; 
(17)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above uses, provided that such be not objectionable because of odor, excessive light, smoke, dusty noise, vibration or similar nuisance; and 
(18)  Such uses as may be permitted under the provisions of section 153.066. 
(b)  Height regulations. Same as district R-2. 
(c)  Area regulations. 
(1)  Size of yard. 
a.  Front yard. 
1.  Residential. Same as district R-1. 
2.  Other use. When all the frontage on both sides of the street between two intersecting streets is located in district B, no front yard is required. 
b.  Side yard. 
1.  Residential. Same as district R-1; ten feet. 
2.  Other uses. Where all the frontage on both sides of the street between two intersecting streets is located in district B, no front yard is required. 
c.  Rear yard. 
1.  Residential. Same as district R-1. 
2.  Other uses. No rear yard is required. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Residential. No limitations. 
b.  Other uses. No limitations. 
(d)  Parking and loading regulations. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in sections 153.050 through 153.054. 
(Code 1996, 153.033; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.034. - District C, Commercial. 
(a)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in district B; 
(2)  Automobile or trailer display and sales, repair garages, tire and seat cover shops, car wash; 
(3)  Bakeries; 
(4)  Building material storage yards; 
(5)  Business or commercial school; 
(6)  Candy and jewelry manufacturing; 
(7)  Carpentry, painting, plumbing or tinsmithing shop; 
(8)  Cleaning and dying plants, laundry; 
(9)  Creamery, ice cream manufacturing and dairy operation; 
(10)  Farm implement display and sales room; 
(11)  Ice plants; 
(12)  Milk distributing station; 
(13)  Mortuaries; 
(14)  Pawnshops, as required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.0035; 
(15)  Pet shops, retail; 
(16)  Printing, engraving and newspaper plants; 
(17)  Public utilities substations; 
(18)  Radio or television broadcasting station or studio; 
(19)  Retail stores; 
(20)  Upholstering shop and furniture manufacturing; 
(21)  Veterinarian or animal hospital, provided that no such building, kennel or exercise runway shall be closer than 25 feet to an R district; 
(22)  Wholesale establishments and warehouses; 
(23)  Uses similar to the above-mentioned permitted uses, provided activities conducted observe the requirements of all city ordinances and regulations; 
(24)  Such uses as may be permitted under the provisions of section 153.066. 
(b)  Height regulations. Same as district R-2. 
(c)  Area regulations. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. 
1.  Residential. Same as district R-1. 
2.  Other use. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of 15 feet. No storage or similar use shall be allowed in required front yards in district C, except that automobile parking will be permitted. 
b.  Side yard. 
1.  Residential. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than ten feet. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than 15 feet. 
2.  Other uses. A side yard of not less than 15 feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a side street. A side yard of not less than ten feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining an R district. Otherwise, no side yard is required. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in any required side street yard adjoining an R district. 
c.  Rear yard. 
1.  Residential. Same as district R-1. 
2.  Other use. No rear yard is required except that a rear yard of not less than 25 feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting or across a rear street from an R district. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Residential. Same as district R-2. 
b.  Other use. No limitations. 
(d)  Parking and loading regulations. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in sections 153.050 through 153.054. 
(Code 1996, 153.034; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.035. - District M, Industrial. 
(a)  Use regulations. The following uses are permitted in the M district: 
(1)  Any use permitted in any of the aforementioned districts, provided that all requirements of district R-2 shall apply to dwelling units; 
(2)  Apparel and other products assembled form finished textiles; 
(3)  Bottling works; 
(4)  Carting, express, hauling or storage yard; 
(5)  Coal, coke or wood yard; 
(6)  Contractor's yard; 
(7)  Cosmetic manufacturer; 
(8)  Drugs and pharmaceutical products manufacturing; 
(9)  Electronic products manufacturing; 
(10)  Fur goods manufacture, but not including tanning or dyeing; 
(11)  Glass products, from previously manufactured glass; 
(12)  Household appliance products assembly and manufacture from prefabricated parts; 
(13)  Industrial and manufacturing plants including the processing or assembling of parts for production of finished equipment where the process of manufacturing or treatment of materials in such that only a nominal amount of dust, odor, gas, smoke or noise is emitted and not more than ten percent of the lot or tract is used for the open storage of products, material or equipment; 
(14)  Musical instruments assembly and manufacture; 
(15)  Planing mills; 
(16)  Plastic products maoppositeure, but not including the processing of raw materials; 
(17)  Sporting and athletic equipment manufacture; 
(18)  Testing and research laboratories; 
(19)  Meat processing plants; and 
(20)  Other uses similar to the above-listed uses, except that the following uses are specifically prohibited: 
a.  Acetylene gas manufacture or storage; 
b.  Acid manufacture; 
c.  Alcohol manufacture; 
d.  Ammonia, bleaching power or chlorine manufacture; 
e.  Arsenal; 
f.  Asphalt manufacture or refining; 
g.  Blast furnaces; 
h.  Bag cleaning, unless clearly accessory to the manufacture of bags; 
i.  Boiler works; 
j.  Celluloid manufacture or treatment; 
k.  Cement, line, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacturer; 
l.  Central mixing plant for cement, mortar, plaster or paving materials; 
m.  Coke ovens; 
n.  Cotton gin; 
o.  Cotton seed oil manufacture; 
p.  Creosote manufacture or treatment; 
q.  Disinfectants manufacture; 
r.  Distillation of bones, coal or wood; 
s.  Dyestuff manufacture; 
t.  Exterminator and insect poison manufacture; 
u.  Emery cloth and sandpaper manufacture; 
v.  Explosives or fireworks manufacture or storage; 
w.  Fat rendering; 
x.  Feed lots (livestock and poultry); 
y.  Fertilizer manufacture; 
z.  Fish smoking and curing; 
aa.  Forge plant; 
bb.  Garbage, offal or dead animals reduction or dumping; 
cc.  Gas manufacture or, storage, for heating or illuminating purposes; 
dd.  Glue, size or gelatin manufacture; 
ee.  Hatcheries (poultry); 
ff.  Iron, steel, brass or copper foundry or fabrication plant; 
gg.  Junk, iron or rag storage or baling, junk or salvage yards; 
hh.  Match manufacture; 
ii.  Lampblack manufacture; 
jj.  Magnesium manufacture or processing; 
kk.  Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture; 
ll.  Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacture; 
mm.  Paper and pulp manufacture; 
nn.  Petroleums or its products, refining; 
oo.  Pickle manufacturing; 
pp.  Potash works; 
qq.  Pyroxylin manufacture; 
rr.  Rock crusher; 
ss.  Rolling mill; 
tt.  Rubber or gutta-percha manufacture or treatment, but not the making of articles out of rubber; 
uu.  Sauerkraut manufacture; 
vv.  Salt works; 
ww.  Shoe polish manufacture; 
xx.  Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores; 
yy.  Soap manufacture other than liquid soap; 
zz.  Soda and compound manufacture; 
aaa.  Slaughterhouses; 
bbb.  Stone mill or quarry; 
ccc.  Stove polish manufacture; 
ddd.  Tallow grease or lard manufacture or refining from, or of, animal fat; 
eee.  Tanning, curing or storage of raw hides or skins; 
fff.  Tar distillation or manufacture; 
ggg.  Tar roofing or waterproofing manufacture; 
hhh.  Tobacco (chewing) manufacture or treatment; 
iii.  Vinegar manufacture; 
jjj.  Wool pulling or scouring; and 
kkk.  Yeast plant. 
(b)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed in height the width of the street on which it faces plus the depth of the front yard. 
(c)  Area regulations. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. Where none of the frontage on either side of the street between two intersecting streets is located in an R district, no front yard is required. Where the frontage on one side of the street between two intersecting streets is located partly in district M and partly in an R district, the front yard shall conform to the R district regulations for a distance of not less than 300 feet from the district boundary. Where a front yard is required along the frontage on one side of a street, the front yard requirements of the property directly opposite on the other side of the street shall be not less than 25 feet. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required front yards in district M. 
b.  Side yard. No side yard is required except that a side street yard of not less than 25 feet in width shall be provided on the side of the lot adjoining or across a side street from and R district. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required side yards or side street yard in district M. 
c.  Rear yard. No rear yard is required except that a rear yard of not less than 50 feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting or across a rear street from an R district, except that such yard requirement shall not apply where the property in the R district also backs up to the rear street. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required rear yards in district M within 25 feet of the rear property line. 
(2)  Size of lot. No minimum lot size is required in the M district. 
(3)  Lot coverage. No minimum coverage is required in the M district. 
(d)  Parking and loading regulations. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in sections 153.050 through 153.054. 
(Code 1996, 153.035; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
SUBCHAPTER IV. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 
 
Sec. 153.050. - Parking requirements based on use. 
In all districts, with the exception of district B there shall be provided at the time any building or structure is erected on structurally altered (except as provided in section 153.051) off-street parking spaces in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Bowling alley. Three parking spaces for each alley; 
(2)  Business or professional office, studio, bank, medical or dental clinic. Three parking spaces plus one additional parking space for each 500 square feet of floor area over 500; 
(3)  Church or other place of worship. One parking space for each ten seats in the main auditorium; 
(4)  Community center, library, museum or art gallery. Ten parking spaces plus one additional space for each 300 square feet of floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet. If an auditorium is included as a part of the building, its floor area shall be deducted from the total and additional parking provided on the basis of one space for each ten seats that it contains; 
(5)  Dance hall, assembly or exhibition hall without fixed seat. One parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area used thereof; 
(6)  Dwellings, including single-, two-family and multi-family. One parking space for each dwelling unit; 
(7)  Fraternity, sorority or dormitory. One parking space for each six beds; 
(8)  Furniture or appliance store, hardware store, wholesale establishments, machinery or equipment sales and service, clothing or shoe repair or service shop. Two parking spaces plus one additional parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area over 1,000; 
(9)  Hospital. Four parking spaces plus one additional parking space for each four beds; 
(10)  Hotel. One parking space for each two sleeping rooms or suites plus one space for each 200 square feet of commercial floor area contained therein; 
(11)  Manufacturing or industrial establishment, research or testing laboratory, creamery, bottling plant, warehouse, printing or plumbing shop or similar establishment. One parking space for each three employees on the maximum working shift plus space to accommodate all truck and other vehicles used in connection therewith; 
(12)  Motor vehicle salesrooms and used car lots. One parking space for each 800 square feet of sales floor; 
(13)  Private club, lodge, country club or golf club. One parking space for each 150 square feet of floor area or for every five members, whichever is greater; 
(14)  Retail store or personal service establishment, except as otherwise specified herein. One parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area; 
(15)  Restaurant, night club, cafe or similar recreation or amusement establishment. One parking space for each 150 square feet of floor area; 
(16)  Roominghouse or boardinghouse. One parking space for each two sleeping rooms; 
(17)  Sanitarium, convalescent home, for the aged or similar institution. One parking space for each two sleeping rooms; 
(18)  School, elementary. One parking space for each ten seats in the auditorium or main assembly room, or one space for each classroom, whichever is greater; 
(19)  Theater, auditorium except school, sports arena, stadium or gymnasium. One parking space for each four seats or bench seating spaces; and 
(20)  Tourist home, cabin or motel. One parking space for each sleeping room or suite. 
(Code 1996, 153.050; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.051. - Computation of spaces. 
In computing the number of parking spaces required for each of the above uses, the following rules shall govern: 
(1)  Floor area shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use; 
(2)  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be constructed to be the nearest whole number; 
(3)  The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature; 
(4)  Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the original effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the original effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is enlarged to the extent of 50 percent or more in floor area or in the area used, said building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein; and 
(5)  In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
(Code 1996, 153.051; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.052. - Location of spaces. 
All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served, except as follows: 
(1)  Where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located not to exceed 300 feet from an institutional building served and not to exceed 500 feet from any nonresidential building served; and 
(2)  Not more than 50 percent of the parking spaces required for theaters, bowling alleys, dance halls, night clubs or cafes, and not more than 80 percent of the parking spaces required for a church or school auditorium may be provided and used jointly by similar uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours as those listed in subsection (1) of this section, provided, however that written agreement thereto is properly executed and filed as specified below: 
In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used a written agreement thereby ensuring their retention for such purposes shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the city attorney and shall be filed with the application for a building permit. 
(Code 1996, 153.052; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.053. - Minimum dimensions for off-street parking. 
(a)  Ninety degree angle parking. Each parking space shall be not less than eight feet in length. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less than 24 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
(b)  Sixty degree angle parking. Each parking space shall be not less than eight feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than 17 feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less than 20 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
(c)  Forty-five degree angle parking. Each parking space shall be not less than eight feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than 16 feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or parking lines. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less than 18 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
(d)  Adjacent to alley. When off-street parking facilities are located adjacent to a public alley, the width of said alley may be assumed to be a portion of the maneuvering space requirement. 
(e)  Adjacent to alley. Where off-street parking facilities are provided in excess of the minimum amounts herein specified, or when off-street parking facilities are provided but not required by this subchapter, said off-street parking facilities shall comply with the minimum requirements for parking and maneuvering space herein as specified. 
(Code 1996, 153.053; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.054. - Off-street loading space. 
Every building or part thereof erected or occupied for retail business, service, manufacturing, storage, warehousing, hotel, mortuary or any other use similarly involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, shall provide and maintain on the same premises loading space in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  In district M, one loading space for each 10,000 or fraction thereof, of floor area in the building; 
(2)  In districts B and C, one loading space for the first 5,000 to 15,000 square feet of floor area in the building and one additional loading space for each 15,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area in excess of 15,000 square feet; and 
(3)  Each required loading space shall have a minimum size of ten feet by 25 feet. 
(Code 1996, 153.054; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
SUBCHAPTER V. - GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR ALL DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 153.065. - Height and area exceptions and modifications. 
(a)  Height. 
(1)  The height regulations prescribed herein shall not apply to television and radio towers, church spires, belfries, monuments, tanks, water and fire towers, stage towers or scenery lofts, cooling towers, ornamental towers and spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads, smokestacks, conveyors, flagpoles, electric display signs and necessary mechanical appurtenances. 
(2)  Public or semipublic service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, where permitted, may be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet, and churches and other places of worship may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet when each of the required yards are increased by one foot for each foot of additional building height above the height regulations for the district in which the building is located. 
(3)  No structure may be erected to a height in excess of that permitted by the regulations of such airfield zoning regulations as may exist at the time and whose regulations apply to the area in which the structure is being erected. 
(b)  Front yards. 
(1)  Where 25 percent or more of the frontage upon the same side of a street between two intersecting streets is occupied or partially occupied by a building or buildings with front yards of less depth than required by this chapter, or where the configuration of the ground is such that conformity with the front yard provisions of this chapter would work a hardship, the zoning administrator may permit modifications of the front yard requirements. 
(2)  In districts R-1 or R-2 where 25 percent or more of the frontage upon the same side of a street between intersecting streets is occupied or partially occupied by a building or buildings having front yards of greater depth than is required by this chapter, no other lot upon the same side of such street between such intersecting streets shall be occupied by a building with a front yard of less than the least depth of any such existing front yards, unless by permission of the zoning administrator. 
(3)  In a residential district no fence, structure or planting higher than 3½ feet above the established street grades shall be maintained within 20 feet of any street intersection. 
(4)  Open and unenclosed terraces or porches and eave and roof extensions may project into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four feet, provided, however, that no supporting structure for such extensions may be located within the required front yard. An unenclosed canopy for a gasoline filing station may extend beyond the building line but shall never be closer to the property line than 12 feet. The building line of a gasoline filling station shall mean the actual wall of the building and shall not be interpreted as being the curb of a walk or driveway or as the front of a canopy or the columns supporting same. 
(5)  Where an official line has been established for future widening or opening of a street upon which a lot abuts, then the width of a front or side yard shall be measured from such official line of the building. 
(c)  Side yards. 
(1)  On a corner lot the width of the yard along the side street shall not be less than any required front yard on the same side of such street between intersecting streets, provided, however, that the buildable width of a lot of record shall not be reduced to less than 30 feet. 
(2)  No accessory building shall project beyond a required yard line along any street. 
(3)  For the purpose of side yard regulations, a two-family dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
(4)  Where a lot of record at the time of the original effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is less than 50 feet in width, the required size yard may be reduced to provide a minimum buildable width of 30 feet, provided, however, that no side yard shall be less than five feet. 
(5)  The area required in a yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of window sills, cornices or other ornamental features. 
(6)  A roof overhang, an open fire escape or an outside stairway may project not more than three feet into a required side yard, nor closer than three feet to a property line. 
(d)  Rear yards. An accessory building not exceeding 20 feet in height may occupy not to exceed 25 percent, and unenclosed parking spaces may occupy not to exceed 80 percent of the area of a required rear yard but no accessory building shall be closer than five feet to any rear or side lot line. 
(Code 1996, 153.065; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.066. - Special uses. 
(a)  Special uses. The city council, in accordance with statutory requirements by an affirmative vote, may, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected and after recommendations from the zoning administrator containing such requirements and safeguards as are necessary to protect adjoining property, authorize the location of any of the following uses in the special district, provided the application shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and showing the general arrangement of the project, together with essential requirements such as off-street parking facilities, size, height and construction of signs, locations of buildings and the uses to be permitted, means of ingress and egress to public streets, and the type of visual screening such as walls, plantings and fences: 
(1)  Institutions of an educational, philanthropic or religious nature in any district; 
(2)  Radio broadcasting towers and stations, television towers and television transmitting stations in any district; 
(3)  Any installation of public utility, either privately or publicly owned, in any district (but not including offices); 
(4)  Private clubs on a site of three acres or more in any district; 
(5)  Hospitals on a site of five acres or more in any district; 
(6)  Shopping centers or related commercial developments on a site of three acres or more in any district; 
(7)  Apartment projects on a minimum site of 2½ acres or on one block of a street frontage between intersecting streets, whichever is smaller, in any district; 
(8)  Professional offices for architects, engineers, landscape architects, attorneys, interior decorators and certified public accountants in any R-2 district; 
(9)  Public stables on riding academies on a site of ten acres or more in any district; 
(10)  Hotels and motels with related uses, on a site of five acres or more in any district; 
(11)  Circuses, carnivals and other similar transit amusement enterprises in the business, commercial or industrial districts, but not within 300 feet of any R district; 
(12)  Greenhouses or plant nurseries on a site of three acres or more in any district; 
(13)  Beauty parlors and barbershops, neighborhood grocery stores and drug stores, washaterias and any other neighborhood services and businesses; 
(14)  A tourist or trailer camp and/or trailer park and or HUD-code manufactured home camp and/or HUD-code manufactured home park or a recreational vehicle park (subject to regulations in chapter 156) may be located in a business, commercial and/or industrial district and its extension into an abutting residential district; providing, however, such tourist or trailer camps, trailer parks, HUD-code manufactured home camps and HUD-code manufactured home parks or recreational vehicle parks (subject to regulations in chapter 156) shall comply with the following, where applicable, and such additional requirements as may be deemed necessary for proper development and the protection of the surrounding area: 
a.  All appropriate state and county sanitation regulations shall be strictly observed; 
b.  At least 1,500 square feet of lot area per trailer shall be provided; no trailer or HUD-code manufactured home shall be parked closer to the street than 30 feet to any property line abutting or lying within an R district, nor closer than 20 feet to any other property line. A clearance of not less than 25 feet shall be maintained between trailer coaches or HUD-code manufactured homes on all sides; 
c.  No service building or other facilities for bathing, laundry and sanitation as required by the state and local health regulations, shall be located closer to the street than the required front yard setback, nor closer than 30 feet to any property line abutting or lying within an R district, nor closer than 20 feet to any other property line. Such buildings or facilities shall be accessible to all trailer coaches by means of the access drive or hard surfaced walks; 
d.  Wherever practical, space shall be reserved for recreation and a playground; and 
e.  All HUD-code manufactured homes must be located within a HUD-code manufactured home park. Exceptions may be granted to any single HUD-code manufactured home owner who obtains written permission from all property owners within a 250-foot radius and furnishes the documents to the city manager. Exceptions are also granted to all existing HUD-code manufactured home owners to remain at locations established prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(15)  Any single HUD-code manufactured home owner must provide ten days' notice to all property owners within a 250-foot radius and furnish proof of notice to the permitting department. Forms shall be provided by the city. 
(b)  Special use permit regulations. 
(1)  In recommending that a special use permit for the premises under consideration be granted, the zoning administrator shall determine that such uses are harmonious with and adaptable to building structures and uses of abutting property and other property in the vicinity of the premises under consideration, and shall make recommendations as to requirements for the paving of streets, alleys and sidewalks, means of ingress and egress to public streets, provisions for drainage, adequate off-street parking and protective screening and open space. 
(2)  Every special use permit granted under these provisions shall be considered as an amendment to the zoning regulations as applicable to such property under consideration. In granting such permit, the city council may impose conditions which must be complied with by the owner or grantee before a certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building inspector for use of the building on such property pursuant to such special use permit; and such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of a special use permit, or the change in zoning of such property, but shall be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of the certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  No special use permit shall be granted unless the applicant, owner and grantee of the special use permit shall be willing to accept and agree to be bound by and comply with the written requirements of the special use permit, as attached to the site plan drawing and approved by the zoning administrator. 
(4)  A building permit shall be applied for and secured within six months from the time of granting the special use permit provided, however, that the city council may authorize an extension of this time upon recommendation by the zoning administrator. 
(5)  When the city council authorizes granting of a special use permit, the zoning map shall be amended according to its legend to indicate that the affected area has conditions and limited uses. 
(Code 1996, 153.066; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.067. - Nonconforming uses. 
The lawful use of land existing upon the original effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued, subject to the provisions hereof. 
(1)  Previous use upon original date of ordinance. The lawful use of a building existing upon the original effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be continued, although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof. Such use may be extended throughout such portions of the building as are arranged or designed for such use, provided no structural alterations, except those required by law or ordinance, are made therein. Structural alterations would include, but not be limited to, additions to an existing building, removal of interior walls for the purpose of additional business usage space, and remodeling the front of a building in order to promote the business within. If such nonconforming building is voluntarily removed, the future use of such premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Discontinued use. In the event a nonconforming use of any building or premises is voluntarily discontinued for a period of one year, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(3)  Change to conforming use. A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use or a more restricted nonconforming use, may not thereafter be changed back to a less restricted use than that to which it was changed. 
(4)  Zoning changes. If, by amendment to this chapter, any property is hereafter transferred to a more restricted district by a change in the district boundaries, or the regulations and restrictions in any district are made more restrictive or of a higher classification, the provisions of this chapter relating to the nonconforming use of buildings or premises existing upon the original effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall apply to buildings or premises occupied or used upon the effective date of such amendment. 
(5)  Structural alterations require approval. Repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming building, provided that no structural alteration or extensions shall be made except those required by law or ordinance, unless the building is changed to a conforming use. 
(6)  Destruction of property. A nonconforming use shall not be extended or rebuilt in case of obsolescence or total destruction by fire or other causes. In the case of practical destruction by fire or other causes not exceeding 50 percent of its value, the building inspector shall issue a permit for reconstruction. If destruction is greater than 50 percent of its value, the board of adjustment may grant a permit for repair or replacement after public hearing and having due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered in the light of public welfare and character of the areas surrounding the designated nonconforming use and the purpose of this chapter, provided, however, that construction is completed within 12 months from the date of the permit. 
(Code 1996, 153.067; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
SUBCHAPTER VI. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 153.080. - Building permits required. 
No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit therefor, issued by the chief building official. A building permit shall not be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter unless otherwise authorized in a written order from the zoning administrator in the form of an administrative review or variance as provided by this section. 
(Code 1996, 153.080; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.081. - Applications. 
(a)  All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by site plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the sizes and locations of building, structure, or alteration. The application will serve as a basis for issuing both the building permit and the certificate of zoning compliance and occupancy. It shall include such information as lawfully may be required by the zoning administrator, including existing or proposed uses for the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot and on abutting and adjacent properties; parking, where required and such matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement of this section. 
(b)  One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the zoning administrator, after he and the building official have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to the same by their signatures on such copy. One copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained to become a part of the city's permanent records by the chief building official. 
(c)  Application; plot plan. 
(1)  All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by accurate plot plans submitted in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
a.  The actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be build upon; 
b.  The exact sizes and locations on the lot of the buildings and accessory buildings then existing; 
c.  The lines within which the proposed building and structure shall be erected or altered; 
d.  The existing and intended use of each building or part of building; 
e.  The number of families or dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate; 
f.  Off-street parking accommodations; and 
g.  Such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter or if provisions of section 153.066 have been complied with. 
(2)  One copy of such plot plans will be returned to the owner when such plans have been approved. 
(3)  All dimensions shown on these plans relating to the location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on and by a qualified registered surveyor and the lot shall be staked out on the ground before construction is started. If prior surveys have established property lines to the satisfaction of the appropriate authority, building permits will be issued on this information. 
(Code 1996, 153.081; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.082. - Certificates of zoning compliance and occupancy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any building, or premises or both, or part thereof, hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure nor will permanent utility connections to serve the premises be made until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued therefor by the zoning administrator stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this section. 
(b)  A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued by the zoning administrator for a period not exceeding six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided that such temporary certificate may include such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public. In no case will a temporary certificate be issued if the building is deemed unsafe and unfit for occupant use. 
(c)  The zoning administrator shall maintain a record of all certificates of zoning compliance, which shall be open to public inspection. 
(d)  Failure to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance shall be a punishable violation. 
(Code 1996, 153.082; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.083. - Building permit invalid if work not begun in certain time. 
If the work described in any building permit has not begun within six months from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall be cancelled by the chief building official; and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. When a permit is cancelled, a new application and resubmission of current plans will be required along with a new fee. 
(Code 1996, 153.083; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.084. - Construction and use to be as provided in necessary documents. 
Building permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the zoning administrator authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use or arrangement at variance with that authorized when a building permit is obtained and application is made for a zoning compliance shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
(Code 1996, 153.084; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.085. - Use permits. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of the regulations described by this section is to allow the compatible and orderly development within the city of uses which may be suitable only in certain locations in a zoning district if developed in a specific way or only for a limited period of time. 
(2)  A use permit is required for all conditional uses. A use permit may have a specified time limitation attached and may impose conditions other than those which are specifically set forth in this section. 
(b)  Approval; responsibility. 
(1)  The city council, after receipt of a report and recommendation from the zoning administrator, shall have the responsibility for approving all use permits. 
(2)  The following procedures shall be complied with prior to the approval or denial of any use permit: 
a.  Applications shall be made by the property owner or certified agent thereof to the zoning administrator on a form prescribed for this purpose by the city; 
b.  After receiving an application for a use permit the zoning administrator shall place notification of such request in a local newspaper of general circulation and notice of such request shall be made by mail to all owners of real estate property lying within 200 feet of the property on which application has been made at least ten days before a public hearing with the zoning administrator; 
c.  Renewals of use permits shall be considered in the same manner as the original permit; 
d.  Use permits may be revoked after consideration of the zoning administrator and the city council when the conditions under which the use permit was granted are no longer being observed by the applicant. 
(c)  Prerequisites of approval. 
(1)  No structure of property in any zoning district shall be granted a use permit until a hearing is held by the zoning administrator and the city council; 
(2)  The city council, after receipt of a report and recommendation from the zoning administrator, may approve a conditional use subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, when the city council finds: 
a.  That the proposed use meets all the minimum standards established in this section; 
b.  That the proposed use will not be detrimental to the health, welfare, and safety of the surrounding neighborhood or its occupants, and not be substantially or permanently injurious to neighboring property; 
c.  That the proposed use is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this section. 
(3)  The city council may impose additional reasonable restrictions or conditions to carry out the spirit and intent of this section and to mitigate adverse effects of the proposed use. 
(d)  Compliance. 
(1)  Following the issuance of a use permit, the building official shall ensure that if the development is undertaken, it is completed in compliance with the conditions of said permit. 
(2)  Issuance of a use permit does not relieve the applicant of the responsibility for complying with all other applicable city ordinances. 
(3)  If a use permit has not been utilized within six months after the date issued, the permit is automatically cancelled. 
(Code 1996, 153.085; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
SUBCHAPTER VII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 153.100. - Zoning administration. 
(a)  The city manager is designated the zoning administrator by the city council to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  If the zoning administrator shall find, or if any person files with him a complaint in writing alleging that any of the provisions of this chapter or other ordinance are being violated, he shall immediately investigate and when necessary give written notice to the person responsible to cease such violation, forthwith. 
(2)  Notice may be delivered in person or by certified mail to violator or to any person or property where violation is occurring. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the chief building official. 
(1)  The chief building official or any duly authorized person shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time for purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out this duties in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  Whenever any construction work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the chief building official or the city manager may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on the owner, or contractor doing or causing such work to be done, any such person shall forthwith stop proceed with the work. 
(Code 1996, 153.100; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.101. - Actions of council and administrator. 
(a)  In exercising its powers, the city council may, in conformity with the provisions of the statutes of the state as existing or hereafter amended, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The zoning administrator shall have the power to impose reasonable conditions to be complied with by the applicant. 
(b)  A majority vote of the members of the city council shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the application of any matter upon which it is required to pass under this section or to effect any variance in said section. 
(c)  Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the zoning administrator or any taxpayer or any officer, department or board of the municipality must present to a court of record (district court) a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing of the decision. 
(Code 1996, 153.101; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.102. - Appeals. 
(a)  The city council shall hold a public hearing on all appeals made to it and written notice of such public hearings shall be sent to the applicant and all other persons who are owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the property on which the appeal is made. Such notice shall be given not less than ten days before the date set for hearing to all such owners who have rendered their property for city taxes as the ownership appears on last city tax roll. Such notice may be served by depositing same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States Post Office. Notice shall also be given by publishing the same in the official publication of the city at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing, which notice shall state the time and place of such hearing. 
(b)  It is the intent of this subchapter that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the zoning administrator and that such questions shall be presented to city council only on appeal from the decision. Under this subchapter the city council shall have only the duties of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal of this section, as provided by law, and of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in section 153.104. 
(Code 1996, 153.102; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.103. - Special variances and exceptions. 
When in its judgment, the public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate use of the neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently injured, the city council may, in specific cases, after public notice and public hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize the following special variances and exceptions to the regulations herein established and take action relative to the continuance or discontinuance of a nonconforming use: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error on any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator in the enforcement of this section. 
(2)  Interpret the intent of the zoning district map where uncertainty exists because the physical features on the ground vary from those on the zoning district map and none of the rules set forth apply. 
(3)  To approve the use of a lot in a residential district contiguous to (even if separated by a street or alley) an apartment, office, retail, commercial or industrial district off-street parking or passenger vehicles subject to such standards and safeguards as are appropriate for the protection of adjacent residential uses. 
(4)  Initiate on its motion, or cause to be presented by interested property owners, action to bring about the discontinuance of a nonconforming structure under any plan whereby full value of the structure can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the regulations of this section. 
(5)  Permit the change of occupancy from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use only when the extent of the second nonconforming use is found to be less detrimental to the environment than the first. 
(6)  Permit the enlargement of a nonconforming use only when the enlargement will not prolong the life of the nonconforming use. A specific period of time for the return to conformity can be required. 
(7)  Permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming structure or building on the lot or tract occupied by such building, provided such reconstruction does not, in the judgment of the zoning administrator, prevent the return of such property to a conforming use or increase the nonconformity of a nonconforming structure. 
(8)  Require the vacation and demolition of a nonconforming structure which is deemed to be obsolete, dilapidated or substandard. 
(9)  Permit such variance of the front yard, side yard, rear yard, lot width, lot depth, coverage, minimum setback standards, off-street parking or off-street loading regulations where the literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in an unnecessary hardship, and where such variance is necessary to permit a specific parcel of land which differs from other parcels of land in the same district by being of such restricted area, shape or slope that it cannot be developed in a manner commensurate with the development permitted upon other parcels of land in the same district. A modification of the standards established by this chapter shall not be granted or relieve a self-created or personal hardship, not for financial reason only, nor shall modification be granted to permit any person a privilege in developing a parcel of land not permitted by this chapter to other parcels of land in the district. 
(Code 1996, 153.103; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.104. - Fees. 
(a)  A filing fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be charged for each of the following: 
(1)  Rezoning requests. 
(2)  Certificates of zoning compliance. 
(3)  Appeals to city council. 
(b)  Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
(Code 1996, 153.104; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995)  
Sec. 153.105. - Amendments. 
(a)  The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this subchapter may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed upon initiation by the city manager, the city council or by a petition of a property owner or his authorized agents, provided, however, that no such action may be taken until: 
(1)  The question has been referred to the zoning administrator for consideration on the question, and their recommendation received and until; 
(2)  A public hearing has been held in relation thereto, before the city council at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(b)  At least 15 days prior to the hearings, notice of the time and place of such hearings and a description of proposed changes shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(c)  When a proposed amendment affects the zoning classification of property, written notice shall be given to property owners within a distance of at least 200 feet from the boundaries of the subject property at least 15 days prior to the hearing date. If a proposed change to a regulation or boundary is protested in accordance with this subsection, the proposed change must receive, in order to take effect, the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of all members of the city council. The protest must be written and signed by the owners of at least 20 percent of either: 
(1)  The area of the lots or land covered by the proposed change; or 
(2)  The area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed change and extending 200 feet from that area. 
In computing the percentage of land area under this subsection, the area of streets and alleys shall be included. 
(d)  The same procedure for notifying adjacent property owners shall be followed by the zoning administrator for hearings on rezoning petitions and for use permit applications unless otherwise provided. 
(e)  All meetings of the city council shall be open to the public. The city council shall keep minutes of their proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city secretary and shall be a public record. 
(f)  If a petition for rezoning is denied by the city council, another petition for reclassification of the same property or any portion of that property may not be filed for one year from the date of the final denial. 
(Code 1996, 153.105; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995) 
State Law reference— Procedures governing adoption of zoning regulations and district boundaries, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.006.  
SUBCHAPTER VIII. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate sexually oriented businesses, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 243. 
 
Sec. 153.120. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nudity or state of nudity means the appearance of human bare buttocks, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breasts; or a state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttocks, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola of female breasts. 
Sexually oriented business means and includes the following: 
(1)  Adult cabaret or theater. Any nightclub, bar, restaurant, theater, concert hall, auditorium, or other similar commercial establishment which regularly features performances by persons who are in a state of nudity, or who expose, engage in, or depict specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
(2)  Adult motel. Any hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment which: 
a.  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration providing patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, digital video disks, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, so long as such hotel, motel, or commercial establishment has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of these sexually oriented movies, photographs, or reproductions; 
b.  Offers sleeping rooms for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
c.  Allows a tenant or occupant of one sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time of less than ten hours. 
(3)  Adult video store and adult novelty store. Any commercial establishment which as its principal business offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video reproductions, digital video disks, or other photographic reproductions which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as defined below) or any commercial establishment which offers, as its principal business, the sale or rental of devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities (as defined below). 
(4)  Escort agency. A person or business association which furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts to act as a companion or date for another person for a fee, tip, or other consideration. The term "escort agency" includes any agency which offers to privately model lingerie or perform a striptease for another person and also includes any modeling studio where the model appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas for any form of money or other consideration. The term "escort agency" does not include art galleries, art schools, or painting classes which are for the advancement of cultural, educational, or scientific studies. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes human genitals in a state of arousal. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitalia, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(2)  Sexual acts, either actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation and sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition. 
(Code 1996, 153.120; Ord. No. 204, 6-12-2003)  
Sec. 153.121. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
Notwithstanding any other provision herein, no sexually oriented business shall be established or maintained within 500 feet of the boundary of any property classified as District R-1, District R-2, District B or District C under the provisions of section 153.015. 
(Code 1996, 153.121; Ord. No. 204, 6-12-2003)  
Sec. 153.122. - Further restrictions on schools, churches and day care centers. 
In addition to the provisions of section 153.121, no sexually oriented business shall be established or maintained within 1,500 feet of the property line of a lot with any of the following uses: 
(1)  Any public or private kindergarten, elementary or secondary school or registered day care center; 
(2)  Any church; 
(3)  Any park or public area maintained by the city government. 
(Code 1996, 153.122; Ord. No. 204, 6-12-2003)  
Sec. 153.123. - Concentration of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  No sexually oriented business shall be established or maintained within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(b)  No sexually oriented business shall be established, maintained or enlarged in the same building or structure containing another sexually oriented business. 
(Code 1996, 153.123; Ord. No. 204, 6-12-2003)  
Sec. 153.124. - Measurement. 
Measurements as provided for in this subchapter shall be made in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or lot structure used as part of the premises where sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest point or on the lot line of any prohibited area as described herein. 
(Code 1996, 153.124; Ord. No. 204, 6-12-2003)  
Sec. 153.125. - License required. 
All sexually oriented businesses must obtain a license from the city. The license shall be on a form prescribed by the city manager. The application for the license shall be on a form prescribed by the city manager and must include the following: 
(1)  The name, address, email address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  Whether the applicant meets each of the requirements as set forth below for the issuance of the license; 
(3)  The name, address, email address and telephone number of each person required to sign the application as well as the name, address, email address, telephone number and type of entity (if applicable) of each person or entity owned or controlled by such person that owns or controls an interest in the business to be licensed; and 
(4)  Such other matters, consistent with this subchapter, as may be specified in the application form. The application shall be accompanied with a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space, occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to the accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
(5)  If the person who is applying for a license to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, the individual must sign the application as the applicant. If the applicant is an entity rather than an individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the entity must sign the application for the license as an applicant. Each signatory on the application must be qualified as required below. 
(Code 1996, 153.125; Ord. No. 204, 6-12-2003)  
Sec. 153.126. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Inspection. Prior to the issuance of any license, the premises upon which the business is to be conducted shall be inspected by and found to be in compliance with the law by the chief of police, the fire marshal, the code compliance officer, and the health office, or their duly authorized representatives. 
(b)  Requirements. 
(1)  Any applicant to be entitled to receive a license must: 
a.  Be over the age of 18; 
b.  Not be delinquent in the payment of any city taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed or imposed against the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to any commercial establishment; 
c.  Provide a consent for a criminal history to be conducted by the police department. It shall be grounds for denial of a license that any individual executing the application, or any entity executing the application, shall have been convicted of any felony; any offense involving moral turpitude; any offense under V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 43; any offense under V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 21 prohibiting public lewdness, indecent exposure, indecency with a child; any offense under V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 22 including aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault, incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway (as prohibited by V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 25); or any attempt, criminal conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of these offenses. 
(2)  In the event that the applicant or any signatory on the application, or any of them, have been convicted of any of these offenses, it shall be grounds for denial of the application. The fact that a conviction is on appeal shall not constitute grounds for avoiding this prohibition. If the individual has been placed upon deferred adjudication, the city manager shall have the right to evaluate the facts of the individual case and, in the event that the facts of the case are, in the judgment of the city manager, of such a nature as to impair good moral character of the applicant, the city manager shall deny the license. 
(c)  License fee. The license fee for a sexually oriented business shall be an annual fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(d)  Display of license. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom the license is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. It shall be placed in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Code 1996, 153.126; Ord. No. 204, 6-12-2003)  
Sec. 153.127. - Inspections. 
The licensee shall permit representatives of the city to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insurance compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open for business. Any person who operates a sexually oriented business or is employed at a sexually oriented business, commits an offense if they refuse to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the city at any time that it is occupied or open for business. The provisions of this section do not apply to the areas of a motel that are currently rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Code 1996, 153.127; Ord. No. 204, 6-12-2003)  
Sec. 153.128. - Renewal of license. 
Each license shall expire one year from the date of its issuance. The license may be renewed only by making an application for a renewal. The application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days prior to the expiration date and must contain the same requirements as in the original application. In addition, the application for renewal shall reflect any arrest made by the city police department on the premises of the sexually oriented business at any time during the term of the operation, as well as any criminal offenses occurring on the premises of the sexually oriented business which have resulted in an investigation by the city police department during the term of the original license. 
(Code 1996, 153.128; Ord. No. 204, 6-12-2003)  
Sec. 153.129. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
If the city manager finds that, subsequent to the issuance of a license, the licensee has violated any provision of this subchapter, refused to allow the inspection of the premises, knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the premises of the sexually oriented business, permitted the consumption of alcoholic beverages upon the premises of the sexually oriented business, had one or more employees, representatives, agents, or servants on the sexually oriented business convicted of one of the offenses described in section 153.126, then, in such event, the city manager may: 
(1)  Suspend the license of the sexually oriented business for a period of not less than 30 days; or 
(2)  Revoke the license of the sexually oriented business. 
(Code 1996, 153.129; Ord. No. 204, 6-12-2003)  
Sec. 153.130. - Mandatory revocation. 
If the city manager finds, following an investigation, any of the following, the license of the sexually oriented business shall be revoked: 
(1)  The licensee gave false or misleading information in its application or its application for renewal; 
(2)  The licensee gave false or misleading information to any representative of the city during any inspection; 
(3)  The licensee has allowed the use, possession, or sale of any controlled substances on the premises; 
(4)  The licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(5)  The licensee has been convicted of an offense involving moral turpitude during the term of the license; 
(6)  The licensee, its agents or employees have knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 21.01; 
(7)  The licensee is delinquent in the payment of any taxes, fees, sales taxes, or other charges by the city or any other governmental entity having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1996, 153.130; Ord. No. 204, 6-12-2003)  
Sec. 153.131. - Appeal. 
If a license is suspended or revoked, the licensee shall have the right to appeal this suspension or revocation to the city council. Such appeal shall be by written notice and must be filed within 15 days of the suspension, denial of license, or revocation of license. The licensee shall bear the burden of proving its entitlement to the license. 
(Code 1996, 153.131; Ord. No. 204, 6-12-2003)  
Sec. 153.132. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not be entitled to transfer its license. 
(Code 1996, 153.132; Ord. No. 204, 6-12-2003)  
Sec. 153.133. - Signage. 
No sign that is visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertisement that portrays nudity or a state of nudity is allowed. 
(Code 1996, 153.133; Ord. No. 204, 6-12-2003)  
Sec. 153.134. - Injunction. 
The city may enforce this subchapter by injunction against any person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in violation of this subchapter. 
(Code 1996, 153.134; Ord. No. 204, 6-12-2003)  
Sec. 153.135. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates or fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter or who builds or alters any building in violation of any plan or statement submitted and approved hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The owner of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(Code 1996, 153.999; Ord. No. 0002, 12-14-1995; Ord. No. 204, 6-12-2003)  
CHAPTER 154. - LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Antiquities Code of Texas, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code ch. 191; authority to preserve substandard building as historic property, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.00111. 
 
Sec. 154.01. - Purpose. 
(a)  The city council recognizes the historical, cultural, and aesthetic importance of certain buildings, structures, or districts within the city. 
(b)  The council desires to protect and preserve such landmarks and districts, and such protection and preservation is in the best interests of both historical preservation and the city's economic wellbeing. 
(Code 1996, § 154.01; Ord. No. 184, 9-27-2001)  
Sec. 154.02. - Designation of historic districts and landmarks. 
(a)  Historic districts and historic landmarks. The city council may, from time to time, designate certain areas in the city historic districts or certain places as historic landmarks. Those provisions pertaining to the designation of historic districts or historic landmarks constitute a part of the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city. All zoning maps shall reflect the historic district and landmark designation by the letter "H" as a suffix to the use designation. 
(b)  Criteria. In making the designation of an area or place as a historic district or landmark, the city council shall consider one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the city; 
(2)  Location as the site of a historical event; 
(3)  Embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or specimen; 
(4)  Relationship to other distinctive buildings, sites, districts, or structures which are historically significant and preserved, or which are eligible for preservation; 
(5)  Unique location of singular physical characteristics representing an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood, community, or the city; 
(6)  Value as an aspect of community sentiment or public pride; 
(7)  Identification with a person who significantly contributed to the development or culture of the city; 
(8)  In the case of landmark designation, the designation must be supported by the complete written consent of the property owner. 
(c)  Downtown historic districts and designated landmarks. 
(1)  Downtown historic district. The city downtown area more specifically described below meets several of the aforesaid criteria and is hereby designated a historic district within the city: 
Beginning at the corner of Second and "E" Streets, the district boundary follows "E" Street northeast to Fourth Street; 
Thence northwest to "D" Street; 
Thence northeast to Fifth Street; 
Thence northwest to "C" Street; 
Thence northeast to the property line of Baumann Grocery; 
Thence northwest to the corner of the Baumann Grocery property line; 
Thence southwest to Fifth Street; 
Thence northwest to "B" Street; 
Thence southwest crossing Fourth Street to the property line of Strozier's Paint and Body Shop; 
Thence northwest to the corner of the Strozier's Paint and Body Shop; 
Thence southwest to Third Street; 
Thence northwest to the Sanchez Mrs. Annie's property line; 
Thence southwest to the comer of the Sanchez Mrs. Annie's property line; 
Thence southeast to "B" Street; 
Thence southeast to Houston Street and on through the next block to "D" Street; 
Thence northeast to Second Street; 
Thence southeast to the point of origin at Second and "E" Street. 
(2)  Future historic districts or landmarks. Future designation of additional areas or places as historic districts and/or landmarks shall be governed by the further provisions of this section. 
(d)  Submission to planning and zoning commission for future designations. Formal recommendations to the city or by the city for any additional area or location for district or landmark designation shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission of the city within 30 days. The commission shall give notice and conduct its hearing on the proposed designation. Such hearing shall be in the same manner and according to the same procedures as specifically provided for in the provisions of chapter 153. 
(e)  Uses. Nothing contained in this section or in the designation of property as being in a historic district or being a historic landmark shall affect the present legal use of property. Use classifications as to all property which may be included in a historic district or historic landmark shall continue to be governed by the general zoning provisions of this chapter and the procedures therein established. In no case, however, shall any use be permitted which requires the demolition, razing, remodeling, or alteration of any buildings or structures in such a historic district or historic landmark so as to adversely affect the character of the district or historic landmark, except upon compliance with the terms of this section. 
(Code 1996, § 154.02; Ord. No. 184, 9-27-2001)  
Sec. 154.03. - Creation of historic review board. 
(a)  Board and board membership. There is hereby created a historic review board of the city hereinafter called the "board," consisting of five members appointed by the city council. The board shall be comprised of the following: 
(1)  At least four citizens of the city; 
(2)  At least two members of the Main Street Board, so long as such board is a functioning entity; 
(3)  At least two owners of property within the designated historic district; 
(4)  At least one member of the Wilson County Historical Society, so long as such association is a functioning entity; 
(5)  The building official or his representative shall serve as secretary and ex officio member of the board. 
(b)  Term of appointment. Each member of the board shall be appointed for a term of two years, except that of the members of the first board to be appointed, three shall be appointed to serve for two years, and two for one year. The term shall expire on January 1 of the appropriate year. Any vacancy on the board shall be filled by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. Any member of the board who fails to attend at least 75 percent of all regular meetings of the board within any 12-month period shall be removed from the board unless such failure to attend was the result of illness or other acceptable excuse as determined by the city council. 
(c)  Chairperson and vice-chairperson of the board. The chairperson and vice-chairperson of the board shall be elected annually by a majority of the members of the board, and shall serve a term of one year or until their successors are elected. 
(d)  Duties of the board. The board shall act in an advisory capacity only, and shall have no power to bind the city by contract or otherwise. Through the review procedure provided herein, it shall be the function of the board to advise the building official concerning all applications for review in historic districts or historic landmarks and perform any other advisory functions delegated by the city council. 
(e)  Meetings. The board shall meet monthly at a regularly scheduled time unless no necessary business needs to be conducted. Special meetings may be called upon request of the chairperson, or the vice-chairperson, or upon written request of two members, or upon notice from the building official that a matter requires the consideration of the board. All meetings shall have advance notice posted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Law. Three members shall constitute a quorum and action taken at a meeting shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present and voting at such meeting. 
(Code 1996, § 154.03; Ord. No. 184, 9-27-2001)  
Sec. 154.04. - Historic preservation review and permit required. 
(a)  No person shall proceed to make alterations, changes, restorations, demolitions, or removals to the exterior of or upon any historic landmark of or upon any building or improvement within a historic district without first submitting his plans to the building official as hereinafter provided and securing a permit to proceed. 
(b)  A historic preservation review is necessary for any proposed alteration, change, restoration, or removal of any architectural feature of the exterior of a building or structure (including exterior signage and painting) for any historically designated property under the provisions of this section. Application for historical preservation review shall be made to the building official through the regular building permit procedure of the city. 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed as requiring the historical review process for any regular maintenance of any building that does not alter the exterior presentation or structure of the building. 
(d)  Application shall be deemed complete when submitted upon city forms complete with drawings, plans, and specifications of when submitted upon a form and in a form otherwise acceptable to the building official. 
(e)  No charge or fee will be required for a historic preservation review but the review process, while in conjunction with the building permit process, does not relieve or take the place of building permit and fee requirements provided for elsewhere in this Code. 
(f)  Historic preservation review acceptance, however, shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Code 1996, § 154.04; Ord. No. 184, 9-27-2001)  
Sec. 154.05. - Review process. 
(a)  If the building official determines that the application involves ordinary repair or maintenance, or alteration, change, restoration, or removal of any exterior architectural feature of a building, structure, or sign which does not involve significant changes in the architectural or historic value, style, general design, or appearance, he shall within seven days forward a copy of the application indicating the determination to the chairperson of the board, or to the vice-chairperson of the board if the chairperson is not available. The chairperson or vice-chairperson of the board shall within five business days either approve the building official's determination or call for a meeting of the board to consider the application as provided in subsection (c) of this section. If the chairperson or vice-chairperson of the board do not take any action within five business days, it shall be deemed that the board shall take no action and the building official shall indicate the applications acceptance for historic review purposes on the building permit. 
(b)  If the building official determines that the application involves an alteration, change, restoration, removal, or demolition of an external architectural feature of a building or structure which involves a significant change in the architectural or historic value, style, general design or appearance, he shall refer the application to the board and call for a meeting of the board to consider the application. 
(c)  The board shall hold a meeting to consider the application within 15 business days after the building official's receipt of a completed application. The applicant shall be given written notice of the time and place of the meeting. The board may hold any additional meetings it considers necessary to carry out its responsibilities under this section. The board shall make its recommendation to the building official within 30 days after receipt of a completed application unless the board and the applicant mutually agree to extend the period of review. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the board shall make its recommendation to the building official within 90 days after receipt of complete application for a permit to demolish a historic landmark or a building within a historic district, or to move a historic landmark, or to move a building into or out of a historic district. 
(e)  The board shall forward its recommendation to the building official. While the building official is not bound by such recommendation, he shall within five business days of its receipt give written notice of the applications acceptance or denial. Such notice shall be deemed complete once filed with the city secretary or by issuance of a permit showing acceptance. 
(1)  In the case of applications that do not involve demolition of a historic building or landmark, an application shall be deemed accepted if no notice of action by the building official is given within 60 days after the receipt of a completed application unless time has been mutually extended as provided above. 
(2)  In the case of applications that involve demolition of a historic building or landmark, an application shall be deemed accepted if no notice of action by the building official is given within 100 days after the receipt of a completed application unless time has been mutually extended as provided above. 
(Code 1996, § 154.05; Ord. No. 184, 9-27-2001)  
Sec. 154.06. - Criteria to be used. 
In determining the recommendations and action on acceptance of an application for historic preservation review, the building official and board shall consider the following: 
(1)  The effect of the proposed change upon the general historic, cultural, and architectural nature of the district or landmark; 
(2)  The appropriateness of exterior architectural features which can be seen from a public street, alley, or walkway; 
(3)  The general design, arrangement, texture, material, and color of the building or structure and the relation of such factors to similar features of buildings or structures in the district. The criteria shall not be the aesthetic appeal to the board of the structure or the proposed remodeling but rather its conformity to the general character of the particular historic area involved; 
(4)  All signs shall be in keeping with the character of the historic district or landmark; 
(5)  The value of this historic district or landmark as an area of unique interest and character shall be impaired; 
(6)  The general and specific Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Applying the Standards for Rehabilitation; and 
(7)  The importance of finding a way to meet the current needs of the property owner, and the importance of approving plans that will be economically feasible for the property owner. 
(Code 1996, § 154.06; Ord. No. 184, 9-27-2001)  
Sec. 154.07. - Appeal to city council. 
Any person aggrieved by an action of the board or building official relative to the acceptance or denial of an application shall have the right to appeal to the city council by giving notice of appeal within 15 days of such action. The council shall sit as a review board. An appeal hearing shall be set within 30 days of notice. The council ruling may uphold, overrule, or modify the building official's decision. 
(Code 1996, § 154.07; Ord. No. 184, 9-27-2001)  
Sec. 154.08. - Annual report. 
(a)  The board shall make an annual report to the city council on the state of historic preservation in the city and shall include in the report a summary of its activities for the past year and a proposed program for the next year. 
(b)  The board shall have the further responsibility of recommending to the city council, planning and zoning commission, and the city departments the adoption of policies, the sources of funds, and designation of historic districts and historic landmarks that may further the city's preservation effort. 
(Code 1996, § 154.08; Ord. No. 184, 9-27-2001)  
CHAPTER 155. - EXEMPTIONS FOR POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Sec. 155.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means any fee charged by the city for the processing of requests relating to land usage, including, but not limited to, zoning requests, special use permits, etc. 
Permit fee means any fee charged by the city for the issuance of a permit relating to construction, demolition, modification, or improvement to property. 
Political subdivision means a county, municipality, special district, school district, junior college district, housing authority, or other political subdivision as such may be defined in the statutes of the state. 
(Code 1996, § 155.01; Ord. No. 2014-020, 11-20-2014)  
Sec. 155.02. - Waiver of fees. 
(a)  The city may waive administrative fees, permit fees, or both, for political subdivisions. Political subdivisions shall remain responsible to the city for any costs required to be paid to third parties for the review of proposed plans to ensure compliance with the city's zoning requirements and building codes. 
(b)  Upon written application to the city by the political subdivision, the city shall make a determination on whether to grant a waiver of the fees described in subsection (a) of this section. Such waiver of administrative fees, permit fees, or both, shall be made at the discretion of the city manager of the city. The city manager shall provide a written response to the political subdivision requesting the waiver, and in such response the city manager shall issue a finding granting, denying, or granting in part and denying in part, the application for waiver. 
(Code 1996, § 155.02; Ord. No. 2014-020, 11-20-2014)  
CHAPTER 156. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 156.01. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations pertaining to recreational vehicles and recreational vehicle parks in the city and thereby promote community health and safety. Expansion or addition to any pre-existing recreational vehicle parks will require the total recreational park to comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 1, 9-8-2011)  
Sec. 156.02. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means any person authorized by the licensee of a recreational vehicle park to operate or maintain such park under the provisions of this chapter. 
Building official means the legally designated inspection authority of the city or his authorized representative as designated by the city manager. 
Certificate of occupancy means a certificate issued by the building official for the use of a building, structure and/or land when it is determined by him that the building, structure, and/or land complies with the provisions of all applicable city codes, ordinances, and regulations. 
City official means the director of public works, permit director, or other legally designated person of a city department or his authorized representative when acting in an official capacity or as designated by the city manager. 
Common access route means a private or public access roadway which affords the principal means of access to individual sites or auxiliary buildings. The term "common access route" when used for emergency vehicles access shall meet minimum standards. Minimum standards shall equal or exceed six inches of crushed and/or compacted base and further comply with the county and/or city Code, whichever is the more restrictive. 
Crushed and or compacted base means a minimum of six inches of flexible base compacted to 95 percent maximum density as determined by state department of transportation's standard laboratory test procedure Tex-113-E. Subgrade shall be moisture conditioned and compacted to 90 percent maximum density. The flexible base material shall be Item 200, Type B Flexible Base as per City of San Antonio Standard Specifications for Construction or approved equal. 
Driveway means a minor entranceway off the common access route within the park into an off-street parking area serving no more than two sites. 
Fire equipment means equipment specified by the NFPA as suitable for RV parks per NFPA standards. 
Hard-surface road means the minimum standards for the common access route or an asphalt or concrete road meeting the approval of the director of public works. 
Internal street means the same as "common access route." 
License means a written license issued by the building official permitting a person to operate and maintain a recreational vehicle park under the provisions of this chapter. 
Licensee means any person licensed to operate and maintain a recreational vehicle park under the provisions of this chapter. 
Park means a recreational vehicle park. 
Plot plan means a complete set of signed and sealed engineered drawings providing a graphic representation, drawn to scale, in a horizontal plane delineating the outlines of the land included in the plan and all proposed use locations, accurately dimensioned with, the dimensions also indicating the relation of each plane of use to that adjoining use and to the boundary of the property. Furthermore, the drawing shall include a complete set of all utility, road plans and existing and proposed improvement details. 
Private street means the same as the term "common access route." 
Recreational vehicle means a portable home designed as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational and vacation uses. Such homes shall not exceed eight feet in width and 46 feet in length and shall be classified as a recreational vehicle whether or not its wheels, rollers, skids or other rolling equipment have been removed, and whether or not any addition thereto has been built on the ground; and such designations shall also include pick-up campers, converted buses, self-powered motor homes, tent trailers, tents and any temporary vehicular housing. The term "recreational vehicle" specifically excludes modular office buildings, tents and temporary dwellings. Modular buildings may not be located within a recreational vehicle park. 
Recreational vehicle park means a contiguous parcel of land licensed or used in whole or in part, with or without charges, for the parking of recreational vehicles occupied or intended to be occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes for any length of time. 
Service building means a structure or housing toilets, lavatories and such other facilities as may be required by this chapter. 
Sewer connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the drain outlet of a recreational vehicle to the inlet of the corresponding sewer service riser pipe of the sewage system serving the park or an individual site or pad. 
Sewer service riser pipe means the portion of a sewer service which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each site. 
Site plan means the same as the term "plot plan." 
Space means a plot or pad of ground within the park designed for the accommodation of one recreational vehicle together with such parking and open space as required by this chapter. The term "space" shall also include the terms lot, stand or pad. 
Tow vehicle means a vehicle used to tow a recreational vehicle or a vehicle being towed by a recreational vehicle. 
Water connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within a recreational vehicle. 
Water riser pipe means the portion of the water service system serving a recreational vehicle park which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at a space. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 2, 9-8-2011)  
Sec. 156.03. - General provisions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person for any reason to park or place a recreational vehicle within the city for a period longer than 72 hours. The provisions of this chapter shall not, however, apply to: 
(1)  Locations where recreational vehicles are manufactured and/or sold or stored by the manufacturer or seller. 
(2)  A recreational vehicle located on a space in a recreational vehicle park duly licensed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Locations where the city manager has granted a request to temporarily place recreational vehicles. The request shall be in written form signed by the property owner requesting a specified period of time for the recreational vehicle to be present, it shall also address how utilities will be supplied to the recreational vehicle if applicable. With the request there shall also be provided a site plan showing the proposed location of recreational vehicles and any other structures on the property. The city manager shall be cognizant of designated national emergencies which may require temporary flexibility and exceptions to this chapter. 
(4)  A personal/individual recreational vehicle located on an individual's personal property and the recreational vehicle, provided it is not used as living quarters or storage. 
(b)  In any event, a recreational vehicle shall not be parked on any street or parkway for the purpose of storage. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 3, 9-8-2011)  
Sec. 156.04. - License. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a recreational vehicle park within the corporate limits of the city unless such person shall first obtain a license. 
(1)  License fees. 
a.  The annual license fee for each recreational vehicle park shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
b.  The fee for transfer of license shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. License transfers will not be approved unless the recreational vehicle park is in compliance with the recreational vehicle park ordinance in effect at the time the original recreational vehicle park permit was approved. 
c.  Recreational vehicles are not allowed inside a manufactured home park and vice versa. 
(2)  Application for license. 
a.  Application for recreational vehicle license shall be filed with the building official of the city and upon payment of the license fee, recommendation by the planning and zoning commission of the city, and, upon formal approval by the city council, the building official shall issue the license. 
b.  Applications shall be in writing signed by the applicant or a duly authorized officer or agent of applicant and shall contain at least the following: 
1.  The name, address, email address and telephone number of the applicant; 
2.  The location and legal description of the recreational vehicle park; 
3.  Complete set of engineered drawings, drawn to scale and detailing the plans and specifications of the park drawn including all improvements constructed or to be constructed, utility and street improvements; 
4.  Ingress and egress permits from the applicable state, county, city regulatory agency. 
c.  Such further information as may be requested by the planning and zoning commission to enable it to determine if the recreational vehicle park will comply with legal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 4, 9-8-2011)  
Sec. 156.05. - Location. 
Recreational vehicle parks may be located only in an area zoned for such use under the provisions of chapter 153. Areas zoned for such use are herein designated by the city council as being "special use." 
(Ord. No. 284, § 5, 9-8-2011)  
Sec. 156.06. - Recreational vehicle park plan. 
(a)  The recreational vehicle park shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded and equipped to ensure rapid drainage and to be free from stagnant pools of water. The condition of the soil, groundwater, drainage and topography shall be such that it shall not create a hazard to the property or the health and safety of the occupants. No vehicle park will be allowed within the FEMA flood hazard area. 
(2)  Each park shall provide recreational vehicle parking spaces and each such space shall be clearly defined. R.V. parking spaces shall be not less than 18 feet by 50 feet and include auto parking spaces. There must be at least a ten-foot clearance of space between the parked recreational vehicles. If there is a conflict with any other provision of this Code, this section shall control. 
(3)  The entrance to the park shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets and be approved by the appropriate state, county and city agency. 
(4)  Common access routes must be adequate to provide access to each recreational vehicle space and shall be constructed and maintained in good condition by the licensee and the width of which shall be not less than 24 feet. The minimum inside radius of street intersections shall be 15 feet. Cul-de-sacs streets longer than 150 feet will provide a minimum diameter of 100 feet of turning radius to accommodate emergency vehicles. 
(5)  The park shall comply with state and federal standards for accessible for the mobility impaired as it may be applicable. The applicant shall show proof of compliance. 
(6)  No permanent fixtures will be permitted to be attached to the individual recreational vehicle spaces. 
(7)  Any non-permanent storage building and/or units located on individual recreational vehicle spaces must be located a minimum of ten feet from the nearest recreational vehicle or other non-permanent storage buildings and/or units. 
(8)  Only one recreational vehicle will be permitted in one recreational vehicle space. 
(b)  Recreational vehicle stands or pads shall: 
(1)  Be improved with a minimum of six inches of compacted crushed road base material or with asphalt or concrete adequate to support the weight of the recreational vehicle. 
(2)  Not heave, shift, or settle unevenly under the weight of the recreational vehicle due to frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the structure. 
(c)  Each parking space or pad shall be equipped with water, sewer and electrical hook ups, including on-site fire equipment, which shall conform to all applicable codes or ordinances of the city and as detailed in the approved engineered drawings. 
(d)  All street and walkways shall be lighted at night. Light standards shall have a height and spacing to ensure an average illumination level of not less than 0.2 footcandles. 
(e)  All recreational vehicle spaces must provide for off street parking. The parking space must be improved with a minimum of six inches of compacted crushed road base material or with asphalt or concrete adequate to support the weight of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 6, 9-8-2011)  
Sec. 156.07. - Garbage receptacles. 
(a)  Each recreational vehicle park shall provide fly tight, watertight, rodent proof, dumpsters to accommodate and provide a minimum of 90 gallons per recreational vehicle located within the recreational vehicle park at any given time. (There are approximately 202 gallons per cubic yard.) 
(b)  The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the recreational vehicle park shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 7, 9-8-2011)  
Sec. 156.08. - Fuels. 
(a)  Bottled gas for cooking purposes shall not be used at individual recreational vehicle spaces unless the containers are properly connected by copper or other suitable metallic tubing and as designed by the recreational vehicle's manufacturer. 
(b)  Bottled gas cylinders shall be securely fastened in place as designed by the recreational vehicle's manufacturer. 
(c)  No cylinders containing bottled gas shall be located in a recreational vehicle or within five feet of a door thereof. 
(d)  State and local regulations applicable to the handling of bottled gas and fuel oil shall apply. 
(e)  All applicable provisions of the ordinances of this city regulating the use of liquefied gas must be followed. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 8, 9-8-2011)  
Sec. 156.09. - Fire protection. 
(a)  General. Every park shall be equipped at all times with fire extinguishing equipment in good working order of such type, size, and number and so located within the park as to satisfy the National Fire Protection Association ("NFPA") dry fire extinguisher standards as may be modified by local purchase and inspection requirements acceptable to the fire chief. The minimum number of approved fire extinguishers shall be at least equal to the number of recreational vehicles located within the recreational vehicle park. The required number of fire extinguishers will be inclusive of the fire extinguishers located within the individual recreational vehicles located within the park. 
(b)  Open fires prohibited. No open fires shall be permitted, except that this shall not be construed to prevent outside cooking and/or barbecuing with natural gas in an approved closed pit or grill. Outside cooking or barbecuing with charcoal is prohibited. 
(c)  Proximity to common access routes. All sites and any part of a recreational vehicle shall not exceed 150 feet from the common access routes. 
(d)  Storage and handling of flammable liquids. Only bottled gas for cooking shall be stored on-site. 
(e)  Access to sites for firefighting. Approaches to all sites shall be regulated by the National Fire Code turning radius requirements. All sites shall be kept clear for firefighting personnel and equipment. 
(f)  Firefighting instruction. The park owner or agent shall be responsible for the instruction of his staff in the use of the park fire protection equipment and in their specific duties in the event of fire. 
(g)  Water supply facilities for fire department operations. 
(1)  Water supply facilities for fire department operations shall be connected to the city public water supply system. 
(2)  The park owner shall provide standard city approved fire hydrants located within 500 feet of all sites, measured along the path of travel using driveways and/or streets. When fire hydrants are required the water mains and fire hydrants shall be dedicated to the city after construction of improvements is preformed to the city engineering standards and approved by the director of public works. The water mains and fire hydrants when located on private property shall be in dedicated utility easements of the size set by the director of public works adequate to service said lines and hydrants after all development has accrued. 
(h)  Dry vegetation. The park licensee or agent shall be responsible for maintaining the entire area of the park free of dry brush, leaves and weeds. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 9, 9-8-2011)  
Sec. 156.10. - Supervision. 
(a)  The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable with the licensee for the violation of any provision of this chapter to which the licensee is subject. 
(b)  The licensee or agent shall operate the park in compliance with this chapter and other applicable ordinances and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and its equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(c)  The licensee or agent shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this chapter and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 10, 9-8-2011)  
Sec. 156.11. - Inspection. 
(a)  The building official, building inspector, the fire chief, and the police chief are hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  The building official, building inspector, the fire chief, and the police chief shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  The building official, building inspector, fire chief, and police chief shall have the power and authority in discharging their official duties to inspect the recreational vehicle park for compliance with this chapter and other safety and soundness issues. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 11, 9-8-2011)  
Sec. 156.12. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  The city manager may refuse to renew or seek to revoke any license to maintain and operate a park when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  After such conviction, a new license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to conviction have been remedied and the park is being maintained and operated in full compliance with the law. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 12, 9-8-2011)  
Sec. 156.13. - Exceptions. 
Notwithstanding any of the requirements of this chapter, if it be shown to the satisfaction of the planning and zoning commission that any of the requirements if complied with would cause undue hardship on any applicant for a license hereunder or licensee hereunder, and that such requirement or requirements would not be for the best interest and general welfare of the city and the citizens affected by this chapter, the planning and zoning commission may recommend to the city manager/council waive such requirement or requirements. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 16, 9-8-2011)  
Appendix A - FEE SCHEDULE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the fee schedule ordinance of the city, as adopted by the city council on November 9, 2017. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, section numbers and headings have been added. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
Sec. 1. - Water, sewer, and refuse services. 
The Utility Administration Department provides assistance to all utility customers by setting up and processing payments for water, sewer, and refuse services. The department also sets utility rates that are reviewed annually by the city council. 
Type 	Fee 
Water and Sewer Rates 
Water Rates (residential & commercial) basic cut-in 	$75.00 
Water rates (residential in city limits) 
First 3,000 gallons 	$29.90 
3,001—12,000 	$4.10 per thousand 
12,001 and over 	$4.10 per thousand 
Water rates (residential out of town) 
First 3,000 gallons 	$49.30 
3,001—12,000 	$6.85 per thousand 
12,001 and over 	$6.85 per thousand 
Water rates (commercial in city limits) 
First 3,000 gallons 	$49.70 
3,001—12,000 	$4.10 per thousand 
12,001 and over 	$4.10 per thousand 
Water rates (commercial out of town) 
First 3,000 gallons 	$85.10 
3,001—12,000 	$6.85 per thousand 
12,001 and over 	$6.85 per thousand 
Sewer rates (residential) 
Flat rate 	$35.01 
Sewer rates (commercial) 
First 10,000 gallons 	$70.02 
10,001—40,000 	$6.83 per thousand 
40,001—50,000 	$6.83 per thousand 
50,001 and over 	$6.83 per thousand 
Fire hydrant meter 	$600.00 deposit + $75.00 connection fee 
Water and sewer connections 	$1,350.00 
Water - ¾" meter 	$1,350.00 
Water - 1" meter 	$1,400.00 
Water - 2" meter 	Labor & parts 
Water - 3" meter 	Labor & parts 
Split service 	$1,250.00 
Meter relocation 	$250.00 
Sewer - 4" line 	$1,500.00 
Sewer - 6" line 	$2,500.00 
Water transfer 	$35.00 
Bulk water 
1,000 gallons 	$8.00 
900 gallons 	$7.20 
800 gallons 	$6.40 
700 gallons 	$5.60 
600 gallons 	$4.80 
500 gallons 	$4.00 
400 gallons 	$3.20 
300 gallons 	$2.40 
200 gallons 	$1.60 
100 gallons 	$0.80 
Solid Waste 
Solid Waste Collection Rates 
Residential (one collection time per week) 
One 95-gallon cart 	$17.87 
Each additional cart (maximum of three carts) 	$6.39 
Commercial (one collection time per week) 
One 95-gallon cart 	$27.02 
Additional cart (maximum of three carts) 	$9.65 
Commercial bin service (2-yard FEL can) 
lx/week 	$110.77 
2x/week 	$206.88 
3x/week 	$301.24 
4x/week 	$401.23 
5x/week 	$498.50 
Commercial bin service (3-yard FEL can) 
lx/week 	$125.63 
2x/week 	$233.70 
3x/week 	$341.76 
4x/week 	$455.26 
5x/week 	$563.34 
Commercial bin service (4-yard FEL can) 
lx/week 	$147.51 
2x/week 	$265.91 
3x/week 	$382.30 
4x/week 	$509.30 
5x/week 	$630.89 
Commercial bin service (6-yard FEL can) 
lx/week 	$216.41 
2x/week 	$317.57 
3x/week 	$464.69 
4x/week 	$618.73 
5x/week 	$753.82 
Commercial bin service (6-yard FEL can) 
lx/week 	$270.17 
2x/week 	$372.84 
3x/week 	$544.40 
4x/week 	$725.44 
5x/week 	$894.31 
  
Sec. 2. - Animal related fees. 
Type 	Fee 
Animal Control 	
Dog or cat pickup 	$15.00 
Dog or cat tags 	$5.00 
Livestock pickup 	$35.00 
Feed & board per day 	$5.00 
  
Sec. 3. - Building permit and building related fees. 
(a)  Permit fee charged to build a new building, to add on to an existing building, to remodel, or to alter an existing building, whether residential or commercial, shall be based on the declared valuation of the proposed work. Permit fees based upon such valuation shall be set forth as contained in the following table. 
Valuation 	Fee 
$1,000.00 to $15,000.00 	$100.00 
$15,001.00 to $25,000.00 	$100.00 for the first $15,000.00 plus $14.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and include $25,000.00 
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 	$391.25 for the first $25,000.00 plus $7.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00 
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 	$643.75 for the first $50,000.00 plus $7.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00 
$100,000.00 to $500,000.00 	$993.75 for the first $100,000.00 plus $5.60 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00 
$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 	$3,233.75 for the first $500,000.00 plus $4.75 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00 
 
The City of Floresville may require the applicant to verify the declared valuation. 
(b)  An additional permit fee shall be required for plumbing, electrical, and mechanical work in the amount of $100.00 per each trade applicable. 
(c)  Special inspection fees shall be set at the following rates: 
Inspection Fees and Penalties 	Fee 
Inspections outside of normal business hours 	$47.00/hour with minimum 2 hours 
Re-inspection fees assessed under the International Building Code 	$47.00/hour 
Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated 	$47.00/hour with minimum 2 hours 
Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to approved plans 	$47.00/hour with minimum 2 hours 
 
Type 	Fee 
Type of Contractor 	
Electrical contractor 	$100.00 
Fire protection 	$100.00 
Sign contractor 	$100.00 
Fence contractor 	$100.00 
General contractor 	$100.00 
Plumbing contractor 	$0.00 
Foundation contractor 	$100.00 
Masonry contractor 	$100.00 
Mechanical (HVAC) contractor 	$100.00 
Framing contractor 	$100.00 
Irrigator (landscaping) 	$100.00 
Backflow contractor 	$100.00 
Roofing contractor 	$100.00 
Excavation/demolition contractor 	$100.00 
Specialty contractor 	$100.00 
Other 	$100.00 
Fire code plan review services (fire alarm & sprinkler system) 
Up to $250,000.00 	$500.00 
$251,000.00 to 
$500,000.00 	$850.00 
$501,000.00 to 
$1,000,000.00 	$1,100.00 
$1,001,000.00 to 
$3,000,000.00 	$1,600.00 
$3,001,000.00 to 
$6,000,000.00 	$2,400.00 
$6,001,000.00 and up 	$2,400.00 plus $0.25 for each additional $1,000.00 
*Additional 50% added to total cost for processing fee 
Fire code plan inspection services (fire alarm & sprinkler system) 
Up to $250,000.00 	$750.00 
$251,000.00 to 
$500,000.00 	$1,050.00 
$501,000.00 to 
$1,000,000.00 	$1,350.00 
$1,001,000.00 to 
$3,000,000.00 	$1,900.00 
$3,001,000.00 to 
$6,000,000.00 	$2,850.00 
$6,001,000.00 and up 	$2,850.00 plus $0.25 for each additional $1,000.00 
*Additional 50% added to total cost for processing fee 
-Value ($) is total value of project 
Food and safety inspection 
Peddlers permit (payable at time of issuance) 	$25.00 
Food safety and health 	$200.00/annual 
Temporary food and safety permit 	$125.00 
  
Sec. 4. - Amusement devices and business related fees. 
Business owner, manager or lessee of premises on which a skill or pleasure coins operated or slot machine is made available to other shall be required to secure a permit for each machine at such location by paying to the City. 
Type 	Fee 
New permit (at time of application, per machine) 	$500.00 
Renewal permit (annually, per machine) 	$500.00 
  
Sec. 5. - Vehicle related fees. 
Type 	Fee 
Recreational vehicle parking 
15 or less spaces 	$35.00 per space 
16 to 30 	$45.00 per space 
More than 30 	$55.00 per space 
Transfer of license 	$500.00 
  
Sec. 6. - Subdivision related fees. 
Type 	Fee 
Subdivisions - Plat review 
Major subdivision plats 
Single-family 	$425.00 + $75.00/lot 
Non-single-family 	$425.00 + $475.00/lot 
Minor subdivision plats 
0—3 acres 	$400.00 
3.01—10 acres 	$600.00 
10.01—20 acres 	$875.00 
Greater than 20 acres 	$1,400.00 + $200.00 per acre over 20 
Amending plats 	$525.00 
Filing fee 	$300.00 
Application 
(non-refundable) 	$25.00 
  
Sec. 7. - Cemetery fee schedule. 
(a)  Upon receipt of full payment, the City of Floresville shall execute a deed of conveyance of lot(s) to purchaser. No refunds for any reason. Only residents of the City of Floresville may purchase in the city cemetery. 
(b)  The following fee shall be charged by The City of Floresville, all fees are nonrefundable. 
Type 	Fee 
Standard non-veteran burial plot 	$700.00 
Double stacked non-veteran burial plot 	$1,000.00 
Standard veteran burial plot 	$100.00 
Double stacked veteran burial plot 	$150.00 
Floresville first responder (at least three years' duty) 	$100.00 
Floresville first responder or member of armed forces killed in line of duty 	$0.00 
 
(c)  All monuments and tombstones shall be set in concrete on a substantial concrete foundation. 
(1)  The size of monuments and tombstones and all lettering shall be regulated as follows: 
a.  Single monuments - Length - 30" x height - 30" x width - 16" 
b.  Double monuments - Length - 94" x height - 24" x width - 16" 
(2)  Surface monuments and tombstones shall not be larger than the following dimensions: 
a.  Single monuments - Length - 24" x height - 24" x width - 16" 
b.  Double monuments - Length - 48" x height - 24" x width - 16"  
Sec. 8. - Maximum notary fees for Texas. 
Type 	Fee 
Notary - Acknowledgments 
First signature 	$6.00 + $1.00 for each additional signature on same document 
Jurats 	$6.00 per signature, including oath or affirmation 
Certified copies 	$6.00 per certificate 
Certified copies of notarial 
records 	$0.50 per page 
Protests 	$4.00 each bill or note $1.00 per notice served $4.00 for certificate and seal 
Depositions 	$6.00 for certificates and oath $0.50 per 100 words 
All other 
notarial acts 	$6.00 
 
