CODE OF ORDINANCES - CITY OF FARMERSVILLE, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
FARMERSVILLE, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Joseph E. Helmberger, P.E. 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jim Foy 
Paul Kelly 
Billy Long 
Russell Chandler 
Pansy Hundley 
City Council 
____________ 
John Moran 
City Manager 
____________ 
Alan D. Lathrom 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Edie Sims 
City Secretary 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
FARMERSVILLE, TEXAS 
____________ 
Diane Piwko 
Mayor 
____________ 
John Klostermann 
Donny Mason 
Michael Hesse 
Mike Hurst 
Leaca Caspari 
City Council 
____________ 
Benjamin White, P.E. 
City Manager 
____________ 
Alan D. Lathrom 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Mary Tate 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Farmersville, Texas. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2004 Code, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2004 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Code Attorney, and Colleen Dalton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to John Moran, City Manager; Edie Sims, City Secretary; and Alan D. Lathrom, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Farmersville, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Farmersville, Texas. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Farmersville, Texas. 2011. 
CITY OF FARMERSVILLE, TEXAS
ORDINANCE # 2011-1107-001 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF FARMERSVILLE, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING A REPEALER CLAUSE; PROVIDING A SAVINGS CLAUSE; PROVIDING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE; PROVIDING FOR GOVERNMENTAL IMMUNITY; PROVIDING FOR INJUNCTIONS; PROVIDING A PENALTY CLAUSE; AND PROVIDING FOR PUBLICATION AND A DATE WHEN THIS ORDINANCE AND SAID CODE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
WHEREAS, the City of Farmersville, Texas ("City") is a Type A General — Law Municipality located in Collin County having a population of less than 5,000 persons as determined by the most recent federal census, created in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 6 of the Local Government Code, and operating pursuant to the enabling legislation of the State of Texas; and 
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Farmersville, Texas, hereinafter referred to as the "City," had heretofore duly enacted a code of ordinances pursuant to the City's authority under Chapter 53 of the Texas Local Government Code; and 
WHEREAS, the code of ordinances so adopted was known and designated as "Code of Ordinances, City of Farmersville, Texas," consisting of Articles 1 through 11, adopted June 8, 2004 (the "2004 Code"); and 
WHEREAS, the City Council has determined the necessity for a new code of ordinances to be enacted and codified pursuant to the City's authority under Chapter 53 of the Texas Local Government Code; 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FARMERSVILLE, TEXAS: 
SECTION 1. Findings Incorporated 
All of the above premises are hereby found to be true and correct legislative and factual findings of the City of Farmersville and are hereby approved and incorporated into the body of this Ordinance as if copied in their entirety. 
SECTION 2. New Code of Ordinances Adopted 
The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Farmersville, Texas" published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 77, each inclusive, (the "Code") is hereby adopted. 
SECTION 3. Repealer 
Any and all ordinances, orders, resolutions, rules, regulations, policies or provisions in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance and of the Code are hereby repealed and rescinded to the extent of any conflict herewith. 
SECTION 4. Savings 
All rights and remedies of the City of Farmersville are expressly saved as to any and all violations of the provisions of any Ordinances and the 2004 Code which have accrued at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance and the Code; and, as to such accrued violations and all pending litigation, both civil and criminal, whether pending in court or not, under such Ordinances and the 2004 Code, same shall not be affected by this Ordinance and the Code but may be prosecuted until final disposition by the courts. 
SECTION 5. Severability 
If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or provision of this Ordinance and of the Code, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall to any extent be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, void or unconstitutional, the remaining sections, subsections, clauses, phrases or provisions of this Ordinance and of the Code, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall remain in full force and effect and shall in no way be affected, impaired or invalidated. 
SECTION 6. Penalty Clause 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any officer or department of the City under authority duly vested in such officer or department any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance, rule, regulation or order that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping or refuse, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00. The violation of any other provision of this Code or any other ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, unless specifically stated otherwise in this Code. If the maximum penalty provided by this Code for any offense is greater than the maximum penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the State of Texas, the maximum penalty for such violation provided for violation provided by the state statute shall be the maximum penalty under this Code; provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the State of Texas. Each act of violation and each day or portion of a day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this Section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, administrative adjudication and revocation of licenses or permits. 
SECTION 7. Future Additions and Amendments 
Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
SECTION 8. Ordinances Adopted after July 26, 2011 
Ordinances adopted after July 26, 2011, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of this Code. 
SECTION 9 . Governmental Immunity 
All of the regulations provided in this ordinance and the Code are hereby declared to be governmental and for the health, safety and welfare of the general public. Any member of the City Council or any City official or employee charged with the enforcement of this ordinance and the Code, acting for the City of Farmersville in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable; and he/she is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her said duties. 
SECTION 10. Injunctions 
Any violation of this ordinance and the Code can be enjoined by a suit filed in the name of the City of Farmersville in a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy shall be in addition to any penal provision in this ordinance or in the Code. 
SECTION 11 . Effective Date 
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately from and after its passage and publication of the caption as required by law. 
PASSED on first reading on the 25 th day of October, 2011, and second reading on the 7 th day of November, 2011 at properly scheduled meetings of the City Council of the City of Farmersville, Texas, there being a quorum present, and approved by the Mayor on the date set out below. 
APPROVED THIS 7th DAY OF NOVEMBER, 2011. 
	APPROVED: 
	BY:;sigl; _____ 
	Joseph E. Helmberger, P.E., Mayor 
ATTEST: 	
;sigl; _____ 	
Edie Sims, City Secretary 	
	
APPROVED AS TO FORM AND LEGALITY: 
;sigl; _____ 	
Alan D. Lathrom, City Attorney 	
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal codes of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001 et seq.; enforcement of municipal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001 et seq.; municipal health and safety ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.012 et seq.; effect of codification of municipal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.005; printed Code of Ordinances as evidence, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.006. 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Farmersville, Texas," and may be so cited. This Code may also be referred to by the short title "Farmersville Code." 
(Code 2004, § 1.101) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt a civil and criminal code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. Words used expressing masculine gender shall be construed to include the feminine. 
Chapter, article, division, subdivision, section. When used to clarify the location of an ordinance, subsection, paragraph, or section, these terms refer to that chapter, article, division, subdivision, or section of this Code of Ordinances in which it is found unless specifically and clearly the term is used in reference to a separate publication. 
CIAC. The abbreviation "CIAC" refers to the city's "Capital Improvements Advisory Commission." 
City. The term "city" means the City of Farmersville in the County of Collin and State of Texas. 
City council. The term "city council" means the governing body of the City of Farmersville, Texas. 
City officers, boards, commissions, departments, etc. Whenever reference is made to an officer, board, commission or department, it shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "of the City of Farmersville, Texas." Reference to an officer shall be deemed to include authorized deputies, agents or representatives to which powers or duties are delegated by such officer. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Farmersville, Texas, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation, except and unless the provision specifically refers to calendar days. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.014. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by any of the conjunctions "and," "or," "either…or," or "neither…nor," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided that in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The terms "either…or" and "neither…nor" indicate that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
Councilman; councilmember. An elected or duly appointed member of the city council. 
County. Most of the city's geographical area is located in Collin County, Texas, but portions of the city's geographical area and extraterritorial jurisdiction are or may in the future be situated in adjacent Hunt County, Texas. Collin County, Texas, will be referred to in this Code as "county" or "Collin County." Hunt County, Texas, will be referred to in this Code as "Hunt County." 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Fee schedule or schedule of fees and charges. The term "fee schedule" or "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list included in this Code that lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city council. At the discretion of the city council, the fee schedule may be codified in this Code or maintained separately, on file in the office of the city secretary. 
Gender. A term imparting the masculine gender will be deemed to include the feminine and/or neuter; the feminine, the masculine and/or neuter; and the neuter, the masculine and/or feminine. 
Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the city council of Farmersville, Texas. 
State Law reference— References to governing body deemed to include all members, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 21.002. 
In the city. The term "in the city" means all territory within the geographic corporate limits of the city as those limits currently exist or may hereafter be expanded by annexation, agreement or otherwise and over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police, regulatory and other powers. 
Includes and including. The terms "includes" and "including" are terms of enlargement and not of limitation or exclusive enumeration, and use of the terms does not create a presumption that components not expressed are excluded. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005(13). 
Joint authority. Terms purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it is otherwise declared. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.004. 
Law. The term "law" means applicable federal law, the state constitution and statutes, this Code, ordinances and resolutions of the city and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations that may be promulgated thereunder. 
May. The term "may," when used with reference to an act, means the act referred to is permissive as opposed to mandatory. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(7). 
Nontechnical and technical words. Terms and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical terms and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
State Law reference— Common and technical usage of words, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.011. 
Number. Any term importing the singular number shall include the plural and any term importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.003(b). 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(8). 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they mean Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Savings Time, as may be officially in current use in the state. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.016. 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a general and permanent nature; an authoritative decree or law. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant by the entirety, of the whole, or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" means any person, individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association of persons, proprietorship, owner, agent, occupant, or other legal entity. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005(2). 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(11). 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used it means place or places. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(13). 
Public place. Unless otherwise specifically defined, the term "public place" means any public road, street, alley, park, square, building, or other property of the city or any other places to which people commonly resort for the purpose of business, recreation, or amusements. 
Real property, land, real estate. The terms "real property," "land" and "real estate" include lands, tenements and hereditaments and rights thereto and interests therein. 
Reasonable time or reasonable notice. The term "reasonable time" or "reasonable notice" shall be deemed to mean only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the city governing authority of a special or temporary character expressing an opinion, will or intent of the governing body. 
Roadway. The term "roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.301(11). 
Section. When used to clarify the location of an ordinance, section, subsection, or paragraph, the term "section" refers to that chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which it is found unless specifically and clearly the term is used in reference to a separate section. 
Shall. The term "shall," when used with reference to an act, means that the act referred to is mandatory as opposed to permissive or discretionary. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.016(1)—(2). 
Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" of a person includes a mark when the person cannot or is otherwise unable to write. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(14). 
State. The term "state" means the State of Texas. 
Street. The term "street" means any highway, road, street, avenue, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel, or causeway in the city dedicated or devoted to public use for the primary purpose of vehicular traffic or travel. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.301(5). 
TCEQ. The abbreviation "TCEQ" refers to the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant" means any person holding a written or oral lease of premises, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such premises, alone or with others. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.003(a). 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Tex. Admin. Code. The abbreviation "Tex. Admin. Code" refers to the Texas Administrative Code. 
TxDOT. The abbreviation "TxDOT" refers to the Texas Department of Transportation. 
V.T.C.A., (subject) Code. The term "V.T.C.A., (subject) Code" identifies a specific subject matter code of legislatively adopted statutes, as classified and numbered by the Texas Legislative Council under authority of V.T.C.A., Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. art. 5429b-1, predecessor to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 323.007. 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." means the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
State Law reference— Statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.008. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures whether by printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(17). 
Year. The term "year" means 12 consecutive months. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(18). 
(Code 2004, § 1.101.2) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011.  
Sec. 1-3. - General penalty for violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any city ordinance an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or wherever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, except for: 
(1)  Violations of municipal ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning, public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, vegetation and litter violations shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense; 
(2)  Violations of the state transportation code, which shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00; 
(3)  Violations of traffic laws and ordinances which are punishable as a class C misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  If the maximum penalty provided in this Code for any offense is greater than the maximum penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under state law, the maximum penalty for the violation provided by state law shall be the maximum penalty applicable under this Code. 
(Code 2004, § 1.104.1)  
Sec. 1-4. - Each day of violation is separate offense. 
Each day or portion of a day that any violation of this Code or of any ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any violation of any provision of this Code which constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the city for such purposes. 
(Code 2004, § 1.104.2)  
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines, history and editor's notes, state law and other references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes and state law references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 2004, § 1.101.1) 
State Law reference— Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.024; construction of statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.027.  
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments, additions, deletions, and subsequent ordinances. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any article, section, or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(1)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specified reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: 
"That section _______ of the Farmersville Code is amended to read as follows:…." 
The provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(2)  In the event a new article or section not heretofore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language should be used: 
"That chapter _______ of the Farmersville Code is amended by adding ("article" or "section") _______, which ("article or section") reads as follows:…." 
The new article or section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(3)  In the event it is desired to delete an article or section from this Code of Ordinances, the following language should be used: 
"That ("article _______, chapter _______" or "section _______") of the Farmersville Code is deleted from this Code of Ordinances." 
(b)  It is hereby provided, however, that any subsequent ordinance which fails to amend this Code in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section shall not be deemed invalid or unenforceable as a result of such failure to follow the procedures outlined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 2004, §§ 1.102, 1.102.1—4)  
Sec. 1-7. - Preparation of supplements. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed when authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in this Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into this Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, this Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of this Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from this Code by omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(Code 2004, § 1.103.1)  
Sec. 1-8. - Authority granted to codifier. 
(a)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency, or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings, and titles for sections and other subdivisions of this Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings, and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in this Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing sections or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this article," "this section," etc., as the case may be; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into this Code. 
(b)  In no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in this Code. 
(Code 2004, § 1.103.2)  
Sec. 1-9. - Exclusion of special or temporary ordinances. 
Ordinances hereafter adopted which are not of a general or permanent nature shall be numbered consecutively, authenticated, published and recorded in the book of ordinances, but shall not be prepared for insertion in this Code, nor be deemed a part hereof.  
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance of the city council.  
Sec. 1-11. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the articles, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, subsection, section or article of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid final judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, subsections, sections or articles of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, subsection, section, or article. 
(Code 2004, § 1.105) 
State Law reference— Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.032, 312.013.  
Sec. 1-12. - Form of Code; repository; maintenance. 
A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the city secretary's office, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the city secretary may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the city secretary or his designee to insert in their designated places all resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances that indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of this Code, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from this Code all provisions that may be from time to time repealed by the city council. A copy of this Code shall be available in the city secretary's office for examination by all persons.  
Sec. 1-13. - Responsibility of city personnel with respect to assigned copies of Code. 
Each city official or employee assigned a copy of this Code shall be responsible for maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received. Each such copy shall remain the property of the city and shall be turned over by the official or employee having custody thereof, upon expiration of his term of office or employment, to his successor or to the city secretary, in case he shall have no successor.  
Sec. 1-14. - Responsibility for violations by firms, corporations or associations. 
If any of the terms or provisions of this Code or other ordinances is violated by any firm, corporation or association, the officers and agents actively in charge of the business of such firm, corporation or association shall be responsible for such violation and subject to prosecution therefor. If a corporation or association is adjudged guilty of an offense, the court may sentence the corporation or association to pay a fine in an amount fixed by the court, not to exceed the fine provided for the offense.  
Sec. 1-15. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.031 et seq.  
Sec. 1-16. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
State Law reference— Repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.030, 312.007.  
Sec. 1-17. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city or creating interest and sinking funds; 
(2)  Any right or franchise, permit or other right granted by any ordinance; 
(3)  Any personnel regulations and any ordinance establishing salaries of city officers and employees; 
(4)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the county or state; 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city; 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for adopting an annual budget; 
(9)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(12)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or amending personnel rules or regulations; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or amending plumbing rules or regulations; 
(14)  Any ordinance prescribing subdivision regulations; 
(15)  Any ordinance adopting the sales and use tax; 
(16)  Any ordinance or resolution prescribing taxicab passenger rates; 
(17)  Ordinances prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets, such as ordinances establishing speed limits or designating one-way streets, no parking areas, truck routes, stop intersections, intersections where traffic is to be controlled by signals, etc.; 
(18)  Any ordinance establishing or amending zoning or land use regulations or rezoning property; 
(19)  Any ordinance calling municipal elections or prescribing the manner of conducting the elections in accordance with state law; 
(20)  Any ordinance prescribing any fee or payment of money to the city; 
(21)  Any ordinance creating special districts or assessing taxes therefor; 
(22)  Any ordinance granting specific tax exemptions; 
(23)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
(24)  Any administrative ordinance; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office.  
Sec. 1-18. - Repeal or expiration of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
State Law reference— Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.030, 312.007.  
Sec. 1-19. - Conflicting regulations. 
(a)  If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter. 
(b)  If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more general provision. 
(c)  If any of the provisions hereof conflict, and the conflict cannot be resolved by application of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the more stringent regulation shall apply and the specific provision shall prevail over the general. 
State Law reference— Penalty for ordinance violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001; authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001; jurisdiction of municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003.  
Sec. 1-20. - Interpretation of penal provisions. 
The provisions of titles 1, 2 and 3 of the state penal code (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.01 et seq.; V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 6.01 et seq.; and V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 12.01 et seq.) shall apply in the interpretation of all penal provisions of this Code to the extent that the penal code mandates that they shall apply. 
State Law reference— Concurrent jurisdiction of municipal court concerning certain violations of state statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003(b); municipality may not enact or enforce a law making conduct covered under state penal code an offense subject to criminal penalty, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.08; municipal authority to regulate discharge of firearms within municipal limits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 229.001(b).  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Open government generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq.; public information generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq.; political activities by certain public entities and individuals, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 556.001; ethics, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 571.001 et seq.; public officers and employees generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 601.001 et seq.; municipal government generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 5.001 et seq.; removal of members of governing body of general law municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 21.021 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Type A general law municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 5.001 and 6.001; form of government in home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.021; city manager form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 25.021 et seq.; general provisions affecting governing bodies of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 21.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-19. - Composition. 
The city council shall consist of six members—a mayor and five councilmembers—elected from the city at large, by place or position in the manner provided in section 2-21, for a term of two years or until their successors have been elected and take office as provided in section 2-21.  
Sec. 2-20. - Powers. 
The city council shall have the powers and duties prescribed by state law and any applicable Code provision 
(Code 2004, § 8.101.1) 
State Law reference— Composition of governing body where ward system not utilized, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.031; election of aldermen by place system in general law municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 21.001; election of officers from single member and at-large districts in home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.044; general powers of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.001 et seq.; powers of home rule, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.071 et seq.; authority for enforcement of ordinances and penalties, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001 et seq  
Sec. 2-21. - Place system for the election of councilmembers. 
The city adopts the place system for the election of councilmembers. Each office shall be assigned a place number so that hereafter each such office shall bear its own separate designation, such as councilmember, Place No. 1; councilmember, Place No. 2; councilmember, Place No. 3; councilmember, Place No. 4; and councilmember, Place No. 5. As terms of the incumbents expire, each candidate for the office of councilmember shall file his application for a specific place on the city council. In such election the ballot shall show each office of councilmember as a separate office by place number, with the name of each candidate printed thereon under the specific office for which he is a candidate. Councilmembers for Place No. 1, Place No. 3 and Place No. 5 shall be elected in odd-numbered years. Councilmembers for Place No. 2 and Place No. 4 and the mayor shall be elected in even-numbered years 
(Code 2004, § 8.101.2; Ord. No. 86-1, 1-14-1986) 
State Law reference— Qualifications of members of governing body, V.T.C.A, Local Government Code § 22.032; eligibility requirements for public office, V.T.C.A, Election Code § 141.001; residence defined, V.T.C.A, Election Code § 1.015  
Sec. 2-22. - Salaries and compensation of mayor, councilmembers, treasurer. 
The mayor, treasurer and all city councilmembers' salaries shall be as provided from time to time by the city council. Such elected officials shall be designated as employees of the city, and as such shall be provided with liability insurance coverage, reimbursement of official expenses, and all other benefits accorded under city personnel policies to part-time employees 
(Code 2004, § 8.103; Ord. No. 88-7, 4-12-1988)  
Sec. 2-23. - Removal of councilmembers. 
Removal of councilmembers shall be in accordance with state law.  
Secs. 2-24—2-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, AUTHORITIES, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Building and standards commissions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.033 et seq.; development boards, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 371.001 et seq.; municipal planning commissions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 371.042 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-50. - Report to city council. 
At least one time each year, the members of every board, commission, committee or corporation of the city, all or part of whose members are appointed by the city council, shall appear before the city council at a public meeting designated for such purpose and report to the city council regarding the following matters and any other matters pertinent to smooth and efficient operation: 
(1)  The activities and work of the board, commission, committee or corporation since the date of its last report to the city council; 
(2)  The body's short-term and long-term mission, plans and goals; 
(3)  Any potential challenges or concerns within the body's area(s) of responsibility or oversite; and, 
(4)  Any suggestions regarding the membership and operation of said board, commission, committee or corporation including, but not limited to, requests for assistance, staffing, funding or training. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1201-001, § 2, 12-1-2015)  
Secs. 2-51—2-71. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY AMENITIES BOARD[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2017-0627-002, § 2, adopted July 6, 2017, repealed div. 2, § 2-72—2-80, in its entirety and enacted a new div. 2 to read as set out herein. Former div. 2 pertained to "Library/Civic Center Board," and was derived from Code 2004, §§ 8.108.1—8.108.9; Ord. No. 91-4, adopted February 12, 1991; Ord. No. 2005-21, adopted April 12, 2005 and Ord. No. 2015-1201-001, § 3, adopted December 1, 2015. 
 
Sec. 2-72. - Creation; composition; appointment; compensation. 
There is created a city amenities board consisting of five members. The members of the city amenities board shall be appointed by majority vote of the city council, and shall serve for a term not to exceed two years, or until their successors are appointed and qualified. All members of the city amenities board shall reside in the city and/or within the Farmersville Independent School District for at least one year immediately preceding the date of appointment and shall serve without compensation. No more than two of said members shall reside outside of the city's corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-0627-002, § 2, 7-6-2017; Ord. No. O-2020-0623-001, § 2, 6-23-2020)  
Sec. 2-73. - Term of office. 
The initial members of the city amenities board shall serve as follows: two members shall be appointed to serve until June 1, 2021, or until their successors are appointed; and three members shall be appointed to serve until June 1, 2022, or until their successors are appointed. Thereafter, each member appointed or reappointed shall serve a term not to exceed two years until the member resigns or is removed as herein provided. All members may serve a maximum of two consecutive two-year terms. After serving two consecutive two-year terms, a member will not be eligible for re-appointment to the board for a period of one term (two years). 
(Ord. No. O-2017-0627-002, § 2, 7-6-2017; Ord. No. O-2020-0623-001, § 2, 6-23-2020)  
Sec. 2-74. - Removal of members. 
Members of the board shall serve at the will and pleasure of the city council and may be removed from such board at any time, with or without cause. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-0627-002, § 2, 7-6-2017)  
Sec. 2-75. - Vacancies. 
If a vacancy occurs in the membership of the board, the city council shall appoint a successor to fill the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-0627-002, § 2, 7-6-2017)  
Sec. 2-76. - Officers. 
The board shall be organized by electing its own chairperson, vice-chairperson, and secretary no later than June 30 th of each year or as soon as is practicable following the appointment of new or returning members to the board by the city council. The board may create other leadership positions for its members if it deems necessary to perform its function as a city amenities board. (This provision is not intended to, and shall not be interpreted to, allow the board to appoint new members or otherwise increase the membership of the board.) 
(Ord. No. O-2017-0627-002, § 2, 7-6-2017)  
Sec. 2-77. - Meetings. 
The board shall meet at least one time a month for the purpose of conducting the board's business. Meetings shall be called by the chairman or at the request of the city manager. Meetings shall be noticed and conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meeting Act. A majority of the total membership of the board shall constitute a quorum. All meetings should, to the extent practicable and necessary, cover each area of the board's responsibilities equally at every meeting related to the library system, civic center, and the senior citizens' activities and building. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-0627-002, § 2, 7-6-2017; Ord. No. O-2020-0623-001, § 2, 6-23-2020)  
Sec. 2-78. - Jurisdiction. 
The board shall advise the city council regarding any necessary improvements to the library, civic center and the senior citizens' center. The board shall also advise the city council regarding any needed improvements to the services provided for senior citizens, prioritize those needs and present them to the city council together with the board's recommendations. The board shall further advise the city council regarding policies and procedures governing and relating to the proper function of the library, civic center and the senior citizens' center. The board shall also support and promote the services and programs provided by and through the library, and advise the city council regarding such services and programs and any expansions or improvements the board may recommend. The city council should not take action on any amenity related program until it has been reviewed by the board, and the board has submitted its recommendation to the city council. The city council has final authority to accept or reject the board's recommendations. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-0627-002, § 2, 7-6-2017; Ord. No. O-2020-0623-001, § 2, 6-23-2020)  
Sec. 2-79. - Limitations. 
The city amenities board shall not have any authority to enter into agreements on behalf of the city or to create any legal obligations or liabilities for the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-0627-002, § 2, 7-6-2017)  
Secs. 2-80—2-103. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS ADVISORY COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-104. - Land use assumptions. 
The capital improvements advisory commission (the "CIAC") shall be convened at the request of the city council, city manager or city engineer to consider and to make recommendations concerning land use assumptions and the adoption of a capital improvements plan within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-64, § 1, 12-11-2007)  
Sec. 2-105. - Advisory capacity. 
The CIAC shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city council and is established to: 
(1)  Advise and assist in adopting land use assumptions; 
(2)  Review and comment on a proposed capital improvements plan; 
(3)  Monitor and evaluate the implementation of the capital improvements plan; 
(4)  File semiannual reports with respect to the progress of the capital improvements plan and report to the mayor and city council any perceived inequities in implementing the plan or imposing an impact fee, if any; and 
(5)  Advise the mayor and city council of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions, capital improvements plan, and impact fee program, if any. 
(Ord. No. 2007-64, § 2, 12-11-2007)  
Sec. 2-106. - Composition. 
The planning and zoning commission shall act as the CIAC as provided by state law. The CIAC shall consist of all members of the planning and zoning commission. In addition to the planning and zoning commission members, one ad hoc voting member shall be appointed by the city council, however, only in the event one of the members of the planning and zoning commission is not a representative of the real estate, development, or building industry. Such ad hoc appointee shall be a representative of at least one of such industries; however the ad hoc appointee shall not become a member of the planning and zoning commission by virtue of appointment to the CIAC. The ad hoc appointee may also be the representative of the extraterritorial jurisdiction as discussed herein below. 
If impact fees are imposed in the extraterritorial jurisdiction at least one member of the CIAC shall be a representative from that area. The city council shall appoint one ad hoc voting member from that area in the event one of the members of the planning and zoning commission or an ad hoc member is not a representative from the extraterritorial jurisdiction. Such ad hoc appointee may also be the representative of the real estate, development, or building industry discussed herein above. The ad hoc appointee shall not become a member of the planning and zoning commission by virtue of appointment to the CIAC. 
(Ord. No. 2007-64, § 3, 12-11-2007)  
Sec. 2-107. - Term of service. 
Members of the planning and zoning commission shall be appointed to and serve on the planning and zoning commission in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 2-170. Ad hoc members of the CIAC shall be appointed for a term not to exceed three years and until their successors are qualified and appointed as provided herein. Members of the CIAC may be removed before their terms of office expire. 
No member of the CIAC shall be an employee or official of the city. If a vacancy occurs during any unexpired term by death, resignation or otherwise, the city council shall appoint a commissioner to fill such vacancy for the balance of such unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 2007-64, § 4, 12-11-2007)  
Sec. 2-108. - Officers; meetings. 
(a)  Officers. The CIAC shall meet no later than June 30 th of each year or as soon as is practicable following the appointment of new or returning members to the planning and zoning commission and any ad hoc members to the CIAC by the city council; and appoint one of its members as chairperson, who shall hold office as chairperson for such term as the CIAC shall designate. The CIAC may also elect a vice-chairperson who shall act as chair in the absence of the chairperson. 
(b)  Meetings. Meetings of the CIAC shall be called at the direction of the city council, city manager and/or city engineer as necessary to perform those duties required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395 and such other duties as may be delegated to the CIAC by the city council. The CIAC shall meet a minimum of two times per year to consider, discuss and act on semiannual reports regarding the performance of the city's impact fee program. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1201-001, § 3, 12-1-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-1201-001, § 3, adopted December 1, 2015, repealed and replaced § 2-108, in its entirety. Former § 2-108 pertained to "Meetings," and was derived from Ord. No. 2007-64, § 5, adopted December 11, 2007.  
Secs. 2-109—2-134. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to reenactment by Ord. No. O-2020-0623-001, adopted June 23, 2020, Ord. No. O-2017-0627-002, § 2, adopted July 6, 2017, repealed div. 4, § 2-135—2-143, in its entirety. Former div. 4 pertained to "Senior Citizen Advisory Committee," and was derived from Code 2004, §§ 8.112.1—8.112.5, 8.112.8, 8.112.9; Ord. No. 92-14, adopted July 14, 1992; Ord. No. 2005-21, adopted April 12, 2005; Ord. No. O-2014-0610-001, § 2, adopted June 10, 2014 and Ord. No. 2015-1201-001, § 3, adopted December 1, 2015. 
 
Sec. 2-135. - Creation; composition; appointment; compensation. 
There is created a parks and recreation board consisting of seven members. The members of the parks and recreation board shall be appointed by majority vote of the city council, and shall serve for a term not to exceed two years, or until their successors are appointed and qualified. All members of the parks and recreation board shall reside in the city and/or within the Farmersville Independent School District for at least one year immediately preceding the date of appointment and shall serve without compensation. No more than two of said members shall reside outside of the city's corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. O-2020-0623-001, § 3, 6-23-2020)  
Sec. 2-136. - Term of office. 
The initial members of the parks and recreation board shall serve as follows: three members shall be appointed to serve until June 1, 2021, or until their successors are appointed; and four members shall be appointed to serve until June 1, 2022, or until their successors are appointed. Thereafter, each member appointed or reappointed shall serve a term not to exceed two years until the member resigns or is removed as herein provided. All members may serve a maximum of two consecutive two-year terms. After serving two consecutive two-year terms, a member will not be eligible for re-appointment to the board for a period of one term (two years). 
(Ord. No. O-2020-0623-001, § 3, 6-23-2020)  
Sec. 2-137. - Removal of members. 
Members of the board shall serve at the will and pleasure of the city council and may be removed from such board at any time, with or without cause. 
(Ord. No. O-2020-0623-001, § 3, 6-23-2020)  
Sec. 2-138. - Vacancies. 
If a vacancy occurs in the membership of the board, the city council shall appoint a successor to fill the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. O-2020-0623-001, § 3, 6-23-2020)  
Sec. 2-139. - Officers. 
The board shall be organized by electing its own chairperson, vice-chairperson, and secretary no later than June 30 th of each year or as soon as is practicable following the appointment of new or returning members to the board by the city council. The board may create other leadership positions for its members if it deems necessary to perform its function as a parks and recreation board. (This provision is not intended to, and shall not be interpreted to, allow the board to appoint new members or otherwise increase the membership of the board.) 
(Ord. No. O-2020-0623-001, § 3, 6-23-2020)  
Sec. 2-140. - Meetings. 
The board shall meet at least one time a month for the purpose of conducting the board's business. Meetings shall be called by the chairman or at the request of the city manager. Meetings shall be noticed and conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meeting Act. A majority of the total membership of the board shall constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. No. O-2020-0623-001, § 3, 6-23-2020)  
Sec. 2-141. - Jurisdiction. 
The board shall promote the development and beautification of all city parks, trails and open spaces. The board shall also assess the sporting and recreational needs of the community and encourage the expansion and strengthening of all city recreation programs. The board shall advise the city council regarding existing and potential development projects and improvements to the city's park, trails and open spaces as well as the city's recreation programs. in addition, the board shall report on the allocation and use of city funds related to parks and recreation activities. The city council should not take action on any projects or programs involving parks, trails, or open spaces within the city until it has been reviewed by the parks and recreation board, and the board has submitted its recommendation to the city council. The city council has final authority to accept or reject the board's recommendations. 
(Ord. No. O-2020-0623-001, § 3, 6-23-2020)  
Sec. 2-142. - Limitations. 
The parks and recreation board shall not have any authority to enter into agreements on behalf of the city or to create any legal obligations or liabilities for the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2020-0623-001, § 3, 6-23-2020)  
Secs. 2-143—2-169. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-170. - Creation of commission; appointment; terms. 
There is hereby created a planning and zoning commission consisting of seven members. The members of the planning and zoning commission shall be appointed by majority vote of the city council, and shall serve for a term not to exceed three years, or until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 2007-65, § 1, 12-11-2007)  
Sec. 2-171. - Initial appointment of members; reappointment; removal. 
(a)  Appointment and reappointment. The planning and zoning commission shall consist of seven members. The initial members shall serve as follows: two members shall be appointed to serve until May 1, 1988, or until their successors are appointed; and two members shall be appointed to serve until May 1, 1989, or until their successors are appointed; and three members shall be appointed to serve until May 1, 1990, or until their successors are appointed. Thereafter, each member appointed or reappointed shall serve a term not to exceed three-years until the member resigns or is removed as herein provided. All members may serve a maximum of two consecutive terms. After serving two consecutive terms, a member will not be eligible for re-appointment to the commission for a period of one term (three years). 
(b)  Removal. Members of the planning and zoning commission serve at the will and pleasure of the city council. Any member may be removed before their terms of office expire. 
(Ord. No. 2007-65, § 2, 12-11-2007)  
Sec. 2-172. - Duties and functions. 
The purpose and object of the planning and zoning commission is to act as an advisory board to the city council as the planning and zoning commission and the city council may deem beneficial to the city. 
(1)  Approval of sub-division plats. The commission shall perform all functions related to the review and approval of subdivision plats which may be assigned to them by the statutes of the state and/or the ordinances of the city. 
(2)  Preparation of comprehensive plan. At the request or direction of the city council and/or the city manager the commission shall review, prepare, or cause to be prepared, a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city and its environs, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Land use. 
b.  Thoroughfares and transportation by rail, water, air, or highway. 
c.  Park and school sites. 
d.  Public buildings. 
e.  Housing and neighborhood improvements. 
f.  Drainage. 
g.  Utilities and services. 
h.  Municipal expansion and annexation. 
i.  Slum clearance and blighted areas. 
j.  Parking and use of streets and alleys. 
(3)  Adoption of comprehensive plan. The city council shall adopt, after review and recommendation from the commission, a comprehensive plan, as a whole or as individual parts thereof. The city manager shall be the custodian of the comprehensive plan and all parts thereof. The adoption of any portion of the comprehensive plan shall be by ordinance, carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of the entire city council. Prior to the initiating action of the adoption of any part of the comprehensive plan, the city council shall refer said plan to the commission for concurrence or comment. The city council may, by ordinance, adopt said plan, as a whole or in parts as submitted by the commission. 
(4)  Recommendation of improvements. The commission shall, upon the submission of an application and payment of the corresponding fee or upon the request of the city council, city manager and/or city engineer recommend and advise the city council on matters involving the physical improvement of the city, including capital improvement programs, approval of subdivision plats, and other changes or additions involving the physical arrangement of the city. 
(5)  Recommendations for ordinances and public hearings. The commission shall make and recommend for adoption ordinances for zoning the city in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Ch. 211, as amended, and it shall hold public hearings and make recommendations to the city council on all requests or proposals for amending, changing, or adding to the zoning ordinances. 
(6)  Powers. The commission, in the performance of its duties, shall have all the powers, duties, and responsibilities prescribed by statutes of the state and the zoning ordinance of the city. Should the planning and zoning commission desire on its own motion to institute study and proposal for changes and amendments in the public interest to the master plan, thoroughfare plan, subdivision ordinance, comprehensive zoning ordinance or capital improvements plan, the commission shall first submit a request, including a preliminary report explaining the reasoning and perceived need for such undertaking, to the city manager and the city council for their review and assessment and the city council's consent, authorization and direction to the commission to proceed with such undertaking so as to allow for the most beneficial and efficient use of the city's staff and limited resources. 
(Ord. No. 2007-65, § 3, 12-11-2007)  
Sec. 2-173. - Organization and meetings. 
(a)  Organization. The commission shall be organized by electing its own chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary no later than June 30 th of each year or as soon as is practicable following the appointment of new or returning members to the commission by the city council. 
(b)  Meetings. The commission shall meet once each month and at such other times as the chairman or a majority of the members of the commission may direct. Four members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. However, no portion of the comprehensive plan shall be recommended to the city council for approval by less than the affirmative vote of the majority of the entire commission. 
(Ord. No. 2007-65, § 4, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 2015-1201-001, § 3, 12-1-2015)  
Secs. 2-174—2-191. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - BUILDING AND PROPERTY STANDARDS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-192. - Creation. 
The city council has appointed a Building and Property Standards Commission to act as a quasi-judicial review board in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54, to protect the public safety relating to materials and methods used to construct buildings and improvements, including foundations, structure elements, electrical wiring and apparatus, plumbing and fixtures, entrances or exits, and also relating to the fire safety of the building or improvements, including provisions relating to materials, types of construction or design, warning devices, sprinklers or other fire suppression devices, and relating to dangerously damaged or deteriorated buildings or improvements, relating to the accumulation of refuse, vegetation, or other matter that creates breeding and living places for insects and rodents, and relating to the building codes or the condition, use or appearance of property in the city. 
(Code 2004, § 4.108)  
Sec. 2-193. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The Building and Property Standards Commission will hear and determine any case concerning an alleged violation of Code provisions concerning the health, safety and welfare standards and building codes as provided in the Texas Local Government Code and ordinances adopted under state law, or to perform such duties and responsibilities as may be imposed by state law or ordinances. 
(b)  Such commission shall convene to consider and make recommendations concerning the adoption of ordinances establishing building and property standards for construction within the city. 
(Code 2004, § 4.108.1)  
Sec. 2-194. - Appointment; term of office. 
The Building and Property Standards Commission shall consist of five regular members to be designated as places one through five to be appointed by the city council for a term not to exceed three years and until their successor is qualified and appointed as provided herein. The initial term of places one, three and five shall be for a term of one year, and thereafter such places shall be for a three-year term. The initial term for places two and four are for a two-year term, and thereafter such position will be for a three-year term. The city council shall also appoint two alternate members of the commission who shall serve in the absence of one or more of the regular members and when requested to do so by the mayor and/or city manager. The alternate members shall be designated as places six and seven with place six being appointed to serve the same terms as places two and four and place seven being appointed to serve the same terms as places one, three and five. All members may serve a maximum of two consecutive terms. After serving two consecutive terms, a member will not be eligible for reappointment to the commission for a period of one term (three years). All members of the commission shall be residents of the city and/or owners of real property within the city, and shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 2004, § 4.108.2; Ord. No. 2005-21, 4-12-2005)  
Sec. 2-195. - Removal of members. 
Commissioners may be removed only for cause on written charges and, before removal of any commission member, the city council must hold a public hearing on the matter if requested by the commission member subject to the removal action. 
(Code 2004, § 4.108.3; Ord. No. 98-16, 8-11-1998)  
Sec. 2-196. - Vacancies. 
Should a vacancy occur, the city council will appoint a successor to fill the unexpired term.  
Sec. 2-197. - Providing for officers. 
The commission shall be organized by electing its own chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary no later than June 30 th of each year or as soon as is practicable following the appointment of new or returning members to the commission by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1201-001, § 3, 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 2-198. - Meetings. 
The commission shall meet at least one time each quarter of the year for the purpose of conducting the committee's business. Meetings shall be called at the request of the city manager. Meetings shall be noticed and conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. A quorum shall consist of at least four members. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1201-001, § 3, 12-1-2015)  
Secs. 2-199—2-213. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2017-0627-002, § 2, adopted July 6, 2017, repealed div. 7, § 2-214—2-221, in its entirety. Former div. 7 pertained to "Parks and Recreation Board," and was derived from Code 2004, §§ 9.102—9.102.7; Ord. No. 92-42, adopted December 22, 1992; Ord. No. 2005-21, adopted April 12, 2005; Ord. No. O-2014-0610-001, § 3, adopted June 10, 2014 and Ord. No. 2015-1201-001, § 3, adopted December 1, 2015. 
 
Secs. 2-214—2-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
 
Sec. 2-251. - Board designated; powers and authority. 
(a)  Organization. As the city is a Type A general law municipality of the state, the city councilmembers are hereby granted the authority to act as a board of adjustment under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211. 
(b)  Procedure. The board shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings; provided, however, that such rules are not inconsistent with this article or state statutes. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman, and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be public record. 
(c)  Appeals. 
(1)  Appeals to the board of adjustment can be taken by any person aggrieved, or by an officer, department, or board of the municipality affected, by a decision of the building official under this ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within 15 days after the decision has been rendered by the building official, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(2)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application and notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give the public notice thereof by posting such notice in the mail addressed to all owners of real property located within 200 feet of the property to which the appeal applies and by publishing notice of such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Both the posted and published notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by attorney or by agent. 
(d)  Jurisdiction. When in its judgment, the public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate use of the neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently injured, the board of adjustment may, in specific cases, after public notice and public hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize the following special exception to the regulations herein established. 
(1)  Permit the reconstruction, extension or enlargement of a building occupied by a nonconforming use of the lot or tract occupied by such building, provided such reconstruction does not prevent the return of such property to a conforming use. 
(2)  Permit such modifications of the height, yard, area, coverage, and parking regulations as may be necessary to secure appropriate development of a parcel of land which differs from other parcels in the district by being of such restricted area, shape, or slope that it cannot be appropriately developed without such modification. 
(3)  Require the discontinuance of nonconforming uses of land or structure under any plan whereby the full value of the structure and facilities can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the regulations of this article. All actions to discontinue a nonconforming use of land and structure shall be taken with due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered in the light of the public welfare and the character of the area surrounding the designated nonconforming use and the conservation and preservation of property. The board shall, from time to time on its own motion or upon cause presented by interested property owners, inquire into the existence, continuation or maintenance of any nonconforming use within the city. 
(4)  To bring about the discontinuance of a nonconforming use under a plan whereby the owner's actual investment in the structures on the property prior to the time that the use became nonconforming can be amortized within a definite time period. 
(e)  Actions of the board. 
(1)  In exercising its powers the board may, in conformity with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211, as amended, revise or reform, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decisions, or determination appealed from and make such order, requirement, decisions, or determination as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken, including the power to impose reasonable conditions to be complied with by the applicant. 
(2)  The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to revise any order, requirements, decision or determination of the building official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under the ordinance from which this section is derived or to affect any variance in such ordinance. 
(3)  Any persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment or any tax payer or any officer, department or board of the municipality may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board and not thereafter. 
(Comp. Ord. of 3-11-2008)  
Secs. 2-252—2-280. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Public officers and employees generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 601.001 et seq.; municipal officers in city manager form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 25.051; authority to prescribe duties of and to require bond and security from appointed officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 23.052; removal of municipal officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.077. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-281. - Employee manual. 
The city has compiled and maintains the City of Farmersville Employee Policy and Procedures Manual, adopted herein by reference, a copy of which manual is available in the city secretary's office.  
Secs. 2-282—2-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— City manager form of government in general law municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 25.001 et seq.; city manager generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 25.026 et seq.; authority of municipality to establish powers and duties of city manager, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 25.029. 
 
Sec. 2-301. - Position created. 
There is created the position of city manager. The city manager shall be designated by and shall work under the direction of the city council 
(Ord. No. 2009-34, § 8.122.1, 11-10-2009)  
Sec. 2-302. - Appointment and removal. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and fix his compensation. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. He need not be a resident of the city or state at the time of his or her appointment. The city manager shall reside within the Farmersville Independent School District boundaries within three months after his appointment, and may reside outside the Farmersville Independent School District boundaries while in office only with the approval of the city council. 
(b)  The city manager may be removed at the will and pleasure of the city council by a super-majority vote of the entire city council. 
(c)  During the absence or disability of the city manager, the city council may designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of the city manager's office. 
(Ord. No. 2009-34, § 8.122.2, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. O-2012-0214-001, § 2, 2-14-2012) 
State Law reference— Appointment of city manager, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 25.026; qualifications of city manager, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 25.027; term of office, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 25.028.  
Sec. 2-303. - Bond required. 
The city manager shall furnish a surety company bond to be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-34, § 8.122.3, 11-10-2009) 
State Law reference— Bond of city manager, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 25.029; official bonds generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 604.001 et seq.  
Sec. 2-304. - Compensation. 
The initial salary of the city manager shall be fixed by contract with the approval of the city council. Subsequent changes or increases in the city manager's compensation shall be contingent upon an annual review of the city manager's performance by the mayor and city council and approval thereof by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-34, § 8.122.4, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. O-2012-0214-001, § 3, 2-14-2012)  
Sec. 2-305. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The city manager shall be the administrative head of the municipal government. As such, it shall be his duty to see that all laws and Code provisions are enforced. It shall be his duty also to assume complete responsibility for directing the city's executive departments, within the limits set by law. Any instructions or changes on city policy or personnel will be put in writing by the city manager and copies distributed among city employees. The city manager may authorize any administrative officers who are subject to his direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency. 
(b)  In personnel transactions involving all employees of the city, the city manager shall have the power to appoint and remove all city employees, save and except the city secretary who shall be appointed or removed only after consultation with, and approval of, the mayor and city council. The city attorney, municipal judge and other appointees of the city shall serve at the will and pleasure of the city council and shall be appointed and/or removed from their positions by the city council and/or as otherwise provided by ordinance or law. 
(c)  The city manager shall have the right and duty to attend all meetings of the city council, except only to the extent that state or federal law precludes the city manager from attending an executive session or closed meeting held in conjunction with a properly called public meeting, and the city manager shall have the right to take part in the discussions of such body, but without voting privileges. The city manager shall be entitled to notice of all meetings, regular and special, of the city council. He shall recommend to the city council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the city manager to make and execute all lawful contracts on behalf of the city with regard to matters within his jurisdiction, and to take care that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed. Pursuant to those ends, he shall call to the attention of the city council all violations of contracts and franchises. 
(e)  The city manager shall act as the business manager for the city under the direction of the city council. He shall have supervision over all city property and charge of or supervision over the city's accounting work. 
(f)  The city manager shall be the purchasing agent and shall approve all vouchers in payment of city purchases; provided that all purchases involving expenditures of more than $15,000.00 in one transaction or for one purpose shall first be authorized or approved by the city council. All purchases of any amount shall be subject to the limitation imposed by the city's budget. 
(g)  The city manager shall present to the city council monthly reports covering the work of each department for which he is responsible together with such other special reports as may be required. At the end of the fiscal year, he shall prepare and present to the city council a written annual report summarizing the work of each department and including a statement of the city's financial condition, with recommendations for the ensuing year and subsequent years. 
(h)  The city manager shall prepare each month and present to the city council a statement showing the city's exact financial condition as of the end of the preceding month, including a statement of current assets and liabilities and summarized statements of income and expenditures, detailed as to funds and departments. 
(i)  The city manager shall be the chief budget officer. The city manager shall also prepare and present to the city council, prior to the end of each fiscal year, a budget estimate of incomes and expenditures for the ensuing year for the consideration of the city council, as required by state law, in such a time and manner as enables the city council to timely adopt a budget and tax rate for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(j)  The city manager shall be the chief building official for the city. The city manager may delegate his responsibilities and duties as building official to another duly qualified person or party to act for and on his behalf and the city. 
(k)  The city manager shall draw the city council's attention to community needs and recommend alternatives by which the city council can respond to those needs. 
(l)  The city manager shall perform such other duties as specified by Code provision or resolution of the city council or as directed by a majority of the members of the city council in a properly called public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2009-34, § 8.122.5, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. O-2012-0214-001, § 4, 2-14-2012) 
State Law reference— Powers and duties of city manager generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 25.029.  
Sec. 2-306. - Other powers and duties. 
The city manager shall exercise such other powers and shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law, ordinance or resolution of the city council or which may otherwise devolve upon the city manager from time to time. If such law, ordinance or resolution is made, it shall be carried out within a 30-day time period, except for extenuating circumstances, which shall be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-34, § 8.122.6, 11-10-2009)  
Secs. 2-307—2-315. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DEPARTMENTS 
 
Sec. 2-316. - Directors. 
At the head of each department there shall be a director who shall have supervision and control over his respective departments. Two or more departments may be headed by the same individual, and the city manager may head one or more departments.  
Sec. 2-317. - Responsibilities. 
Each department head shall be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department or agency. Subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, each such department head shall: 
(1)  Be immediately responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of his respective department and all activities assigned thereto; 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in his particular field and inaugurate, with the prior approval of the city manager, such new practices as appear to be of service or benefit to the public; 
(3)  Submit annual reports of the activities of his respective department to the city manager; 
(4)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the city manager; 
(5)  Have power, when authorized by the city manager, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinates under him; and 
(6)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in his respective departments.  
Sec. 2-318. - Intradepartmental cooperation. 
Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the city manager, any other department such service, labor, and materials as may be requested by the head of each department, as its own facilities permit.  
Secs. 2-319—2-334. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal finances generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.001 et seq.; general fiscal powers of home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.022; municipal budgets generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.001 et seq.; audit of municipal finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 103.001 et seq.; municipal depositories, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 105.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-335. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on October 1 and end on September 30. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.042  
Sec. 2-336. - Adoption of identity theft prevention program. 
(a)  The city has developed and adopts by reference as though fully set forth in this division an identity theft prevention program for the purpose of complying with 16 CFR § 681.2 and in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(b)  Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of the adopted program is also to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. (See also footnote in utility chapter regarding "privacy" provisions.)  
Sec. 2-337. - Miscellaneous charges and provisions. 
(a)  Document reproduction. Document reproduction shall be charged as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  Labor and equipment. Under normal circumstances, city personnel and city equipment are to perform only on public property, public easements, or to correct safety situations. City personnel and city equipment may be used beyond these limits only by express approval of the city. Leasing, renting, borrowing and lending of city equipment is prohibited. 
(c)  Rental fees and deposits. Rental fees and deposits shall be charged as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code for the temporary use and rental of city-owned facilities. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.27; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004; Ord. No. 2006-69, 12-12-2006)  
Sec. 2-338. - Policy for checks used in payment of city fees, services, or fines. 
(a)  Checks given in payment of utility bills, municipal court fines or any other service provided by the city will be presented to the customer's bank for payment only one time. 
(b)  A charge as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code will be assessed for any check returned to the city for insufficient funds, or through any other action or fault of the customer. 
(c)  Any person having three checks returned within a 12-month period shall not be permitted to pay any further debts to the city by check for a one-year period thereafter. 
(d)  Two-party or post-dated checks will not be accepted at any time, except those issued by a governmental agency. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.28; Ord. No. 97-17, 9-9-1997; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004)  
Sec. 2-339. - Collection fee of 30 percent imposed on certain debts and accounts receivable. 
(a)  In accordance with and pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 103.0031, there shall be imposed on debts and accounts receivable including unpaid fines, fees, court costs, forfeited bonds, and restitution ordered paid by the municipal court; amounts in cases in which the accused has failed to appear; and false alarm penalties or fees imposed by and through the this Code, all as more particularly described and identified in Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 103.0031 (hereinafter collectively referred to as "fines and fees"), that are more than 60 days past due and which items have been referred to a private attorney or vendor for collection a collection fee in the amount of 30 percent of each such item (the "collection fee"). 
(b)  A defendant is not liable for the collection fee authorized hereunder if the municipal court of the city has determined prior to the expiration of the 60-day period described herein that the defendant in question is indigent, or has insufficient resources or income, or is otherwise unable to pay all or part of the underlying fine or costs. 
(c)  The collection fee does not apply to a case that has been dismissed by a court of competent jurisdiction or to any amount that has been satisfied through time-served credit or community service. 
(d)  The collection fee may be applied to any balance remaining after a partial credit for time served or community service if the balance is more than 60 days past due. 
(e)  The collection fee authorized hereby may not be used for any purpose other than compensating the private attorney or vendor who earns the fee. 
(f)  The allocation of the fines and fees and the collection fee shall be calculated and made in accordance with and pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 103.0031. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-0125-002, § 2, 2-8-2011)  
Secs. 2-340—2-364. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LIABILITY CLAIMS 
 
Sec. 2-365. - Limit of liability; written notice required. 
The city shall never be liable for any claims for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the person who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall within 60 days from the date the damage or injury was received give notice in writing to the city manager of the following facts: 
(1)  The date and time when the injury or damage occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received. 
(2)  The nature of the damage or injury sustained. 
(3)  The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained. 
(4)  A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred. 
(5)  The amount of damages claimed. 
(6)  The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the claim is presented. 
(7)  In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed. 
(8)  In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof. 
(Code 2004, § 2.101.1)  
Sec. 2-366. - Notice requirements. 
(a)  All notices required by section 2-365 shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city manager at 205 South Main Street, Farmersville, Texas 75442, and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the person named in this subsection. 
(b)  The written notice required under section 2-365 shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone equally authorized to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city manager as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein. 
(Code 2004, § 2.101.3)  
Sec. 2-367. - Waiving of provisions prohibited. 
Neither the mayor, a city councilmember or any other officer or employee shall have the authority to waive any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004, § 2.101.4)  
Secs. 2-368—2-392. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2012-0925-002, §§ 1—11, adopted September 25, 2012, was not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, those provisions were treated as repealing and replacing art. VII, § 2-393. Former art. VII, § 2-393 pertained to appointing a records management officer and was derived from Code 2004, § 8.137 and Ord. No. 90-6, adopted May 8, 1990. 
State Law reference— Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-393. - Definition of municipal records. 
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to them is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0925-002, § 1, 9-25-2012)  
Sec. 2-394. - Additional definitions. 
Department head means the officer who by ordinance or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of its operations in an emergency or disaster, to the recreation of its legal and financial status, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-397. 
Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-398. 
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0925-002, § 2, 9-25-2012)  
Sec. 2-395. - Municipal records declared public property. 
All municipal records as defined in section 2-393 are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0925-002, § 3, 9-25-2012)  
Sec. 2-396. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for their management from creation to ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0925-002, § 4, 9-25-2012)  
Sec. 2-397. - Designation of records management officer. 
The city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within 30 days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0925-002, § 5, 9-25-2012)  
Sec. 2-398. - Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the municipality, and to properly preserve those records of the municipality that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the city the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0925-002, § 6, 9-25-2012)  
Sec. 2-399. - Duties of records management officer.[11] 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and archives commission to determine if the records management program and the municipality's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(8)  Disseminate to the city and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(9)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the records of the city are carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(10)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules or through records destruction authorization requests, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(11)  Report annually to the city on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (10); and 
(12)  Bring to the attention of the city non-compliance by department heads or other municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0925-002, § 7, 9-25-2012) 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Note— The wording of subsections (1), (3), (4), (8), and (9) is derived directly from the duties and responsibilities of records management officers set out in state law in § 203.023, Local Government Code. The other duties prescribed are standard features in the centralized direction of records management programs. These duties fall well within the scope of the definition of records management in section 2-394, the wording of which is taken directly from the definition of records management offered in the Texas Local Government Records Act, § 201.003(13). 
 
Sec. 2-400. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0925-002, § 8, 9-25-2012)  
Sec. 2-401. - Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records series created or received by the department and the retention period for each series. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and the city. 
(d)  Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0925-002, § 9, 9-25-2012)  
Sec. 2-402. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-401 shall be implemented by department heads according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management officer that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0925-002, § 10, 9-25-2012)  
Sec. 2-403. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0925-002, § 11, 9-25-2012)  
Secs. 2-404—2-414. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CODE OF ETHICS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-06, §§ 1—9, adopted March 12, 2002, set out provisions for use herein. Said provisions have been treated as repealing art. VIII, §§ 2-415—2-427, in its entirety; and enacting a new art. VIII, to read as set out herein. Former art. VIII pertained to "Ethics," and was derived from Code 2004, § 8.105—8.105.11, 8.106.1; Ord. No. 2002-05, adopted March 12, 2002; Ord. No. 2002-06, adopted March 12, 2002 and Ord. No. 2002-31, adopted May 14, 2002. 
State Law reference— Public officer ethics generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 571.001 et seq.; personal financial disclosure, standards of conduct and conflicts of interest generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 572.001 et seq.; disclosure of certain relationships with local government officers and conflicts disclosure statement required, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 176.003 et seq.; conflicts of interest regarding municipal planning and development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 374.908; abuse of office, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 39.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-415. - Code of ethics. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Benefit means anything reasonably regarded as economic gain or economic advantage, including benefit to any other person in whose welfare the beneficiary is interested, but does not include a contribution or expenditure made and reported in accordance with law. 
Board means a board, commission or committee: 
(1)  Which is established by city ordinance, charter, interlocal contract or state law; or 
(2)  Which serves as the board of a nonprofit development corporation that acts as an instrumentality of the city; and 
(3)  Any part of whose membership is appointed by the city council, but does not include a board, commission, or committee which is the governing body of a separate political subdivision of the state or agency of the state or county. 
Employee means a person employed and paid a salary by the city whether under civil service or not, including those individuals on a part-time basis, but does not include an independent contractor or city council member. 
Negotiating concerning prospective employment means a discussion between a city officer or employee and another employer concerning the possibility of the city officer or employee considering or accepting employment with the employer, in which discussion the city officer or employee responds in a positive way. 
Officer means a member of the city council and any member of a board or commission who is appointed by the city council. 
Financial interest means an interest that a person has in an entity or transaction which may result in an economic gain or economic advantage to that person, including a benefit. 
(b)  Policy. 
(1)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that: 
a.  Officers and employees of the city be independent, impartial and responsible only to the people of the city; 
b.  Governmental decisions and policy be made using the proper procedures of the governmental structure; 
c.  No officer or employee have any financial interest, direct or indirect, or engage in any business, transaction or professional activity or incur any obligation of any nature which is in conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the public interest; 
d.  Public office not be used for personal gain; and 
e.  The city council at all times be maintained as a nonpartisan body. 
f.  No person shall be appointed to a city board or commission, unless he or she is a qualified voter of the jurisdiction in which he or she resides, is not in arrears in the payment of city taxes, utility service charges, or other obligations owed to the city, is not an adversary party to pending litigation against the city, and has been a resident of the city, or the Farmersville Independent School District, depending on the appointment, for at least one year immediately preceding the date of appointment, except the library/civic center board. 
(2)  To implement this policy, the city council has determined that it is advisable to enact this code of ethics for all officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, advisory or administrative, to serve not only as a guide for official conduct of the city's public servants, but also as a basis for discipline for those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(c)  Standards of conduct. 
(1)  An officer or employee of the city shall not: 
a.  Accept or solicit a benefit that might reasonably tend to influence the officer or employee in the discharge of his official duties; 
b.  Use his official position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or others; 
c.  Grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to a person or organization beyond that which is available to every other person or organization. This shall not prohibit the granting of fringe benefits to city employees as part of their employment or as an added incentive to the securing or retaining of employees; 
d.  Disclose information that could adversely affect the property or affairs of the city, or directly or indirectly use any information understood to be confidential which was gained by reason of his official position or employment for his own personal gain or benefit or for the private interest of others; 
e.  Transact any business on behalf of the city in his official capacity with any business entity with which he is an officer, agent or member or in which he has a financial interest. In the event that such a circumstance should arise, then he shall make known his interest, and: 
1.  In the case of an officer, leave the room during debate or hearing, refrain from discussing the matter at any time with the members of the body of which he is a member or any other body which will consider the matter and abstain from voting on the matter; or 
2.  In the case of an employee, turn the matter over to his superior for reassignment, state the reasons for doing so and have nothing further to do with the mater involved; 
f.  Personally provide services for compensation, directly or indirectly, to a person or organization who is requesting an approval, investigation, or determination from the body or department of which the officer or employee is a member. This restriction does not apply to outside employment of an officer if the employment is the officer's primary source of income; 
g.  Accept other employment or engage in outside activities incompatible with the full and proper discharge of his duties and responsibilities with the city, or which might impair his independent judgment in the performance of his public duty; 
h.  Personally participate in a decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, investigation, or rendering of advice in a proceeding, application, request for ruling or determination, contract, claim, or other matter under the jurisdiction of the city, if the officer or employee is negotiating or has an arrangement concerning prospective employment with a person or organization which has a financial interest in the matter, and, in the case of an employee, it has been determined by the city manager that a conflict of interest exists. If an officer or employee begins negotiation or enters an arrangement concerning prospective employment with a person or organization that has a financial interest in a matter in which the officer or employee has been participating, the officer or employee shall: 
1.  In the case of an employee, immediately notify the official responsible for appointment to his position of the nature of the negotiation or arrangement and, if the city manager determines that a conflict of interest exists, follow the instructions of the city manager with regard to further involvement in the matter; or 
2.  In the case of a board member, immediately notify the board of which he is a member of the nature of the negotiation or arrangement and: 
(A)  Refrain from discussing the matter at any time with other board members or members of the city council if the city council will also consider the matter; 
(B)  Leave the room during debate or hearing on the matter; and 
(C)  Abstain from voting on the matter; or 
3.  In the case of a member of the city council, file an affidavit with the city Secretary describing the nature of the negotiation or arrangement and: 
(A)  Refrain from discussing the matter at any time with other council members or members of a board that will consider the matter; 
(B)  Leave the room during debate or hearing on the matter; and 
(C)  Abstain from voting on the matter; 
i.  Receive any fee or compensation for his services as an officer or employee of the city from any source other than the city, except as may be otherwise provided by law. This shall not prohibit his performing the same or other services for a public or private organization that he performs for the city if there is no conflict with his city duties and responsibilities; 
j.  1.  In the case of a member of the city council or an employee, personally represent, or appear in behalf of, the private interests of others: 
(A)  Before the city council or any city board or department; 
(B)  In any proceeding involving the city; or 
(C)  In any litigation to which the city is a party. 
2.  In the case of a board member, personally represent or appear in behalf of, the private interests of others: 
(A)  Before the board of which he is a member, 
(B)  Before the city council; 
(C)  Before a board which has appellate jurisdiction over the board of which he is a member; or 
(D)  In litigation or a claim to which the city or an employee of the city is a party if the interests of the person being represented are adverse to the city or an employee of the city and the subject of the litigation or claim involves the board on which the board member is serving or the department providing support services to the board; 
k.  Use the prestige of his position with the city on behalf of a political party; 
l.  Knowingly perform or refuse to perform any act in order to deliberately thwart the execution of the city ordinances, rules or regulations or the achievement of official city programs; 
m.  Use city supplies, equipment or facilities for any purpose other than the conduct of official city business; or, 
n.  Engage in any dishonest or criminal act or other conduct prejudicial to the government of the city or that reflects discredit upon the government of the city. 
(2)  The restrictions in this section do not apply to business associates of officers or employees, but only personally to the officers and employees themselves. 
(3)  The restrictions and requirements of subsection (c)(1)e. do not apply to an officer or employee of the city serving as a member of any board, commission, or other entity when transacting business on behalf of the city in an official capacity with that board, commission or entity, if the officer or employee: 
a.  Was appointed by the mayor, city council or city manager to represent the city on the board, commission, or entity; and 
b.  Has no financial interest in the board, commission, or entity or in the business being transacted. 
(d)  Financial interests. Any officer, whether elected or appointed, who has a substantial financial interest or financial interest other than an incidental or remote interest in any matter that is pending before, or that might be considered by, the body of which the officer is a member shall: 
(1)  Disclose such interest to the other members of the body; 
(2)  Refrain from discussing the matter at any time with any other member of the body of which the officer is a member or with a member of any other body that might consider the matter; 
(3)  Leave the room during debate or hearing; and 
(4)  Refrain from voting on the matter. 
(e)  Political activities of officers. 
(1)  In elections other than for city council of the city, a member of the city council may not: 
a.  Use the prestige of the member's position with the city on behalf of a candidate; 
b.  Solicit or receive contributions; or 
c.  Serve as the designated campaign treasurer for a candidate as required by V.T.C.A. Election Code, Ch. 14. 
(2)  In any election, a member of a city board, commission, or committee, whether governmental or advisory, may not: 
a.  Use the prestige of the member's position with the city on behalf of a candidate; 
b.  Serve as the designated campaign treasurer for a candidate as required by V.T.C.A. Election Code, Ch. 14; or 
c.  Personally solicit or receive contributions for a candidate. A member, however, is not prohibited from serving on a steering committee to plan a program of solicitation and listing the member's name without reference to the office held when the committee as a whole is listed. 
(3)  Subsections (e)(1)a. and (e)(2)a. do not prohibit a member of the city council or of a board from lending the member's name in support of a candidate so long as the office held with the city is not mentioned in connection with the endorsement. 
(f)  Additional employment. An employee of the city may accept employment from a public utility corporation enjoying the grant of a franchise, privilege, or easement from the city if: 
(1)  The employee is to perform the duties of a security guard for the public utility corporation; 
(2)  The employment is approved by the employee's department head; and 
(3)  The employment does not conflict with his duties as an employee of the city. 
(g)  Restrictions on contracting with the city or providing representation of others. 
(1)  An officer or employee in a position that involves significant reporting, decision-making, advisory, or supervisory responsibility who leaves the service or employment of the city may not, within 24 months after leaving that service or employment, represent any other person or organization in any formal or informal appearance: 
a.  Before the city concerning a project for which the person had responsibility as a city officer or employee; or 
b.  Before any other agency on a project for which the person had responsibility as on officer or employee. 
(2)  A former officer or employee who is subject to the requirements of (e)(1) shall, during the 24 months after leaving the service or employment of the city, disclose the officer or employee's previous position and responsibilities with the city when representing any other person or organization in any formal or informal appearance before a city agency. 
(3)  A member of the city council or an employee may not, within 24 months after leaving the service or employment of the city, either individually or as the officer or principal of a private business entity: 
a.  Submit a proposal, on behalf of the member or employee or on behalf of a private business entity, to make any city contract that is not required by state law to be competitively bid; 
b.  Negotiate or enter into any city contract that is not required by state law to be competitively bid; or 
c.  Have or acquire any financial interest, direct or indirect, in any city contract that is not required by state law to be competitively bid. 
(h)  Limitations on employee political activity and on holding of elective public office by an employee. 
(1)  An employee of the city immediately forfeits employment with the city if: 
a.  The employee becomes a candidate for election to the city council; 
b.  The employee becomes a candidate for nomination or election to an elective public office where the holding of that office will conflict with the full and proper discharge of the employee's duties with the city; or 
c.  A managerial or supervisory exempt city employee becomes a candidate for nomination or election to an elective public office of an entity having contractual relations with the city that involve the employee's department. 
(i)  Violations; removal; appeals. 
(1)  The failure of any officer or employee to comply with this section or the violation of one or more of the standards of conduct set forth in this section, which apply to him, shall constitute grounds for expulsion, reprimand, removal from office or discharge. In the case of an employee of the city, disciplinary action and appeals therefrom shall be in conformance with procedures established by the city personnel rules and regulations. Where no specific appeal procedure is otherwise prescribed, the appeal shall be to the city council. In the case of a city councilman, the matter shall be decided by a vote of two-thirds of the entire membership of the city council. In the case of members of boards or commissions, the matters shall be decided by the city council, after notice and hearing. The decisions of these bodies shall be final in the absence of bias, prejudice or fraud. 
(2)  If the city council determines that a person has violated this subsection, the city council may direct the city attorney to initiate whatever legal action is necessary to seek enforcement of its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2002-06, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 2002-31, §§ 1—9, 5-14-2002)  
Secs. 2-416—2-450. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC INFORMATION REQUESTS 
 
Sec. 2-451. - Purpose. 
This chapter provides standards for processing requests for public information pursuant to the Public Information Act, Texas Government Code ch. 552. This policy provides uniform procedures and guidelines when a city official or employee receives a request for information to ensure that such individuals respond to a request for information in a prompt, professional and efficient manner. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Promote and increase efficiency, responsiveness to the public, and economy in the operation of city government; and 
(2)  Provide a fair and equal opportunity for obtaining access to information; and 
(3)  Reduce duplication of effort and increase the efficiency with which requests are handled; and 
(4)  Demonstrate the city's commitment to an informed citizenry to further the public's control over the instruments they have created. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1013-002, § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 2-452. - Scope. 
This chapter applies to all data, documents, forms, and information managed or possessed by the city or to which the city has a superior right of access. This chapter applies to all requests for information submitted to the city after the date of enactment. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1013-002, § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 2-453. - Public information officer. 
(a)  The city secretary shall serve as the public information officer for the city. 
(b)  In addition to other duties assigned, the public information officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the open records program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; and 
(2)  Plan, formulate and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1013-002, § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 2-454. - Conflicts. 
This chapter is a guide for city employees and officers. It should in no way be construed as modifying state laws regarding disclosure of public information or the retention of local government records. This chapter is to be read in harmony with such other city policies and state statutes when possible so as to give effect to the stated purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1013-002, § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 2-455. - Requests for confidential information. 
The public information officer shall consult with the city attorney, or his or her designee, regarding requested information that may contain privileged, confidential, or exempted information. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1013-002, § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 2-456. - Uniformity. 
All requests for information are to be treated uniformly without regard to the requestor's identity, motives, or method of submission so long as the request is in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1013-002, § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 2-457. - Full cost recovery. 
To the extent possible, the city must recover the costs of responding to requests for information. Therefore, all requests for information are subject to reasonable charges that include the costs related to reproducing information such as the costs of materials, labor and overhead, as allowed by law. Charges for providing requested information accrue at the time the requestor is advised that the copy is available upon payment of the applicable charges. The public information officer shall impose charges to inspect or copy requested information in accordance with the guidelines established by the office of the Attorney General of Texas, when applicable. Exceptions can be made in those rare and unusual situations in which the city secretary determines that waiving charges is in the public interest. A waiver to payment of the applicable charges can be made only in instances where the public information officer determines that doing so is in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1013-002, § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 2-458. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Unauthorized access. It shall be unlawful for any person other than a city officer, official or employee to open city filing cabinets, drawers, binders, or file storage boxes at city hall without the express permission of the city manager or the public information officer. 
(b)  Unauthorized removal. It shall be unlawful for any person other than a city officer or employee to remove documents, forms, files, information or data from city hall without the express permission of the city manager or the public information officer. 
(c)  Unauthorized destruction. It shall be unlawful for any person other than a city officer or employee to destroy, deface, obscure, tear, shred, or dispose of documents, forms, files, information or data from city hall without the express permission of the city manager or the public information officer. 
(d)  Unauthorized disclosure. It shall be unlawful for any person to disclose to the public any confidential documents, forms, files, information or data from city hall without the express permission of the city manager or the public information officer. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1013-002, § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 2-459. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Dissemination. All employees and officers of the city shall be informed of the existence of the policies and procedures adopted pursuant to this article. All city departments shall keep copies available for reference by employees and officers. Failure to reasonably comply with this policy shall be grounds for employee discipline up to and including termination. 
(b)  Civil and criminal penalties. The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article as may be required by governing law. Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution. Any person knowingly violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. An offense under this article is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(d)  Civil Remedies. Nothing in this article shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this article and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates this article or to require specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with this article; and 
(2)  In addition to any other remedies available hereunder, a civil penalty of up to $100.00 per day or portion of a day shall be assessed when it is shown that the defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the article and after receiving notice committed acts in violation of the article or failed to take action necessary for compliance with the article; and 
(3)  Any other relief or processes now or hereafter available. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1013-002, § 2, 10-13-2015)  
CHAPTER 5 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq.; alcoholic beverage permit and license fees authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 11.38, 61.36; location restrictions for sale of beer and wine authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.31 et seq.; local option provisions, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 251.71 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means alcohol, or any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted. 
Ale means a malt beverage containing more than four percent of alcohol by weight. 
Beer means a malt beverage containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and not more than four percent of alcohol by weight, and does not include a beverage designated by label or otherwise by a name other than beer. 
Malt liquor means a malt beverage containing more than four percent of alcohol by weight. 
Mixed beverage means one or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or in part of an alcoholic beverage in a sealed or unsealed container of any legal size for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the holder of a mixed beverage permit, the holder of a daily temporary mixed beverage permit, the holder of a caterer's permit, the holder of a mixed beverage late hours permit, the holder of a private club registration permit, or the holder of a private club late hours permit. 
Off-premises means locations other than those described in the definition of premises in this section. 
On-premises means locations as described in the definition of premises in this section. 
Premises means the grounds and all buildings, vehicles, and appurtenances pertaining to the grounds, including any adjacent premises if they are directly or indirectly under the control of the same person. 
Residential area means: 
(1)  An area designated as a residential zoning district by a governing ordinance or code; 
(2)  An area in which the actual land use is predominantly one of private residences; 
(3)  A subdivision for which a plat is recorded in the real property records of the county and that contains or is bounded by public streets or parts of public streets that are abutted by residential property occupying at least 75 percent of the front footage along the block face; and/or 
(4)  A subdivision for which a plat is recorded in the real property records of the county and a majority of the lots of which are subject to deed restrictions limiting the lots to residential use. 
Wine andvinous liquor means the product obtained from the alcoholic fermentation of juice of sound ripe grapes, fruits, berries or honey, and includes wine coolers. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 5.102.1, 6-9-2009; Ord. No. 2009-39, § 2, 12-8-2009) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.04.  
Secs. 5-2—5-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 5-21. - Required; procedure. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, distill, brew, import, transport, store for purposes of sale, distribute or sell any beer, wine or mixed beverages within the city unless such person has obtained a city permit from the city secretary's office. 
(b)  Any person wishing to manufacture, distill, brew, import, transport, store for purposes of sale, distribute or sell any beer, wine or mixed beverages must complete a city permit application and pay the application fee as set forth in section 5-22(a). 
(c)  The city secretary shall submit each application to the appropriate departments, as determined by the city manager, to ensure that the application complies with all Code provisions and regulations, including this section. 
(d)  Upon investigation of compliance with all applicable Code provisions and payment of the initial permit fee as set forth in section 5-22(b), the city secretary shall issue to the applicant the proper license, which shall state on its face the location, type of business for which it is issued, and the date when it will expire. The license shall be posted in a prominent place, visible to the customers of the establishment. 
(e)  Applications and permits shall be kept on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 5.102.2, 6-9-2009)  
Sec. 5-22. - Application fee; initial fee. 
(a)  An application fee as determined from time to time by city council on the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code shall be charged by the city secretary for accepting any permit application or permit renewal application. No permit application or permit renewal application may be accepted unless accompanied by the application fee. 
(b)  The initial permit fee determined by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code shall be equal to one-half of the state fee required by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (TABC) of every person that may be issued any state permit or license for the manufacture, distilling, brewing, importing, transporting, storing, distributing or sale of any beer, wine or mixed beverage, unless a different fee is allowed or required by state law. In no event shall the fee exceed the maximum amount permitted by the state legislature. No city permit may be issued unless the initial permit fee is received. 
(c)  The city secretary shall issue a receipt for the application fee and initial permit fee and keep a record of the same in the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 5.102.3, 6-9-2009)  
Sec. 5-23. - Renewal and fee. 
(a)  All permits shall be renewed annually. All permits shall terminate at 12:00 midnight on the day before the anniversary date of their issuance and no permit shall be issued covering a term longer than one year. 
(b)  The city shall require payment of an annual permit renewal fee by all establishments selling alcoholic beverages within the city. The permit renewal fee determined by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code shall be equal to one-half of the state fee required by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission of every person that may be issued any state permit or license for the manufacture, distilling, brewing, importing, transporting, storing, distributing or sale of any beer, wine or mixed beverage, unless a different fee is allowed or required by state law. In no event shall the fee exceed the maximum amount permitted by the state legislature. 
(c)  The city secretary may cancel a permit if a permittee fails to pay the permit renewal fee. The city secretary shall send notice of such cancellation to the address on file with the permit application. 
(d)  A permittee who sells an alcoholic beverage without first having paid the permit renewal fee under subsection (b) of this section commits a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 5.102.4, 6-9-2009)  
Sec. 5-24. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  The owner, operator or person in control of an establishment licensed by the state for on-premises alcoholic beverage consumption, which is located in a zoning district in which bars are not permitted, may be required to file with the city manager's office an affidavit on a form provided by the city manager. The affidavit shall reflect gross sales for the preceding 12-month period (or for the period since the restaurant began its operation, whichever time period is shorter), and each affidavit shall show gross sales of food and gross sales of alcoholic beverages, as those terms are defined in Chapter 77, Zoning, as separate figures. 
(b)  The person operating an establishment subject to the reporting requirements of this section may be required to file with the city manager's office a copy of the filings supplied to the state for sales tax and a copy of any tax return required by the Alcoholic Beverage Code (V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq.). 
(c)  Legally nonconforming uses having no limitations imposed by ordinance or the zoning board of adjustments on the amount of alcoholic beverages sold shall not be subject to this section's reporting requirements. 
(d)  Submission of the data described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not constitute a waiver of any claim of confidentiality regarding public access to the information. 
(e)  The person operating an establishment subject to the reporting requirements of this section shall permit the city manager or his designee to view and copy the books, records and receipts relative to the sale of food and alcoholic beverages at any time after four hours' notice, and such permission shall not be construed to constitute a waiver of any claim of confidentiality the operator may have. 
(f)  No person shall fail to keep a record in the manner required by this section, fail to file any return in the manner required by this section, keep a false record, or file a false return. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 5.102.6, 6-9-2009)  
Sec. 5-25. - Violations; penalty. 
A person subject to the licensing or reporting provisions of this article who sells an alcoholic beverage without having obtained and maintained in effect a city permit and a TABC permit at all such times, paid the fees levied in section 5-23, and/or timely filed a true and correct report required by the city, commits a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00. In addition, the city secretary shall report such failure to pay to the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 5.102.7, 6-9-2009)  
Secs. 5-26—5-53. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RULES AND REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-54. - Consumption in certain public places prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on any public street or alley or on any public place adjacent to any street or alley in the city. For purposes of this section, a person's private residence and any patio or balcony area attached to said private residence shall not be considered a public place. It is also unlawful pursuant to an order of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission to possess an open container or publicly consume alcoholic beverages in the "central business district" of the city as defined in ch. 47, art. IV, div. 4, dated on or about the 10th day of August, 2014. However, notwithstanding the foregoing, such consumption shall be lawful if: 
(1)  Private club. The public place is within the premises or patio area of a permitted private club holding a valid Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (TABC) liquor permit and a valid city alcoholic beverage permit; 
(2)  Special event. 
a.  The alcoholic beverage is sold or dispensed by the holder of a valid state alcoholic beverage commission alcoholic beverage permit and a valid city alcoholic beverage permit; 
b.  The alcoholic beverage is sold or dispensed in conjunction with a properly permitted special event; and 
c.  The area designated for alcohol dispensing and consumption is provided within an enclosure (barrier or sides) with secured ingress and egress. Additionally, the area so designated for the dispensing or service of alcohol shall be covered by a roof. 
(b)  The chief of police, other police officers or any peace officer within the city limits may arrest without warrant any person who violates the terms of this article and the officer or person making the arrest is justified in adopting all of the measures which he might adopt in cases of arrest under warrant; provided further, that, in all cases of arrest without warrant, the officer making the arrest shall immediately take the person arrested before the nearest or most accessible magistrate having jurisdiction. 
(Code 2004, §§ 6.104, 6.104.1; Ord. No. 72-4, 11-14-1972; Ord. No. O-2014-0923-004, § 2, 9-23-2014) 
State Law reference— Public consumption regarding mixed beverage permit holders, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 28.101; public intoxication, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 49.02  
Sec. 5-55. - Hours of sales to comply with state law. 
The hours of sales of alcoholic beverages in the city shall comply with state law provisions regarding the hours of sales of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 5.102.5, 6-9-2009)  
Secs. 5-56—5-83. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LOCATION RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 5-84. - Sales locations in proximity to churches, schools and hospitals. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption is not permitted within 300 feet of a: 
(1)  Church or public school or hospital; or 
(2)  Private school which offers a course of instruction for students in one or more grades from kindergarten through grade 12 and has more than 100 students enrolled and attending courses at the location in question. 
(b)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption is not permitted within 300 feet of a: 
(1)  Church or public school or hospital; or 
(2)  Private school which offers a course of instruction for students in one or more grades from kindergarten through grade 12 and has more than 100 students enrolled and attending courses at the location in question. 
(c)  The sale of alcoholic beverages is not permitted within 300 feet of a day care center or child care facility, as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 42.002. This provision only applies to a place of business selling alcoholic beverages pursuant to a permit issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (TABC) under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 25, 28, 32, 69 or 74, and which does not also hold a food and beverage certificate from the TABC. 
(d)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. 
(e)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a public or private school shall be: 
(1)  In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or 
(2)  If the place of business is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the place of business is located. 
(f)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a day care center or child care facility shall be calculated in the same manner as used for a public or private school, with the following exceptions (in which event the place of business in question is exempted from the distance requirements): 
(1)  The place of business selling alcoholic beverages and the day care center or child care facility are located on different stories of a multistory building; or 
(2)  The place of business selling alcoholic beverages and the day care center or child care facility are located in separate buildings and either the place of business selling alcoholic beverages or the day care center or child care facility is located on the second story or higher of a multistory building. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 5.102.6, 6-9-2009; Ord. No. 2009-39, § 3(A)—(F), 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 5-85. - Sales prohibited in residential areas. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises and/or on-premises consumption is not permitted in a residential area. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 5.102.6, 6-9-2009; Ord. No. 2009-39, § 3(H), 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 5-86. - Variance for alcohol sales. 
(a)  The city council may allow a variance to this division if it determines that the enforcement of the regulation in a particular instance is not in the best interests of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on the applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, or is not effective or necessary, or that a previous permit was issued for the premises in error and enforcement of the regulation would be inequitable, or for any other reason the city council determines, after consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, that the variance is in the best interest of the community. 
(b)  No variance may be granted under subsection (a) of this section except after a public hearing for which notice has been given. Notice of a request for a variance from this subsection shall be given to owners of property within 300 feet of the business. The notice area for a variance request relating to a church or public hospital shall be measured in a direct line from the front door of the place of business. The notice area for a variance request relating to a public or private school shall be measured in a direct line from the property line of the place of business. The notice shall be sent via regular United States mail not less than ten days before the date set for hearing, to all such owners who have rendered their property for city taxes as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll. 
(c)  The city council may assess a reasonable fee as determined by the master fee schedule contained in appendix A of this Code for the administrative costs associated with processing a variance request under subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 5.102.6, 6-9-2009; Ord. No. 2009-39, § 3(G), 12-8-2009)  
Chapter 8 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority for municipal regulation of theatres, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2156.002; sports, amusements, and entertainment generally, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2001.001 et seq.; municipal authority to regulate exhibitions, shows and amusements, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.032; municipal authority to regulate sexually oriented businesses, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq.; municipal regulation of sports shooting ranges, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 250.001; regulation of amusement rides, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2151.051; municipal authority to prohibit operation of amusement rides, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2151.1525; regulation of circuses, carnivals and zoos, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2152.001 et seq.; regulation of coin-operated machines generally, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.001 et seq.; authority for municipal regulation of coin operated machines, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.451 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 8-1—8-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADULT BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
Board of adjustment means the city's board of adjustment, which shall act as the appeals board for all purposes of this article. 
Chief of police means the city's chief of police or his designated agent. 
Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or privately perform a striptease for another person. 
Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to hire escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
Establishment means the: 
(1)  Opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  Conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  Addition of any sexually oriented business to another existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  Relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
Nudity or state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male or female genitals, or female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast. 
Operates or causes to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Residential district means a single-family, duplex, townhouse, multiple family or mobile home zoning district as defined in Chapter 77, Zoning, or as defined in the development code or comprehensive zoning ordinance of an adjoining city, if applicable. 
Residential use means a single-family, duplex, multiple family, townhouse, mobile home or manufactured housing park or subdivision, or campground use as defined in Chapter 77, Zoning, or the comprehensive zoning ordinance of an adjoining city, if applicable. 
Seminude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or is seminude. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
Specified anatomical areas means human genitals in a state of sexual arousal. 
Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition. 
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor area exists as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Transfer of ownership orcontrol of a sexually oriented business means the: 
(1)  Sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  Transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  Establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law, upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.1)  
Sec. 8-20. - Classification. 
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Nude model studios; and 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.2)  
Sec. 8-21. - Enforcement; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, any person violating sections 8-81 through 8-83, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio or sexual encounter center, then violation of section 8-81 is punishable as a class A misdemeanor. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under sections 8-48 through 8-51, 8-81 through 8-83 and 8-113 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school licensed by the state, or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution that each item of descriptive, printed, film, or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.20)  
Sec. 8-22. - Injunction. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of sections 8-81 through 8-83 is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.21; Ord. No. 98-12, 4-14-1998)  
Secs. 8-23—8-47. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 
 
Sec. 8-48. - Required. 
A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.3(A))  
Sec. 8-49. - Application. 
An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who must comply with section 8-116 shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of section 8-116. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.3(B))  
Sec. 8-50. - Signed application required. 
If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 8-52 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.3(D))  
Sec. 8-51. - Separate license required. 
The fact that a person possesses a valid license for any other type of business does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.3(E))  
Sec. 8-52. - Qualifications and issuance. 
The chief of police shall approve and issue any license required by this division to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application, unless the chief of police finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant, or the applicant's spouse, in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this article, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(5)  The license fee required by section 8-55 has not been paid. 
(6)  An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(7)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with this article. 
(8)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime involving: 
a.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 43: 
1.  Prostitution; 
2.  Promotion of prostitution; 
3.  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
4.  Compelling prostitution; 
5.  Obscenity; 
6.  Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to minor; 
7.  Sexual performance by a child; 
8.  Possession of child pornography; 
b.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 21: 
1.  Public lewdness; 
2.  Indecent exposure; 
3.  Indecency with a child; 
c.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 22; 
d.  Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 25; or 
e.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses for which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(9)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse. 
(10)  An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection (8)a of this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by subsection (8)e of this section has elapsed. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.4(A))  
Sec. 8-53. - Form. 
The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, expiration date, and address of the sexually oriented business. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.4(B))  
Sec. 8-54. - Display. 
The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.4(C))  
Sec. 8-55. - License fee. 
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.5; Ord. No 2004-43, 11-9-2004)  
Sec. 8-56. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, planning department, code services department, and building inspection department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a city representative at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.6)  
Sec. 8-57. - Expiration. 
Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in sections 8-49 and 8-50. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date and, when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.7)  
Sec. 8-58. - Suspension. 
The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with this article; 
(2)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; or 
(5)  Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.8)  
Sec. 8-59. - Revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 8-58 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 8-52 for which the time period required in section 8-52(8)e has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in section 8-58, for which a conviction has been obtained, and the persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 21.01; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a plea of guilty, nolo contendere, no contest or any plea involving deferred adjudication shall be deemed the equivalent of a conviction. 
(d)  Subsection (b)(5) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)  When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under section 8-52(8)e has lapsed. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.9)  
Sec. 8-60. - Appeal. 
If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license or suspends or revokes a license, the chief of police shall send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. In the case of suspension or revocation of an existing license, written notice shall also be posted upon the business premises. Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the licensee whose application for a license has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal to the board of adjustment. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the chief of police in suspending, denying or revoking a license until the board of adjustment makes a final decision. The decision of the board of adjustment shall be final and any appeal shall be made directly to the state district court. An appeal to the state district court must be filed within 30 days after the receipt of notice of the decision of the board of adjustment. The licensee shall bear the burden of proof in court. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.10)  
Sec. 8-61. - Transfer. 
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.11)  
Secs. 8-62—8-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LOCATION RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 8-81. - Sexually oriented business; offenses and violations. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of a: 
(1)  Church, rectory, or church-related structure; 
(2)  Public, private, parochial, elementary, or secondary school or a school zone in which the speed of traffic is regulated by posted signs during certain school hours; 
(3)  Boundary of a residential district or historical district; 
(4)  public park, playground or recreation facility, library, day care center, nursery school, preschool or kindergarten; or 
(5)  Property line of a lot devoted to a residential use. 
The above location restrictions apply whether or not the church, rectory, church-related structure, public school, private school, parochial school, elementary school, secondary school, school zone, residential district boundary, public park, playground, recreational facility, library, day care center, nursery school, kindergarten or property line devoted to residential use is located within or outside the city or is a lawful nonconforming use of property. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.12(A)—(C))  
Sec. 8-82. - Method of measuring distance. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, rectory, public or private elementary or secondary school, day care center, nursery school, kindergarten, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, playground, library, recreational facility, residential district, or residential lot. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall mean in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.12(D), (E))  
Sec. 8-83. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, which is in violation of this article, shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed three years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established business is nonconforming. 
(b)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, rectory, or church-related street, a public, private or parochial elementary or secondary school, or a school zone in which the speed of traffic is regulated by posted signs during school hours, a boundary of a residential district or historical district within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business, a public park, playground or recreation facility library, day care center, nursery school or kindergarten, or the property line of a lot devoted a residential use. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.12(F), (G))  
Sec. 8-84. - Appeal from location restrictions. 
(a)  If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license or application because the location of the sexually oriented business establishment is in violation of sections 8-81 through 8-83, then the applicant may, not later than ten calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the chief of police a written request for an exemption from the location restrictions of sections 8-81 through 8-83. 
(b)  If the written request is filed with the chief of police within the ten-day limit, the board of adjustment shall consider the request. The board shall set a date for the hearing within 60 days from the date the written request is received. 
(c)  A hearing by the board may only proceed if all the board members are present. The board shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply. 
(d)  The board may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the location restrictions of sections 8-81 through 8-83 if it finds that the: 
(1)  Location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare; 
(2)  Granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this division; 
(3)  Location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight; 
(4)  Location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation, nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and 
(5)  Other applicable provisions of this article will be observed. 
(e)  The board shall grant or deny the exemption by a supermajority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote shall result in denial of the exemption. The concurring vote of a majority of the members shall be necessary to affirm, modify or reverse any decision. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the board is final. 
(f)  If the board grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year from the date of the board's action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the location restrictions of sections 8-81 through 8-83 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption. 
(g)  If the board denies the exemption, the applicant may not reapply for an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the board's action. 
(h)  The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this article than the location restrictions of sections 8-81 through 8-83. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.13)  
Secs. 8-85—8-111. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 8-112. - Escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.14)  
Sec. 8-113. - Nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under the age of 18 years was in a state of nudity in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be seen or viewed from a public place or public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.15)  
Sec. 8-114. - Adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) and (b) of this section if the person under the age of 18 years was in a state of nudity in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.16)  
Sec. 8-115. - Adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel, as that term is defined in section 8-19. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the term "rent" or "subrent" means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.17)  
Sec. 8-116. - Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object, and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police or his designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access, for any purpose, from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area from the manager's stations remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises, and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this article. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (a)(7) of this section is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsection (a) of this section commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.18)  
Sec. 8-117. - Display of sexually explicit material to minors. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of 17 years he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film, videocassette, CD, DVD, or other electronic media the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following: 
(1)  Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy; 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; 
(3)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid stage, whether covered or uncovered. 
(b)  The term "display" means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business establishment: 
(1)  It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or 
(2)  The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public. 
(Code 2004, § 5.105.19)  
Secs. 8-118—8-147. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BILLIARD TABLES AND COIN-OPERATED MACHINES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-148. - Definitions 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Billiard table means any table surrounded by a ledge or cushion, with or without pockets, coin-operated or non coin-operated, upon which balls are impelled by a stick or cue. 
Coin-operated machine means any kind of machine or device operated by or with a coin or other United States currency, metal slug, token, electronic card, or check, including a music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine, and includes, but is not limited to, music coin-operated machines and skill or pleasure coin-operated machines. 
Music coin-operated machine means any kind of coin-operated machine, including a phonograph, piano, or graphophone, that: 
(1)  Dispenses music or is used to dispense music; 
(2)  Is operated by inserting a coin, U.S. currency, metal slug, token, or electronic card or check; and 
(3)  Is not a coin-operated machine designed exclusively for a child. 
Service coin-operated machine means any kind of machine or device, including a pay toilet or telephone, that dispenses only a service. The term "service coin-operated machine" does not include a machine or device that dispenses merchandise, music, skill, or pleasure. 
Skill or pleasure coin-operated machine means any kind of coin-operated machine that dispenses, or is used or is capable of being used to dispense or afford, amusement, skill, or pleasure, or is operated for any purpose, other than for dispensing only merchandise, music, or service. 
(1)  The term "skill or pleasure coin-operated machine" includes a: 
a.  Marble machine; 
b.  Marble table machine; 
c.  Marble shooting machine; 
d.  Miniature racetrack machine; 
e.  Miniature football machine; 
f.  Miniature golf machine; 
g.  Miniature bowling machine; 
h.  Billiard table or pool game; or 
i.  Machine or device that dispenses merchandise or commodities or plays music in connection with or in addition to dispensing skill or pleasure. 
(2)  The term "skill or pleasure coin-operated machine" does not include a coin-operated machine designed exclusively for a child. 
(Code 2004, § 5.108.1) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.002.  
Sec. 8-149. - Scope and applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to coin-operated machines which are not operated for profit and located within private homes, or to coin-operated machines which are operated, not for profit, by religious, charitable or educational organizations authorized under state laws, or to coin-operated machines which are operated, not for profit, by schools, colleges or other institutions, provided that any such billiard table and/or coin-operated machine is restricted to residents of such private homes, members of such religious, charitable, or educational organizations, or institutions of learning, and their invited guests, and where the general public is excluded from such use. 
(Code 2004, § 5.108.10)  
Secs. 8-150—8-166. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 
 
Sec. 8-167. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate a coin-operated machine on commercial premises unless and until a license shall have been issued by the city for such operation. 
(b)  Licenses shall be issued by the city secretary only when the conditions of this article have been complied with and a certificate and approval of the chief of police appears on the application. 
(Code 2004, § 5.108.2)  
Sec. 8-168. - Term. 
(a)  All licenses issued under the terms of this division shall terminate on December 31 of each year. 
(b)  A license shall not be issued under the terms of this division unless and until the applicant shall present the city secretary with satisfactory proof that the applicant has paid a license fee to the city for each coin-operated machine in an amount equal to the occupation tax on a coin-operated machine a municipality may require, as determined by V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2153. 
(c)  Licenses issued under the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be deemed personal to the licensee and shall not be transferable from person to person or from place to place. 
(Code 2004, § 5.108.3)  
Sec. 8-169. - Application. 
Any person desiring a license to own or operate one or more billiard tables or coin-operated machines at any single location in the city shall file with the city secretary a written, sworn application for each license stating: 
(1)  The location by street and number of the place which is proposed to be used, and for what purpose such place is to be used, and the name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  If the applicant is an individual, that he has never been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  If the applicant is a corporation, firm, association of persons or partnership, the names and addresses of the principal officer, owners, operators, or partners; 
(4)  The number of billiard tables or coin-operated machines proposed to be owned or operated on the licensed premises, together with the floor plan of the building in which such tables or coin-operated machines are to be located, showing the location of each such table or coin-operated machine and the use of each room in the building; and 
(5)  Such application shall be accompanied by a license fee, as established from time to time and shown on the master fee schedule contained in appendix A of this Code, equal to one-quarter of the rate of occupation tax imposed by the state on a coin-operated machine under V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.401. 
(Code 2004, § 5.108.4)  
Sec. 8-170. - Issuance. 
All applications for licenses under the provisions of this division shall be on file at least ten days prior to the issuance of any such license in order to allow sufficient time for the chief of police to investigate the facts stated in the application, and ensure that the necessary elements are provided, including the required license fee. 
(Code 2004, § 5.108.5)  
Sec. 8-171. - Misrepresentation in application. 
(a)  The information required of applicants for licenses is for the purpose of determining the number and location of tables for determination of the required fee and to record the name of the operator, location and layout of licensed premises. 
(b)  Any misrepresentation of any such facts or any placement of tables other than as shown on the application, unless such application is later amended, shall justify revocation of the license by the city secretary. 
(Code 2004, § 5.108.6)  
Sec. 8-172. - Issuance and handling. 
(a)  No license shall be issued under the terms of this division unless and until the premises, place or business complies with all state laws and all Code provisions regarding health, sanitation, fire, building and zoning, including the issuance of a certificate of occupancy if required. 
(b)  The license provided for in this division shall state on its face to whom it is issued, date of issuance, expiration date, address and location of the business or premises, and number of billiard tables or coin-operated machines permitted on the licensed premises. 
(c)  Each license shall be signed and sealed by the city secretary and posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the premises licensed. 
(Code 2004, § 5.108.7)  
Sec. 8-173. - Revocation or refusal; appeal. 
(a)  A license may be refused or revoked by the city if the applicant or licensee fails to maintain all qualifications required for the license by this division or if the required fees or taxes are not timely and fully paid. A license issued under this division may be revoked by the city if it determines that the: 
(1)  Information required by this division has been misrepresented by the licensee; 
(2)  Licensee has violated any of the operating requirements of this article or any other Code provision; 
(3)  Licensee has attempted to transfer the license from place to place or from person to person; 
(4)  Licensee suffers or permits possession of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs on the premises, or use of the billiard tables or coin-operated machines for gambling. 
(b)  If any person applying for a license under this division is refused such license or, after such license is issued, if it is revoked, such refusal or revocation shall become final after the expiration of ten days from the date of such refusal or revocation, unless on or before the expiration of such ten days, the applicant or licensee shall file with the city secretary a written appeal addressed to the city council in which it is requested that the council grant a hearing on such refusal or revocation. Such appeal shall operate as a stay of the revocation. The city council shall conduct a public hearing within 30 days after the date of filing of such appeal and the action of the city council at such time shall be final and conclusive as to all parties. 
(Code 2004, § 5.108.9)  
Secs. 8-174—8-199. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OCCUPATION TAX 
 
Sec. 8-200. - Imposed. 
There is hereby imposed an annual occupation tax, payable in advance by December 31 of each calendar year, on any and all billiard tables and coin-operated machines situated in the city. 
(1)  The occupation tax shall be equal to one-quarter of the tax imposed by the state on a coin-operated machine that an owner exhibits or displays, or permits to be exhibited or displayed. 
(2)  The city may seal each billiard table or coin-operated machine if the tax imposed by this section is not paid, and there shall be a fee imposed as from time to time shall be established in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code for the release of a sealed billiard table or coin-operated machine. 
(Code 2004, § 5.108.11; Ord. No. 2000-14, 5-9-2000; Ord. No. 2004-43, 11-9-2004)  
Secs. 8-201—8-223. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 8-224. - Closing time. 
Premises licensed under the terms of this article shall not remain open between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. during weekdays and Saturdays, and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 12:00 noon on Sundays. 
(Code 2004, § 5.108.8)  
Secs. 8-225—8-241. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES 
 
Sec. 8-242. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than provided by section 1-3. Each instance of a violation of any provision of this article is a separate offense and each day that a person remains in violation shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2004, § 6.109.8; Ord. No. 87-16, 7-14-1987)  
Sec. 8-243. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to show or exhibit any carnival or circus within the city without first obtaining a license to do so from the city manager. Any person showing or exhibiting, or in any manner connected with or taking part in the showing or exhibiting of, a carnival or circus within the city limits without first applying for and obtaining such a license shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2004, § 6.109.1)  
Sec. 8-244. - Application. 
Any person desiring to conduct or show a carnival or circus within the city limits shall make application for a license to the city manager and file the same with the city secretary not less than two weeks prior to the time when it is desired to show or exhibit such carnival or circus. 
(1)  Such application shall give the name and permanent address of the owner of the carnival or circus and, if the carnival or circus is owned by company or corporation, the application shall show such fact and the name of the manager or other officer in charge of the carnival or circus. In any event, the application shall show the person in active charge and control of showing and exhibiting the carnival or circus. 
(2)  The application shall further name the local organization sponsoring the public event and the individual to be held responsible for any damages or unpaid service expenses or for clean up expenses. 
(Code 2004, § 6.109.2)  
Sec. 8-245. - Conditions. 
The following conditions apply to the application: 
(1)  The applicant shall provide an approved on-site uniformed security officer during city-approved operating hours. 
(2)  The applicant shall locate amusements in a city-approved site providing ample off-street parking and in city-approved zoned areas. 
(3)  The applicant shall provide refuse receptacles/containers or approved arrangements for site clean-up. 
(4)  Utility connections and use shall be in accordance with current city codes, regulations, and service fees. 
(5)  Public safety devices and city services, including street barricades, shall be provided according to current city service fees. 
(6)  The applicant shall provide proof or documentation of adequate liability insurance coverage from an approved insurance carrier for all known exposures in relation to the public activity. 
(7)  The city is not liable for any incidents or occurrences and shall be released from any lien and held harmless by the issuance of the license to operate. 
(Code 2004, § 6.109.3)  
Sec. 8-246. - Approval. 
After an application is filed under this article, the city manager may approve such license or refer the same to the city council for action. The city council may approve the application for a license if the council is convinced that the amusement is to be conducted in a decent, orderly, and safe manner. 
(Code 2004, § 6.109.4)  
Sec. 8-247. - License fee. 
As a condition and requirement of the licensing of any public amusement to show in the city, the applicant for such license shall pay a license fee as established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 2004, § 6.109.5; Ord. No. 2004-43, 11-9-2004)  
Sec. 8-248. - Term. 
A license issued under this article shall cover operations in the city and be valid only to the registered applicant for a period not to exceed four consecutive days. A new license shall be required each time the amusement returns to the city or operates beyond the permitted time period. 
(Code 2004, § 6.109.6)  
Sec. 8-249. - Inspection. 
The city and its appointed officials have the right to inspect any or all aspects of the amusement activity and close or halt its operation for any violation of this article. 
(Code 2004, § 6.109.7)  
Secs. 8-250—8-299. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - REGULATION OF GAME ROOMS AND AMUSEMENT REDEMPTION MACHINES 
 
Sec. 8-300. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement redemption machine means: 
(1)  A recreational machine that provides the user with an opportunity to receive something of value other than a right of replay and which complies with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations applicable to such machines. 
(2)  A skill or pleasure coin-operated machine that is designed, made and adapted solely for bona fide amusement purposes, and that by operation of chance or a combination of skill and chance affords the user an opportunity to receive exclusively non-cash merchandise prizes, toys, novelties, or a representation of value redeemable for those items. 
(3)  Any electronic, electromechanical or mechanical contrivance designed, made and adapted solely for bona fide amusement purposes if the contrivance rewards the player exclusively with non-cash merchandise, prizes, or novelties, or a representation of value redeemable for those items, that have a wholesale value available from a single play of the game or device of not more than ten times the amount charged to play the game or device once or $5.00, whichever amount is less. 
Amusement redemption machine game room or game room means any establishment, building, facility or other place where two or more amusement redemption machines, with the exception of excluded machines, are displayed or exhibited for public use. 
City official means a police officer, code enforcement officer or building official of the city. 
Excluded machines. An amusement redemption machine game room does not include: 
(1)  A machine that awards the user non-cash merchandise prizes, toys or novelties solely and directly from the machine, including claw, crane, or similar machines; nor 
(2)  A machine from which the opportunity to receive non-cash merchandise prizes, toys, or novelties, or a representation of value redeemable for those items, varies depending upon the user's ability to throw, roll, flip, toss, hit, or drop a ball or other physical object into the machine or a part thereof, including basketball, skeet ball, golf, bowling, pusher, or similar machines; nor 
(3)  A machine or any device defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 47.01 as a gambling device, or any activity prohibited or described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 47. 
Game room owner or owner means a person who has an ownership interest of at least 25 percent in a game room. 
Licensee means any person, individual, firm, company, association, or corporation operating an amusement redemption machine game room in the city. 
Operational machine means an amusement redemption machine that is ready to be played and which is accessible to the public. 
Permittee means any person, individual, firm, company, association, or corporation maintaining, displaying for public patronage, or otherwise keeping for operation the public any gaming machine in the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 8-301. - Permit required; license required. 
(a)  No person shall maintain, display for public patronage, or otherwise keep for operation by the public any amusement redemption machine without first obtaining a permit from the city issued under the terms and conditions of this article. No permit shall be issued until the occupation tax has been paid for each amusement redemption machine as required by this article. 
(b)  No person shall operate an amusement redemption machine game room in the city without first obtaining a license from the city, as required by this section. No license shall be issued until the occupation tax has been paid by the game room owner for each amusement redemption machine within the premises, and the applicable game room license fee has been paid by the game room owner. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 8-302. - Occupation tax levied. 
(a)  Every person who owns, controls, exhibits, displays, or permits to be exhibited or displayed in this city any amusement redemption machine shall pay, and there is hereby levied on every amusement redemption machine except such as are exempted in this article, an annual occupation tax per machine equal to 25 percent of the occupation tax charged and collected by the state, which occupation tax is specifically authorized by V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.451. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the operator of the amusement redemption machines from paying the tax levied in this section for the account of the owner, but the payment of the tax by the operator or other person shall not relieve the owner from the responsibility of complying with all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 8-303. - Payment of occupation tax; receipt to be attached to amusement redemption machine. 
(a)  The occupation tax levied by this article shall be paid to the city. The city shall issue a receipt reflecting payment of the occupation tax per machine. 
(b)  The receipt reflecting payment of the occupation tax shall be attached to the amusement redemption machine mentioned in the receipt and shall bear the serial number of the particular amusement redemption machine. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, exhibit, or display any amusement redemption machine in the city without having attached thereto an occupation tax receipt. It shall also be unlawful for any occupation tax receipt issued for a certain amusement redemption machine to be transferred to any other amusement redemption machine. 
(d)  The fee for issuing a replacement occupational tax receipt for one lost, destroyed or mutilated shall be 50 percent of the original occupation tax paid. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 8-304. - Payment of annual inspection and license fee; issuance of license. 
An owner, operator, or lessee of an amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to secure a license annually. An amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to secure a license by paying to the city an annual inspection and amusement redemption machine game room license fee in the amount identified in section 6-1 of appendix A, "master fee schedule," per machine kept within and about the licensed premises. Upon payment of the fee and compliance with all licensing requirements, the license shall be issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 8-305. - Term of license; jurisdiction; scope. 
A license issued for an amusement redemption machine game room under this article: 
(1)  Is an annual license which expires December 31 of each year unless it is suspended or cancelled earlier; 
(2)  Is effective for a single place of business only; 
(3)  Vests no property right in the licensee except to maintain, display for public patronage, and permit the use or skill or pleasure of amusement redemption machines in accordance with the terms and conditions of this article; 
(4)  Shall automatically expire if the licensee thereof sells the property or the business, transfers equity to accomplish same, or otherwise disposes of amusement redemption machines; and 
(5)  Is not assignable or transferable. 
In addition, the city shall not refund any portion of a license fee after the license is issued, nor shall it prorate or reduce in amount any fee due to the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the initial license issued to an existing amusement redemption machine game room following the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived and the game room's compliance with the requirements of this article shall not expire until December 31, 2014. Thereafter, any such license shall expire as provided herein-above. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 8-306. - Restrictions, regulations, controls, and limitations. 
(a)  All building and fire code standards must be met. Inspection by building officials and the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be obtained before a license for an amusement redemption machine game room is issued. 
(b)  Amusement redemption machine game rooms shall be permitted only in the light industrial (I-1) district upon the granting of a specific use permit (SUP). Notwithstanding the foregoing, those amusement redemption machine game rooms that were issued a specific use permit on or before November 9, 2010, may be issued a license under the provisions of this article for so long as such game room retains its nonconforming use rights under the chapter 77 and the game room is continuously licensed, and which license remains in full force and effect and is not revoked pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Only one amusement redemption machine game room shall be permitted on any lot or in any single building, structure or strip center. 
(d)  No amusement redemption machine game room shall be situated within 1,000 feet of any church, school, daycare, hospital or any other amusement redemption machine game room. The distance shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening objects or structures and from the nearest lot line of the amusement redemption machine game room seeking a license to the nearest lot line of the church, school, daycare, hospital or any other amusement redemption machine game room. 
(e)  No alcoholic beverages shall be served or allowed on the licensed premises. No amusement redemption machines or related business activities shall be allowed to be situated and/or performed outdoors. 
(f)  The hours of operation for an amusement redemption machine game rooms shall be limited to the following hours: 
(1)  Monday through Thursday, open at 8:30 a.m. and close at 11:00 p.m.; and 
(2)  Friday through Sunday, open at 8:30 a.m. and close at 12:00 a.m. 
(g)  One parking space shall be provided for each two amusement redemption machines within the amusement redemption machine game room, plus one additional parking space for each employee per shift. 
(h)  The owner, operator, or manager of the licensed premises must be present to supervise the operation of the amusement redemption machine game room. The amusement redemption machine game room shall not be left unattended. 
(i)  Amusement redemption machines must be situated within the licensed premises as to be in full and open public view, which entails being visible to all patrons of the establishment. 
(j)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted inside the building, structure, facility or space housing the amusement redemption machine game room. 
(k)  A sign stating that no one under the age of 18 is allowed inside the amusement redemption machine game room building shall be posted in plain sight immediately inside the entrance stating that: 
"No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted inside the building, structure, facility or space housing the amusement redemption machine game room." 
(l)  An amusement redemption machine game room operator must be a person who is at least 18 years of age. 
(m)  The total number of amusement redemption machine allowed in one amusement redemption machine game room establishment shall be limited to the maximum number approved in conjunction with a specific use permit or 50 amusement redemption machine games, whichever number is greater. Any back-up or replacement amusement redemption machine games shall be secured in a locked storage area or closet to which the public is not allowed to enter and such machines shall not be connected to electricity or otherwise operational. The occupation tax on such back-up or replacement amusement redemption machine games shall be paid annually regardless of whether such machines are used by the game room's patrons. 
(n)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed or have the effect to license, permit, authorize or legalize any machine, device, table, or gaming machine, the keeping, exhibition, operation, display or maintenance of which is illegal or in violation of any ordinance of the city, any section of the penal code of this state, or the constitution of this state. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 8-307. - Application for amusement redemption machine game room license. 
An applicant for a license under the provisions of this article shall file with the city secretary a written application on a form provided for that purpose by the city which shall be signed by the applicant, who shall be the owner of the amusement redemption machine game room sought to be licensed. A separate application must be filed for each location sought to be licensed. The following information is required in the application: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone number, and driver's license number of the applicant if the applicant is a natural person; 
(2)  Name, address, telephone number and driver's license number of all persons who own 25 percent or more interest in the amusement redemption machine game room; 
(3)  Name, address, telephone number and driver's license number of all corporate officers, if any, of the such business; 
(4)  Name, address, telephone number of the business; 
(5)  If incorporated, the name of the business registered with the Texas Secretary of State; 
(6)  If a partnership, the name, address, telephone number and driver's license of each of the general and limited partners; 
(7)  The trade name by which the applicant does business and a true and correct copy of the registration of the applicant's assumed name filed in the office of the county clerk, bearing the file mark or stamp that evidences its filing in that office; 
(8)  The street address of the premises; 
(9)  If applicant is not the owner of the premises, the applicant shall furnish the name, address, and telephone number of the property owner; 
(10)  Name, address, and telephone number of the operator of the premises to be permitted; 
(11)  Number of amusement redemption machines in the premises to be permitted and the serial number of each amusement redemption machine; 
(12)  Whether a previous license of the applicant, or, if applicable, a corporate officer of the applicant, has been revoked within two years of filing of the application; 
(13)  The previous occupation(s) of the applicant and, if applicable, all corporate officers and partners of the applicant within the preceding five years; 
(14)  A notarized statement, under oath, that: 
a.  All the facts contained in the application are true and correct; 
b.  The amusement redemption machines are not and will not be used as gambling devices; 
c.  The location and operation of the amusement redemption machine game room will not violate any applicable deed restrictions; 
d.  The amusement redemption machine game room will be operated in accordance with all laws; 
(15)  Name, address, and telephone number of an emergency contact person who can be reached after hours; 
(16)  A floor plan of the amusement redemption machine game room interior depicting the layout of the amusement redemption machine game room interior specifically including, but not limited to, the location of all amusement redemption machines, coin-operated machines or devices, the manager's station(s), restroom facilities, kitchen and bar facilities, if any, and all areas to which patrons will not be permitted; and 
(17)  Any other plans that may be required by this Code. 
Any failure to provide the documents required by this section shall be grounds for denial of the application to which it applies. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 8-308. - Renewal of amusement redemption machine game room license. 
(a)  A license may be renewed for the following calendar year beginning October 1 of each year by filing a completed application for each license and paying the applicable fee set forth in this article. A renewal application shall be subject to the same requirements in this section for a license application. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of a license, the licensee shall be required to obtain a renewal of the expired license if the licensee wishes to continue operating an amusement redemption machine game room. Failure to obtain the renewal within 30 days after expiration will require such person to pay an additional late fee in an amount equal to 20 percent of the fee actually due or 20 percent of the previous year's fee, whichever amount is greater, in order to obtain reinstatement of his license. Nothing herein authorizes the licensee to operate after the expiration of a license and before a renewal is effective 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 8-309. - Grounds for denial of license; applicants or licensees indebted to city. 
(a)  The city shall refuse to approve issuance or renewal of a permit for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Any failure to provide the information required by this article; 
(2)  A determination by the city that inaccurate, erroneous or incomplete information has been submitted; 
(3)  A false statement as to a material matter made in an application for a license; 
(4)  Revocation of a license, pursuant to this article, of the applicant or a co-owner or a corporate officer of the applicant within two years preceding the filing of the application; 
(5)  Refusal or failure to pay the occupation tax on any amusement redemption machine; 
(6)  Refusal or failure to pay the correct license fee amount; 
(7)  The applicant or a co-owner for such license has, within the past three years, been convicted of any violation of this article; and/or 
(8)  The applicant or a co-owner for such license has, within the past ten years, been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(b)  The city shall not issue or renew a license under this article and shall suspend or cancel a license if it be determined that the applicant or licensee is indebted to the city for any fee, costs, penalties, or delinquent taxes. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 8-310. - Suspension or revocation of license for violation of article. 
(a)  Power and authority. If any individual, company, corporation or association who owns, operates, exhibits, or displays any amusement redemption machine(s) in an amusement redemption machine game room in this city shall violate any provision of this article, the city shall have the power and authority to suspend or revoke the license(s) issued hereunder to any of the foregoing by giving written notice, stating the reason justifying such suspension or revocation, and the same shall be suspended or revoked ten days from date of such notice. 
(b)  Suspension. The city manager or his designee shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Refused to allow or interfered with an inspection of the amusement redemption machine game room premises; or 
(3)  Demonstrated an inability to operate or manage an amusement redemption machine game room in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(c)  Revocation for continuing violations. The city manager or his designee shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension occurs and the license has been previously suspended within the preceding twelve months. 
(d)  Automatic revocation. The city manager or his designee shall revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the city during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an employee of a licensee knowingly allowed the possession, use, or sale of a controlled substance on the premises; or 
(3)  A licensee or an employee of a licensee knowingly operated the amusement redemption machine game room during a period of time when the licensee's permit was suspended. 
(e)  Effect of revocation. No license shall be issued within a period of one-year to anyone whose license has been revoked, except at the discretion of the city council. If the license of an individual, company, corporation, or association owning, operating, or displaying amusement redemption machines in this city is cancelled, such individual, company, corporation or association shall not operate, display or permit to be operated or displayed such amusement redemption machines in any amusement redemption machine game room until a new license is granted. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 8-311. - Appeal from denial, suspension or revocation of license. 
If the city refuses to approve the issuance of a license or the renewal of a license to an applicant, or suspends or revokes a license issued under this article, this action is final unless the applicant or licensee, within ten days after the receipt of written notice of the action, files a written appeal with the judge of the municipal court, who shall, within ten days after the appeal is filed, consider all the evidence in support of or against the action appealed, and render a decision, either sustaining or reversing the action. If the judge of the municipal court sustains the action of the city, the applicant or licensee may, within ten days of that decision, file a written appeal with the city secretary to the city council setting forth specific grounds for the appeal. Similarly, if the judge of the municipal court overturns the action of the city manager or his designee, the city manager may, within ten days of that decision, file a written appeal with the city secretary to the city council setting forth specific grounds for the appeal. The city council shall, within 30 days, grant a hearing to consider the action. The city council has authority to sustain, reverse, or modify the action appealed. The decision of the city council is final. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 8-312. - Display of license. 
A license issued under this article for an amusement redemption machine game room shall be displayed at or near the entrance of the business premises, and such display shall be permanent and conspicuous. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 8-313. - Replacement license. 
A replacement license may be issued for one lost, destroyed, or mutilated, upon application on a form provided by the city. A replacement license shall have the word "REPLACEMENT" stamped across its face and shall bear the same number as the one it replaces. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 8-314. - Inspections. 
(a)  The premises in which such amusement redemption machines are located shall conform to all building codes and fire prevention codes of the city and the fire marshal of the city and his assistants and the chief building official may enter into the premises where such amusement redemption machines are located at any time during normal business hours for the purposes of inspecting said premises for fire hazards. 
(b)  All law enforcement personnel of the city shall have the right to enter into said premises at any time during normal business hours for the purpose of enforcement of the terms of this article. 
(c)  The city shall have the authority to seal any coin-operated machine located in any amusement redemption machine game room for which the occupation tax has not been paid. A fee in the amount identified in section 6-1 of appendix A, "master fee schedule," will be charged for the release of any machine sealed for non-payment of said occupation tax. 
(d)  The city shall have the authority to seal any coin-operated machine located in any amusement redemption machine game room for which a license fee has not been paid. A fee in the amount identified in section 6-1 of appendix A, "master fee schedule," will be charged for the release of any machine sealed for non-payment of said license fee. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 8-315. - Responsibility of licensee. 
A licensee hereunder shall not permit any of the following activities within the licensed premises: 
(1)  The sale, purchase, possession or consumption of any alcoholic beverages as the same is defined by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code; 
(2)  The operation of any amusement redemption machine by a person younger than 18 years of age; 
(3)  Gambling by any person; 
(4)  The possession of gambling materials; and 
(5)  Unlawful or criminal activity of any kind. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 8-316. - Parking facilities. 
Any person who desires a license for the operation of two or more amusement redemption machines in one specific location shall be required to provide sufficient off-street parking to accommodate the vehicles of the patrons as provided herein. Such parking area shall be maintained in a safe, clean manner and shall not interfere with safe and expeditious movement of other vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 8-317. - Violations of existing laws not authorized. 
Nothing herein shall be construed or have the effect to license, permit, authorize or legalize any machine, device, table, or gaming machine, the keeping, exhibition, operation, display or maintenance of which is illegal or in violation of any ordinance of the city, any section of the penal code of this state, or the constitution of this state. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Chapter 11 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local Public Health Reorganization Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 121.001 et seq.; treatment of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq.; dangerous dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.001 et seq.; Rabies Control Act of 1981, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq.; animal health, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 801.001 et seq.; cruelty to livestock animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.09; livestock, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 141.001 et seq.; registration of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.031; protection of birds, nests, and eggs, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 64.002 et seq.; vaccination of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.021; restraint of dogs and cats; impoundment, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033; quarantine of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.042 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words used herein shall be interpreted to read as follows and any words not herein defined shall be construed in the context used and by ordinary interpretation, and not as a word of art: 
Abandon means to dump, desert, or leave any animal on public or private property with the intent of terminating any further responsibility for said animal or by failing to provide adequate care or adequate shelter for a period of 24 hours or more; and shall also mean refusing to claim or failing to timely redeem any animal impounded or quarantined by the city, as specified herein. 
Adequate/proper shelter means a shelter for an animal that shall effectively protect the animal from any form of cold, overheating, inclement weather and direct effects of wind, rain, snow, ice or the sun. By way of example, and not limitation, a shelter may consist of a three-sided structure, with a roof. The shelter shall provide shade during hot weather months with provisions for cooling the animal when temperatures exceed 90 degrees Fahrenheit. During months when temperatures fall to 50 degrees Fahrenheit or lower, auxiliary heat or clean, dry bedding material shall be provided for the animal to provide insulation against the cold. 
Adoption of a dog or cat means the release of the animal from the care, custody, control or ownership of the animal shelter to a person who agrees to assume ownership responsibilities for the care of that animal as defined in this chapter. 
Aggressive animal means any animal which, when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon any public or private property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack such that a reasonable person would believe the animal would cause physical injury to the person. 
Altered animal means any animal, male or female, whose reproductive organs have been surgically removed. 
Animal means any living creature classified as a member of the animal kingdom including, but not limited to, birds, fish, fowl, mammals and reptiles, but specifically excluding human beings. 
Animal control officer means the person or person designated by the city to represent and act for the city in the impoundment of animals, controlling of stray animals and as otherwise required in this chapter. 
Animal shelter means a facility operated, controlled or contracted with the city, or its designated contractor, for the purpose of impounding, confining, safekeeping, controlling or caring for animals held under, and consistent with the authority of this chapter, or an establishment designated or contracted by the city for the keeping of said animals. 
Assistance animal means an animal that is specially trained or equipped to help a person with a disability and that: 
(1)  Is used by a person with a disability who has satisfactorily completed a specific course of training in the use of the animal; and 
(2)  Has been trained by an organization generally recognized by agencies involved in the rehabilitation of persons with disabilities as reputable and competent to provide animals with training of this type. 
At large means any animal which is not under restraint. 
Bee means any stage of the common domestic honeybee (Apis mellifera). 
Bodily injury means physical pain, illness or any impairment of physical condition. 
Cat means a domesticated animal that is a member of the feline family (Felis domesticus). This term specifically excludes a lion, tiger, bobcat, jaguar, panther, leopard, cougar, any other prohibited animal or any hybrid of a prohibited animal and a domesticated animal. 
Cruel or inhumane treatment means beating or torturing an animal, abandoning, cruelly confining or transporting, seriously over loading, seriously over working, or abusing an animal. 
Dangerous animal means an animal, other than a dog, that: 
(1)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a person or other animal that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(2)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the animal will attack and cause bodily injury to that person. 
Dangerous dog means a dog that: 
(1)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a person or other animal that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(2)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person. 
Direct physical control means the animal is within the owner's observation and in such close proximity as to permit the owner reasonable opportunity to control the animal, should it become necessary to do so in order to protect the animal, a human or another animal from harm. 
Dog means a domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family (Canis familaris). This term shall not include a wolf, jackal, fox, dingo, coyote, other prohibited animal or any hybrid of a prohibited animal and a domesticated animal. 
Domestic animal means any normal household pets, such as but not limited to dogs, cats, cockatiels, ferrets, hamsters, guinea pigs, gerbils, rabbits, fish or small, nonpoisonous reptiles or nonpoisonous snakes. 
Foster care animal means any animal under the control of a recognized member of a local humane organization which is to be held for a period of time not to exceed 90 days. 
Fowl means a bird of any kind, including, but not limited to, chickens, ducks, geese, guineas, pigeons, roosters, turkeys and pheasants. 
Guard dog means a dog that received training for the purpose of protecting property or persons, which is used by law enforcement, private security, or in protective functions where the dog is responsive to control by its owner or handler and used only for protective functions, irrespective of its status as a personal pet of its owner or handler. 
Harbor means the act of keeping and caring for an animal or providing premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care for a period of three consecutive days. 
Impound means to take an animal into custody by the city; impoundment shall begin at the time any animal control officer or police officer takes control of an animal either by hand, rope, trap, projectile or confinement to a vehicle. 
Inhumane treatment of animals means any treatment of an animal prohibited by V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.09, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 821, 822 or 826, as amended, or by any other provision of law including federal, state and local laws, ordinances or rules. 
Kennel means any business or establishment other than a veterinary hospital, whether operated separately or in connection with another business or establishment, that keeps, boards and/or trains dogs and/or cats for profit. Kennels must be established, maintained and operated in compliance with all applicable zoning and land use regulations of the city. 
Livestock means any horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep, swine, ostriches, emus or rheas. Small livestock shall include but not be limited to all types of domesticated swine, sheep and goats. Large livestock shall include but not be limited to horses and any member of the domesticated horse family, including but not limited to mules, donkeys, ponies; all types and varieties of cattle; ostriches, emus and rheas. 
Local rabies control authority (LRCA) means the officer designated by the city under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.017, or his or her designee. 
Owner means any person, partnership, corporation or association that harbors, shelters, keeps, controls, manages, possesses, has custody or has whole or part interest in any animal. The occupant, owner or head of a household of any premises where an animal remains for 72 hours or more shall be presumed to be the owner of such animal for the purpose of this chapter. 
Person means a natural individual, firm, corporation or other legal entity. 
Pet means any animal normally kept for pleasure rather than utility, excluding livestock. 
Pet store means any business or establishment other than a veterinary hospital, whether operated separately or in connection with another business or establishment that buys and sells dogs, cats, and/or other species of pets for profit. Pet stores or shops must be established, maintained and operated in compliance with all applicable zoning and land use regulations of the city. 
Possession means actual care, custody, control, or management of a certain animal. 
Premises means a parcel of land of one or more continuous lots owned, leased or controlled by one or more persons. 
Prohibited animal means any animal not normally born and raised in captivity, or any hybrid of an animal listed in this definition, regardless of the percentage of the hybrid mix, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Class Reptilia: Family Helodermatidae (venomous lizards) and Family Hydrophiidae (Venomous Marine snakes); Family Viperidae (rattlesnakes, pit vipers and true vipers); Family Elapidae (coral snakes, cobras, and mambas); Family Columbridae-Dispholidus Typus (boomslang); Bioga Dendrophilia (mangrove snake) and Kirklandii (twig snake only); Order Crocodilia (such as crocodiles and alligators); 
(2)  Class Aves: Order Falconiforms (such as hawks, eagles, falcons and vultures); 
(3)  Class Mammalia: Order Carnivores: 
a.  Family Felidea (such as lions, tigers, bobcats, jaguars, leopards and cougars), except commonly domesticated cats; 
b.  Family Canidae (such as wolves, dingos, coyotes, foxes and jackals), and any hybrid of an animal listed in this section except commonly domesticated dogs; 
c.  Family Mustelida (such as weasels, skunks, martins, minks, badgers and otters) except ferrets; 
d.  Family Procyonidae (such as raccoons and coati); 
e.  Family Ursidae (such as bears); 
f.  Marsupialia (such as kangaroos, opossums, koala bears, wallabies, bandicoots, and wombats); 
g.  Chiroperta (bats); 
h.  Edentata (such as sloths, anteaters, and armadillo); 
i.  Probosidea (elephants); 
j.  Primata (such as monkeys, chimpanzees, orangutans, and gorillas); 
k.  Rodentia (such as beavers and porcupines); and 
l.  Ungulata (such as antelope, deer, bison and camels); 
(4)  Class Amphibi: poisonous frogs; 
(5)  Any species of animal illegal to own under federal, state or local law. 
Public auction means any place or facility where animals are sold to the highest bidder. This definition does not apply to individual sales of animals by private owners to other private owners. 
Restraint. If the following conditions exist, an animal is restrained: 
(1)  The animal is securely enclosed or confined to its owner's yard by a physical fence in a manner that will isolate the animal from the public and from other animals except for animals owned or under the control of the owner; 
(2)  The animal is accompanied by its owner or trainer at a bona fide dog show, field trial or exhibition; 
(3)  The animal is secured by a leash of at least five feet and not more than ten feet in length and of sufficient strength to control the animal while the animal is being walked; 
(4)  The animal is a specially trained dog that is used by a blind or deaf individual to aid him/her within the city; 
(5)  The animal is a guard dog in the performance of the animal's duty in an enclosed building or securely fenced and locked area which is marked on all sides with signs in four-inch letters stating "guard dog" and clearly visible to the public; or 
(6)  The dog is in a place of public assembly and is effectively and securely muzzled in order to prevent the dog from biting. 
Secure enclosure means a fence or structure of at least six feet in height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine a dangerous animal in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner. Such enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animals from escaping from the enclosure. The enclosure shall be posted with signs on all sides in four-inch letters warning of the presence of a dangerous animal and shall include a symbol of a dangerous animal understandable by young children. 
Senior citizen means any person 65 years of age or older. 
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. An injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping and tearing of muscle that would cause a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical treatment, satisfies this definition. 
Stray means an animal that is improperly restrained and that wanders upon a public place, roadway, street, highway, or the property of another person. 
Unaltered animal means any animal, male or female, whose reproductive organs are intact and functional. 
Unprovoked attack by a dog means an incident in which a dog which attacked a human being or an animal was not hit, kicked, or struck by a human being with any object or part of a human being's body, nor was any part of the dog's body pulled, pinched, or squeezed by a human being, nor was the dog taunted or teased by any human being, nor was the human being in the dog's territory on the property of the dog's owner at the time of the attack. 
Vaccination means the inoculation of an animal with a rabies vaccine or other medicine that is accepted by the United States Department of Agriculture for use in that species, and which is administered by a veterinarian, licensed in the state, for the purpose of immunizing the animal against rabies or other diseases. 
Veterinarian means a veterinarian, licensed by the state. 
Veterinary hospital or clinic means any establishment that is maintained and operated by a veterinarian, licensed in the state, for the diagnosis, treatment or surgery of injuries and diseases to animals. 
Zoonotic disease means an illness which is of animal origin and usually causes illness to other animals but which can be transmitted to, and cause illness in humans. 
(b)  To the extent not otherwise defined herein, reference may be made, for purposes of clarifying definitions, to state law and/or generally accepted industry publications.  
Sec. 11-2. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this chapter: 
(1)  To provide regulations by which the transmission of rabies to human beings and domestic animals can be prevented and controlled in the city; 
(2)  To decrease the number of unwanted and stray dogs and cats in the city; 
(3)  To encourage responsible animal ownership; and 
(4)  To protect the public health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to authorize the keeping of any animal in violation of any other city ordinance, state or federal statute or law.  
Sec. 11-3. - Incorporation by reference. 
Any reference made in this chapter to any other law, statute, code, ordinance, rule or regulation is intended to incorporate such material as it presently exists and also any future amendments, changes, revisions, repeals or recodifications of such material, unless otherwise expressly provided.  
Sec. 11-4. - Parental responsibility. 
(a)  If an animal is owned or purported to be owned by an individual who is younger than 17 years of age, responsibility and liability for compliance with this chapter with respect to such an animal shall be imposed on the parent, legal guardian, or other person who has the duty of control and reasonable discipline of the minor individual, regardless of whether the parent, legal guardian, or other person otherwise meets the definition of "owner" with respect to the animal at issue. 
(b)  Financial liability imposed under subsection (a) of this section shall not exceed limits imposed by state law. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to imposition of responsibility and liability under subsection (a) of this section that the parent, legal guardian, or other person establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that he or she made a reasonable good faith effort to ensure compliance with this chapter.  
Secs. 11-5—11-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER 
 
Sec. 11-21. - Position established; qualifications; powers and enforcement. 
(a)  Continuation of office. The office of animal control of the city, a division of the city police department, heretofore created by the city, is hereby established and continued in effect. 
(b)  Appointment. The animal control officer shall be hired by and under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(c)  Qualifications. The animal control officer shall possess all the qualifications prescribed by the chief of police. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The animal control officer shall perform all of the duties required of him/her by this chapter, regulations adopted by the city council and all action necessary for the effective enforcement of the animal control ordinances. 
(e)  Enforcement. The animal control officer shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this chapter.  
Sec. 11-22. - Authority to carry tranquilizer guns. 
When acting in the course and scope of employment, an animal control officer shall be and is hereby authorized to carry on the officer's person or in city vehicles, loaded tranquilizer guns approved by the chief of police and not in violation of any provision of the Texas Penal Code or any other applicable state law.  
Sec. 11-23. - Filing of complaints. 
Any citizen, firm or corporation believing any provision of this chapter to have been violated may file a written complaint with the animal control officer of the city. It shall then be the duty of the animal control officer to investigate said complaint and act as necessary on the results of that investigation.  
Sec. 11-24. - Failure to provide identification; notice of citation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person upon being issued a citation to intentionally or knowingly give the animal control officer other than his true name and address. For purposes of this section, a person shall be in violation upon failure to provide the requisite identification information upon a request for identification being issued by a person who identifies themselves as an animal control officer. 
(b)  If the person being cited is not present, the animal control officer may send the citation to the alleged offender by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested. If said citation should come back unclaimed, the citation shall be sent regular mail. If the regular mailing does not come back unclaimed or undeliverable, then service shall be deemed completed.  
Sec. 11-25. - Interference with impounding officers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, or attempt to prevent, an animal control officer from capturing or impounding any animal which may be legally impounded or otherwise interfering with the animal control officer while carrying out his or her lawful duties.  
Sec. 11-26. - Exemption of city officials from liability. 
All of the regulations provided in this chapter and the functions and duties of all officers, agents, servants or employees of the city in the enforcement of this chapter are declared to be governmental and for the benefit, health and welfare of the general public. Any city official or employee charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting for the city in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable by the performance of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties.  
Sec. 11-27. - Inspection of animals and premises. 
The animal control officer shall have the authority to inspect animals and/or premises. For purposes of discharging the duties imposed by the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws, an animal control officer may enter upon private property to the full extent permitted by law.  
Sec. 11-28. - Authority to kill, impound, or destroy animals. 
The animal control officer shall have authority to do the following: 
(1)  Kill an animal which poses an imminent danger to a person or property and a real or apparent necessity exists for the destruction of the animal; 
(2)  Impound an animal which is diseased and endangers the health and welfare of another animal or person; 
(3)  Destroy an impounded animal if the animal control officer determines that recovery of the animal is doubtful due to injury or disease; 
(4)  Destroy an animal which, after being deemed dangerous according to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 822.041—822.047, as amended or superseded; and 
(5)  Impound any animal running at large.  
Secs. 11-29—11-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL NUISANCES 
 
Sec. 11-40. - Public nuisances. 
(a)  Whatever the city health officer or animal control officer determines to be dangerous to human life or health, or that is offensive to the senses, or that is or threatens to become detrimental to the public health, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be unlawful, and the specific acts, conditions and things set forth in this chapter are, among others, declared to be nuisances and prohibited and made unlawful. 
(b)  It shall be a nuisance and a violation of this chapter for any person to permit, cause or allow an animal, whether by action or inaction, within his/her possession to engage in conduct which establishes such animal as a dangerous animal or dangerous dog. 
(c)  Any animal normally found in the wild that has entered onto any public or private property and by its presence is committing a threat to public health and safety or is generally interrupting the tranquility of the location is a nuisance and a violation of this chapter.  
Sec. 11-41. - Maximum number of animals. 
(a)  The keeping of more than the maximum number of animals permitted by this chapter shall be a public nuisance. 
(b)  In no event shall the aggregate number of domestic animals exceed a total of four 4. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor more than four dogs and four cats in the aggregate six months of age or older on any premises.  
Sec. 11-42. - Animals creating disturbances. 
The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long-continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity is declared a nuisance in violation of this section. An audible noise from an animal or bird, in excess of 15 minutes, even if in sporadic bursts, shall be prima facie evidence that the same constitutes a nuisance. A person shall be deemed to have willfully and knowingly violated terms of this subsection if such person shall have been notified by the animal control officer or any police officer of such disturbance and shall have failed or refused to correct such disturbance and prevent its recurrence.  
Sec. 11-43. - Sanitary standards. 
(a)  The owner of any animal allowed by this chapter to be kept in the city shall comply with the following standards of sanitation for that animal: 
(1)  Place food only in impervious containers or on impervious surfaces; and 
(2)  Equip watering troughs or tanks with adequate facilities for draining the overflow. 
(b)  Odors or unclean conditions prohibited. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal or fowl to be kept in a manner or under conditions which creates foul odors, unsanitary conditions, an unreasonable presence of vermin or their offspring, or other harmful or offensive conditions which can be attributed to the presence of the animal, or to its physical or environmental conditions, including but not limited to the accumulation of animal excreta. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to produce odors or unclean conditions sufficient to create a public nuisance.  
Sec. 11-44. - Disposal of excrement: defecation of animals on public and/or private property. 
(a)  An owner, harborer or other person in possession of an animal commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows the animal to defecate in the city on private or public property; and 
(2)  Fails to promptly remove and dispose of any excreta the animal deposits. 
(b)  An owner, harborer, or other person in possession of an animal commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Knowingly permits the animal to enter or be present on public or private property located within the city; and 
(2)  Fails to have in his possession materials or implements that can be used to immediately and in a sanitary manner both remove and dispose of any excreta the animal may deposit on the property. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section if: 
(1)  The property was owned, leased or controlled by the owner, harborer, or person in possession of the animal; 
(2)  The animal was a dog specially trained to assist a person with a disability and was in the possession of that disabled person at the time it defecated on the property; 
(3)  The owner or person in control of the property had given prior consent for the animal to defecate on the property; or 
(4)  The animal is a police canine being used in official law enforcement activities.  
Sec. 11-45. - Animals at large or running at large. 
(a)  Trespass. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any animal in any area which constitutes a nuisance by reason of: repeated trespasses on public property or private property; attacks on other animals; or damage to public or private property. It shall be unlawful for the owner, harborer or person in possession of any animal to leave the animal unrestrained by a leash and unattended in any manner that allows the animal to enter the private property of another without the effective consent of the owner. 
(b)  At large. All animals shall be confined at all times. This means that any animal including, but not limited to a guard dog and a muzzled dog, must be restrained at all times in a securely fenced yard, in an enclosed pen or structure, or by a hand-held leash then in the hand of a person. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, harborer, or person in possession of any animal to: 
(1)  Fail to prevent their animal from being at large within the city limits; 
(2)  Allow their animal to run free in any city park(s); 
(3)  Fail to prevent their animal from chasing vehicles or attacking or interfering with other animals or persons on public property; and 
(4)  Leave the animal unattended in a public place regardless of whether or not the animal is restrained by a leash, chain or muzzle. 
(c)  Impound. The animal control officer is authorized to impound any animal in violation of this section. Such impounded animal shall be held for a period of three days and at the end of this time, if the animal has not been claimed and the proper fee paid as prescribed in article IV, division 3 (section 11-90 et seq.), the animal shall be adopted or disposed of. 
(d)  Public safety. This section does not apply to police canines. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-0509-001, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
Sec. 11-46. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violation; penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined as provided in this Code, unless specific provision for a penalty, is provided herein. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues to occur. 
(b)  Mental state. Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, or in state law as adopted, allegation and evidence of culpable mental state are not required for the proof of an offense defined by this chapter.  
Sec. 11-47. - Noncomplying premises; remedies. 
Where premises do not comply with the provisions of this chapter or if any health ordinance or law is not observed, the animal control officer may, upon written notice to the person owning or controlling the premises, order the correction of the objectionable conditions. In addition to any criminal proceeding, failure to comply with such order shall entitle the city to obtain relief by injunction.  
Secs. 11-48—11-54. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CARE OF ANIMALS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 11-55. - General provisions regarding care. 
(a)  Confinement of animals by individuals. If a stray animal is found upon the premises of another, the occupant of the premises may confine the animal only for so long as reasonably necessary to notify the animal control officer and have the animal impounded. In attempting to confine the animal, the occupant shall not use any force that is intended or known by the occupant to cause, or in the manner of its use is capable of causing, death or injury to the animal. 
(b)  Inspection of premises where animals are kept. Premises where livestock, fowl or pets are kept or maintained shall be subject to inspection, upon receiving a complaint, by the animal control officer at any reasonable hour of the day while in the presence of the owner. 
(c)  Care of animals. Animals shall be provided humane care, treated and transported in a humane manner and not in violation of V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.09, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code title 10, as amended, or any other provision of law, including federal, state and local laws, ordinances and rules.  
Sec. 11-56. - Prohibited actions against animals. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if: 
(1)  A person fails to provide an animal under his or her care, custody, control and/or ownership with adequate wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from inclement weather, and veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; 
(2)  A person having charge or care, custody or control of an animal places or confines such animal, or allows such animal to be placed or confined, in a motor vehicle, trailer or other enclosure under such conditions, or for such a period of time, as to endanger the health of the animal due to heat, lack of food or water, or such other circumstances as may cause injury or death to the animal. It is presumed that an animal's health, safety, or welfare is endangered when the animal is confined in a parked or standing vehicle for a period of five or more minutes when the ambient outside air temperature measures above 85 degrees Fahrenheit or below 35 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(3)  A person treats an animal in an inhumane or cruel manner as defined by V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.09, as amended, or V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 821, as amended; 
(4)  A person knowingly owns, harbors, trains, sells or offers for sale any animal which is to be used for the purpose of fighting; or to be trained, tormented, badgered or baited for the purpose of causing or encouraging said animal to attack human beings or animals when not provoked, except that this section shall not apply to guard dogs; 
(5)  A person mutilates any animal, whether such animal is dead or alive. This subsection (a)(5) does not apply to medical or veterinary medical research, medical or veterinary medical autopsies, or biology class use of animals for educational purposes; 
(6)  A person causes an animal to fight another animal or person; 
(7)  A person other than a licensed veterinarian docks an animal's tail, or crops an animal's ears, or castrates an animal; provided, however, this section shall not apply to normal livestock operations occurring within the city; 
(8)  A person dyes or colors chicks, ducks, rabbits, reptiles or birds; 
(9)  A person transporting an animal fails to effectively restrain an animal so as to prevent the animal from leaving or being accidentally thrown from a vehicle during normal operation of the vehicle; or fails to effectively restrain an animal so as to prevent infliction of bodily harm to passersby. Provided, however, the provisions herein shall not prohibit a person from transporting an effectively confined or tethered dogs in the open bed of a pickup truck; 
(10)  A person is in control of a motor vehicle which strikes a domestic animal or livestock within the corporate limits of the city and fails to report the accident to the animal control officer as soon as practical; 
(11)  A person abandons any animal, including the abandonment of an impounded animal at the animal shelter with the intent to readopt the animal to avoid impoundment fees; 
(12)  A person ties or tethers a dog in a manner that prevents the animal from access to adequate shelter, food and water; 
(13)  A person ties or tethers a dog in such a manner that the animal could become entangled or injured; 
(14)  A person cruelly confines an animal in a manner that prevents the animal from being able to stand to their full height, stretch out, turn around and lie down and make normal postural adjustments comfortably for a period of 24 hours or more; 
(15)  A person confines an animal in such a way that the animal is forced to stand and or lay within its own feces, standing water or other unsanitary conditions; 
(16)  A person exhibits any stud horse or bull or other animal indecently or lets any male animal to any female animal unless done in a wholly enclosed location out of the public view; 
(17)  It shall be unlawful for a person to sell or deliver live chickens, ducklings, goslings or rabbits less than eight weeks of age to any person in quantities of less than five; 
(18)  It shall be unlawful for a person to give away any live animal as a prize or inducement for the purpose of attracting trade or business; 
(19)  It shall be unlawful for any person to beat, starve, overwork or to otherwise abuse any animal; or 
(20)  The actions prohibited by this section are in addition to any prohibitions existing elsewhere in this Code or any applicable state or federal law. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit any duty imposed on an owner by any other provision of this Code or any applicable state or federal law. 
(b)  Violations. 
(1)  Public safety officers, including officers in the city public health, fire, and police departments, shall have the authority to seize any animal that is the subject of any violation of this section if doing so is believed to be necessary to protect the animal's health, safety, or welfare. 
(2)  If an officer personally witnesses a violation of any provision of this section occurring in plain view from or on public property, the officer may seize the animal without seeking issuance of a warrant even if doing so requires entering onto or into private property. 
(3)  If an animal is seized without a warrant under subsection (b)(2) of this section, a timely post-seizure hearing shall be held to satisfy the constitutional requirements of due process. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent public safety officers, including officers in the city public health, fire, and police departments, from euthanizing animals when authorized to do so by any statute, ordinance, or law, or when such action is in the interest of the public health and safety.  
Sec. 11-57. - Placement and baiting of traps. 
(a)  Animal traps. Only humane live animal traps may be used for capturing animals roaming unrestrained in the city; provided, however, this does not preclude the use of commercially sold rat and mousetraps to be utilized, as intended by the manufacturer in accordance with the manufacturer's direction for use, in that person's residence, accessory structure or commercial establishment. 
(b)  Certain traps prohibited. The placing or baiting of any steel jawed trap (commonly known as a "bear trap," "wolf trap" or "coyote trap") within the corporate limits of the city is expressly prohibited. As an exception to this subsection, governmental agencies and entities shall be permitted to use such traps and equipment necessary and permitted by state law or regulations. 
(c)  Traps on public property. Any animal traps found on public property are hereby declared to be abandoned, and the animal control officer is hereby authorized and directed to seize any such trap and process the same as abandoned property in accordance with the applicable provisions of state law and city procedures. 
(d)  Domestic animals traps. It shall be a violation of this chapter to use anything other than commercially sold animal food to bait any trap used for the purpose of trapping any at large domestic animal. Unless the adjacent properties are separated by a solid masonry or wood fence of a minimum six-foot height, traps used for such purpose shall not be placed or located within ten feet of adjacent property lines. In the event no such fence exists and the size, shape or other characteristics of the property preclude traps from being placed or located ten feet from adjacent property lines, said traps shall be placed or located as far from adjacent property lines as practicable.  
Sec. 11-58. - Poisoning of animals prohibited. 
No person shall place any substance or article which has in any manner been treated with any poisonous substance in any place accessible to human beings, birds, dogs, cats or other animals with the intent to kill or harm animals. This shall include antifreeze purposely left exposed to poison animals. This section, however, does not preclude the use of commercially sold rodent poisons when applied in accordance with the manufacturer's directions for such use, in that person's residence, accessory structure or commercial establishment.  
Sec. 11-59. - Disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  Disposal of dead animals except livestock. 
(1)  In the event of the death of a dog, cat, or other domesticated animal, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the animal or the owner of the property on which the animal is located to remove and dispose of the dead animal within 12 hours after death of the animal. The animal control officer has the authority to pick up any dead animal found on public property and dispose of it and to assist a citizen with the same if requested. Following the expiration of 24 hours after the death of an animal, the animal control officer or other city representative may enter upon private property and remove any dead animal which the property owner or animal owner has failed to remove and dispose of. 
(2)  The animal control officer shall have the authority to take custody of and dispose of all deceased animals found on any roadway, street, highway, and/or public or private property where the owner cannot otherwise be identified. 
(b)  Disposal of dead livestock. It shall be the specific responsibility of the owner of any livestock to have the livestock removed and properly disposed of within 24 hours of the death of said livestock, consistent with state law.  
Sec. 11-60. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Animal control officers are hereby authorized to enter upon any fenced or unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land, to the extent allowed by law, for the purpose of capturing, impounding and/or quarantining any animal upon having probable cause to believe said animal to: have bitten, injured or otherwise attacked a human being or other animal; to have, or have been exposed to, rabies or another communicable disease posing a danger to the public health, safety or welfare; or otherwise pose a clear and present danger to human beings or other animals. This authorization is granted due to the emergency created by the potential rabies hazard or danger of injury to persons or other animals, and in recognition of the likelihood that such animal will otherwise escape capture. As a matter of policy, animal control officers shall not enter upon private property to capture and/or impound any animal known to belong to the owner of said property without probable cause. An animal control officer may enter upon such property, however, if it is believed that said animal poses a threat or danger to property, human beings or other animals, or is in violation of the restraint law. 
(b)  Furthermore, should the animal control officer have probable cause to believe an animal has been, or is being, cruelly treated or has rabies or another communicable disease, the animal control officer may, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.022, as amended, obtain a seizure warrant and impound such animal, even if it is enclosed on private property. 
(c)  The animal control officer may seek all available remedies allowed by law to gain entry onto property, including but not limited to search and seizure warrants.  
Secs. 11-61—11-69. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 11-70. - Prohibited animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, offer for sale, barter, trade, keep, own, maintain, use or have in a person's possession or on premises under such person's control any of the following: 
(1)  Any dangerous animal, except as provided in article VI of this chapter pursuant to a final determination that the animal is dangerous; or 
(2)  Any prohibited animal unless that person is a person exempted by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.102, dangerous wild animals, as amended. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, offer for sale, barter, trade, keep, own, maintain, use or have in a person's possession or on premises under such person's control any of the following: 
a.  Any dangerous animal except as provided in article VI of this chapter pursuant to a final determination that an animal is dangerous; or 
b.  Any prohibited animal. 
(b)  A prohibited animal is exempt from this section if: 
(1)  The animal belongs to a bona fide zoological park, circus, educational institution, museum, licensed laboratory, publicly owned nature center, or animals kept by bona fide members of an educational or scientific association or society approved by the director of health, or persons holding permits from an agency of the state or the United States for the care and keeping of animals for rehabilitative purposes. If a person holds a permit from the state department of parks and wildlife to operate a wildcare center in the city, the permit holder must also comply with the city comprehensive zoning ordinance, as amended, and must keep any and all animals or reptiles in cages of sufficient size, construction and strength to restrain the animal or reptile at all times; or 
(2)  The animal is an assistance or service animal as defined herein, that has been registered with the city and has provided to the animal control officer: 
a.  Records of vaccination appropriate for the species of animal; 
b.  Documentation from a veterinarian that the animal is healthy; 
c.  Proof of proper restraint for the animal; and 
d.  Proof that the animal has been or is being trained to perform tasks of an assistance or service animal.  
Sec. 11-71. - Impoundment, quarantine or seizure of prohibited animals. 
The animal control officer may seize and/or order the immediate impoundment or quarantine, at the owner's expense, of any wild or exotic animal found in the city where there is a potentially serious threat to public health, safety or welfare, and/or if in violation of any provision of this chapter. The animal control officer may seek a seizure warrant from a justice court, county court or municipal court, which court, upon probable cause, may issue a warrant authorizing a seizure. A hearing shall be conducted on this disposition of the animal within ten business days of the date of seizure. The owner or harborer of the animal, to the extent the same is known or can be determined through reasonable due diligence, shall receive written notice of the hearing, by personal service and/or certified mail, return receipt requested, as soon as practicable but not later than five days prior to the hearing.  
Sec. 11-72. - Special provisions concerning fowl, rabbits and guinea pigs. 
(a)  Enclosure requirements. Fowl, rabbits, and guinea pigs must be kept indoors, or if outdoors, in a secure pen or enclosure that is at least 30 feet from any inhabited dwelling other than the dwelling of the owner. Any enclosure in which fowl, a rabbit, or a guinea pig is kept must be cleaned and disinfected daily. Litter and droppings from fowl, rabbits and guinea pigs must be collected daily and properly disposed of. Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to ducks or other waterfowl inhabiting natural or manmade watercourses or bodies of water. 
(b)  Number of rabbits and guinea pigs. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly be in possession of more than two rabbits or guinea pigs on any premises in the city. It shall be a defense to prosecution regarding the number of rabbits or guinea pigs being kept that the same rabbits or guinea pigs and no more than the number and kinds of rabbits or guinea pigs in question were being kept on the same premises, by the same owner, prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Provided, however, that no rabbit or guinea pig that dies or is otherwise disposed of by the owner, may be replaced to the extent that such replacement would be in excess of the two number limitation. 
(c)  Regulation of fowl. 
(1)  Roosters are prohibited within the city limits and are declared to be nuisances under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 217, when located in residential districts. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep at any one location more than ten fowl. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any chicken, duck, goose, turkey or other domestic fowl to permit the same to run at large on any street or sidewalk or on any other property, except his or her own, in the city. 
(d)  Sale of baby fowl, ducks. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, lease, rent or in any way transfer, barter or give away baby fowl or ducklings as pets or novelties, whether dyed or not dyed, colored or otherwise artificially treated; provided, however, this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the display or sale of natural chicks or ducklings in proper breeding facilities for hatcheries or stores engaged in business of selling the same to be raised for legitimate commercial purposes.  
Sec. 11-73. - Keeping of bees. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep, or allow to be kept, bees in such a manner as to deny the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent property or endanger the personal health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city.  
Secs. 11-74—11-89. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ANIMAL IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 11-90. - Authority and responsibility of animal control officer. 
(a)  Animal control officers are hereby authorized to capture and impound any animal upon having probable cause to believe said animal to be in violation of any provision of this ordinance or state law which authorizes or requires the animal's capture and impoundment, and in so doing, to enter upon any fenced or unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land when deemed necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, as allowed by law. As a matter of policy, animal control officers shall not enter upon private property to capture and/or impound any animal known to belong to the owner of said property without probable cause. An animal control officer may enter upon the property, as allowed by law, to capture an animal if it is believed that said animal poses a threat or danger to property, human beings or other animals. 
(b)  Additionally, it is the responsibility of the animal control officer to accept any animal delivered to the animal shelter pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, except those animals that are voluntarily released by their owners. For an animal to be voluntarily released, the owner must sign an owner release form. In addition, it is the duty of the animal control officer to capture and impound wild or non-domesticated animals in response to citizen's complaints of public nuisance or to control feral populations. 
(c)  If the lawful owner of an animal requests euthanasia due to injury or illness where recovery of the animal is unlikely and private means are not readily available, the owner must first sign all required forms and pay the required fees as adopted by the city. 
(d)  Baby nursing animals impounded without the mother or whose mother cannot or refuses to provide milk may be transferred to a licensed rehabilitation facility whenever such facility is willing and able to provide care for the baby nursing animals. Should no facility be available, the animals may be humanely destroyed to prevent further suffering.  
Sec. 11-91. - Impoundment procedures. 
(a)  If, by identification tag, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the animal control officer will, as soon as practical, notify the owner either in person or by telephone of said impoundment. If the animal is locally owned within the city and telephone contact can or cannot be made, the animal control officer will post a notice on the front door of the owner's residence indicating that the animal has been impounded. 
(b)  All impounded animals shall be kept for not less than three days, unless the animal is reclaimed earlier by the owner under acceptable conditions. However, no impoundment period is required for an animal voluntarily delivered and released to the animal shelter or city by its owner. 
(c)  After the expiration of any required impoundment period, the impounded animal shall be released to the animal shelter. At that time, the animal shall be disposed of by adoption from the facility, by offering it to a local animal humane group for adoption, by public auction, or by humanely destroying the animal. 
(d)  Any animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, which is in great pain and suffering due to injury and probably will not recover, or which appears to have rabies, and/or which is at large and is posing an imminent danger to human beings or to other animals, may be humanely destroyed by the animal control officer. 
(e)  Any owner or person redeeming an unaltered animal from the animal shelter for the fourth time within any 12 consecutive month period must have the animal sterilized within 30 days of the date the animal is released from the facility. Proof of said sterilization must be provided to the animal shelter within ten days of compliance. 
(f)  When acting in the course and scope of their employment, the animal control officer is hereby authorized to carry on his person, or in city vehicles, loaded tranquilizer guns approved by the division of community services, or other weapons upon demonstration of proficiency and as qualified by the police department, and not in violation of any provision of the state Penal Code or any applicable state law. 
(g)  The premises where livestock, fowl or pets are kept or maintained shall be subject to inspection upon receiving a complaint, at any reasonable hour of the day while in the presence of the owner.  
Sec. 11-92. - State laws for cat and dog sterilization adopted. 
The city shall comply with all sterilization laws as set forth in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 828, as amended. A copy of the statute may be obtained from the city animal control officer.  
Sec. 11-93. - Requirements to redeem an impounded animal. 
An animal which has been impounded under the provisions of this chapter may be redeemed by its owner or the lawful representative provided that the redeeming person: 
(1)  Is at least 18 years of age and presents identification, which verifies his/her identity and date of birth; 
(2)  Identifies themselves as the owner of the impounded animal or provides proof that he is the lawful representative of such owner including possession of the applicable required permit; 
(3)  Proof of current rabies vaccinations, or vaccination prior to release; 
(4)  Properly completes all applicable redemption forms as required; and 
(5)  Pays the applicable impoundment fees and charges.  
Sec. 11-94. - Impoundment fees. 
(a)  Fees and charges for vaccinated animals. The owner of an impounded vaccinated animal shall pay the fees as established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A to this Code in order to redeem such animal: In addition thereto, a daily handling charge as established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A to this Code will be added to the above amount before redemption of the animal. 
(b)  Fees and charges for nonvaccinated animals. Any person claiming an animal that has not been vaccinated for rabies within the last year shall pay an impoundment fee, plus the rabies vaccination fee, plus daily handling charge, all such fees and charges as are established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A to this Code to reclaim the animal. The owner shall submit evidence satisfactory to the animal shelter demonstrating proof that an appointment has been made for the animal to receive the vaccine required in this chapter. In addition, prior to the animal shelter releasing the animal, the owner shall sign a promise in writing that the animal will be vaccinated for rabies within five days of the date of release from the animal shelter. The animal control officer shall keep such statement and upon receiving proof of the vaccination in compliance with the owner's signed promise, the city shall refund the difference between the impoundment fee charged and the normal amount which would have been charged as set forth in the master fee schedule in appendix A to this Code, if the animal had been vaccinated. Should such a statement be signed and the animal is impounded again, and the animal not having been vaccinated as promised, then the impoundment fee shall be the amount as established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A to this Code plus the adopted daily handling fee. Upon each subsequent impoundment of such animals, the same not having been vaccinated, an additional fee in the amount as established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A to this Code shall be assessed.  
Sec. 11-95. - Euthanasia requirements and fees. 
If the lawful owner of an animal requests euthanasia due to probable reasons, the owner must first sign the required forms. A minimum fee in the amount as established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A to this Code shall be assessed, subject, however, to change due to the cost of the solution.  
Sec. 11-96. - Requirements for adoption of animals from animal shelter; fees. 
(a)  Requirements for adoption and fees. Requirements for adoption of an animal and fees in connection therewith shall be determined by the business entity which provides housing for animals pursuant to an agreement with the city. 
(b)  Determination of health of animals for adoption. A determination of the health of an animal in connection with the animal's adoption shall be determined by the business entity which provides housing for animals pursuant to an agreement with the city.  
Secs. 11-97—11-114. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ANIMAL RESTRAINT 
 
Sec. 11-115. - Offenses and affirmative defenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or person in control of an animal to fail to keep the animal under restraint in a securely enclosed or confined area and in a manner that will isolate the animal from the public and other animals except for animals owned or under the control of the owner. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to fail or refuse to exercise diligent care and control of his or her animal to prevent such animal from becoming a public nuisance. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person to use a chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device to attach a dog to a stationary object or trolley system. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense to a violation of subsection (c) of this section that the dog tethering: 
(1)  Is during a lawful animal event, veterinary treatment, grooming, training, or law enforcement activity; 
(2)  Is required to protect the safety or welfare of a person or the dog, and the dog's owner maintains direct physical control of the dog; 
(3)  Occurs in the direct physical control of the owner in a designated city dog park; or 
(4)  Occurs on the owner's premises and: 
a.  While the dog is within the owner's direct physical control; and 
b.  Prevents the dog from advancing to within 15 feet of the edge of any public street. 
(e)  The affirmative defenses provided in subsection (d) of this section are only available if the following specifications are met: 
(1)  The chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device is attached to a properly fitted collar or harness worn by the dog; 
(2)  The chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device is not placed directly around the dog's neck; 
(3)  The chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device does not exceed 1/20 th of the dog's body weight; 
(4)  The chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device, by design and placement allows the dog a reasonable and unobstructed range of motion without entanglement; and 
(5)  The dog has access to adequate shelter and clean and wholesome water. 
(f)  A person commits an offense if the person fails to comply with this section. 
(1)  An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor. If a person fails to comply with this section with respect to more than one dog, the person's conduct with respect to each dog constitutes a separate offense. 
(2)  An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(g)  This section does not prohibit a person from walking a dog with a hand-held leash.  
Secs. 11-116—11-124. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - REGISTRATION 
 
Sec. 11-125. - Requirements for registering dogs and cats. 
(a)  Registration required. No owner shall have within the city any dog or cat six months of age or older unless such dog or cat is currently registered. A current metal registration certificate issued by the city must be affixed to a collar or harness that must be worn by the dog or cat all times. No dog or cat shall be registered until it has a current vaccination. The city shall annually register and issue identification tags, to any person living in the city who owns or possesses a dog or cat requiring vaccination to prevent rabies. Said issuance will be for the purpose of owner identification in cases where a dog or cat has bitten, scratched, attacked or injured a human being or another animal and in cases where the dog or cat might become impounded, lost or injured. 
(b)  Application procedures; fees. Application for the registration tag must be made annually, by the owner, in writing or in person, and be accompanied by proof that the dog or cat has been vaccinated against rabies within the preceding year and be accompanied by a fee as established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A to this Code. If the original current registration is lost or destroyed, the owner may obtain a duplicate by paying an additional fee therefor, as established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A to this Code. If any animal is impounded at the animal shelter, it must be registered with the city before being redeemed. 
(c)  Registration transfer; charges therefor. If there is a change in ownership, the new owner shall have the registration transferred to his or her name within ten days after taking possession of the animal. There shall be no charge for the transfer. Application for such transfer shall be made to the city in writing or in person. 
(d)  Vaccination and license identification. A registration tag may not be issued for an animal that has not been vaccinated against rabies within the preceding year. The registration tag shall be valid for the length of time the rabies vaccination is valid. 
(e)  Guard dogs. Each dog which has received protection or guard dog training and is kept in the city must be registered as a guard dog with the city annually. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person who keeps or allows any such dog to be kept upon their premises to fail or refuse to present proof to the animal control officer, upon request, that such dog has been registered as a guard dog within the preceding 12-month period. The animal control officer shall issue a permit to each qualifying dog. Such permit and tag shall be valid for a period of 12 months and are not transferable to any other animal. The registration tag shall be prominently displayed on the dog at all times by securely affixing it to a properly fitted collar, harness, or similar device worn by the dog. The tag and permit can only be issued provided the owner first presents proof that the dog is currently vaccinated against rabies. No fee shall be required for the issuance of guard dog permit as provided herein.  
Secs. 11-126—11-139. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RABIES CONTROL 
 
Sec. 11-140. - State law adopted. 
The city hereby adopts the Rabies Control Act of 1981 (V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 826), as amended, and the standards established by the state board of health as minimum standards for rabies control and quarantine provisions within the city. In addition thereto, all of the rabies control provisions of this chapter, which are adopted pursuant to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 826.015 and 826.033, shall have application within the city. A copy of the statute may be obtained from the animal control officer.  
Sec. 11-141. - Reporting of rabies cases or suspected rabid animals required; confinement of animals. 
(a)  Reporting of rabies required. It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian or the veterinarian to report to the animal control officer all cases of rabies or suspected rabies of which any of the persons have knowledge. 
(b)  Confinement. Any animal having rabies or symptoms thereof or suspected of having rabies, or which has been exposed to rabies, shall be immediately released by owner to the city for confinement in a veterinary hospital approved by the city, or for confinement in the city pound, or immediately upon facts having come to the attention of the owner or custodian of such animal with respect to its being rabid or having been exposed to rabies, such dog, cat or other animal shall be immediately and securely quarantined and kept under supervision of the animal control officer for a period of not less than ten days.  
Sec. 11-142. - Procedure when animal has bitten person or animal; exceptions; quarantine fees. 
(a)  Procedure. When any dog, cat or other animal has bitten, scratched or otherwise attacked a person or animal, any person having knowledge of such incident shall immediately notify the city and such dog, cat or other animal shall be confined in the animal shelter or in a veterinary hospital for a period of ten days at the expense of the owner and such dog, cat or other animal shall during such period of confinement be subject to inspection by city personnel or a licensed veterinarian. After the ten-day period the owner shall be notified and granted five additional days to pick up the animal. The charge for each day of confinement of the animal shall be as established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A to this Code. After the expiration of this time limit the animal control officer may then adopt out or dispose of the animal. 
(b)  Exceptions to procedure. If the animal in question has a valid and current vaccination, was not running at large at the time of the exposure, and is not a repeated biting animal, the animal control officer may allow the owner to secure the animal on his property if the owner can provide secure and adequate facilities for such confinement, provided that the animal be inspected by a veterinarian at the end of the quarantine period. The animal control officer shall also be granted access to the animal at any time during the ten-day quarantine to ensure the conditions of the quarantine are being met. Failure to allow inspection of the animal will result in revocation of the home quarantine. Police K-9 shall be exempt from the confinement requirements. The police K-9 shall be checked by a licensed veterinarian immediately and at the end of the ten-day period. 
(c)  Quarantine fee. The owner of any dog or cat held in quarantine for observation purposes shall be charged a daily fee in an amount as established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A to this Code. This fee is in addition to any impoundment fee.  
Secs. 11-143—11-154. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DANGEROUS ANIMALS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 11-155. - State law adopted. 
The city council hereby expressly adopts the regulations and procedures outlined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.001 et seq., as amended.  
Sec. 11-156. - Application. 
For purposes of this article VI, division 1 only, the term "dangerous animal" shall include a "dangerous dog," unless otherwise stated.  
Sec. 11-157. - Nuisance declared. 
It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance that an owner or other person harbors, keeps, or maintains a dangerous animal in the city unless the owner complies with the requirements of this article.  
Sec. 11-158. - Sale or possession of dangerous animals. 
No person shall knowingly sell, own, offer for sale, breed, possess, keep, buy or attempt to buy, or train a dangerous animal within the city unless the owner has received the proper permits pursuant to this chapter.  
Sec. 11-159. - Finding of an animal as dangerous. 
(a)  A person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous animal when: 
(1)  The owner knows of an attack as described in section 11-1, definition of "dangerous animal" or "dangerous dog"; or 
(2)  The owner is informed by the animal control officer that the animal is a dangerous animal. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a written sworn notarized affidavit by any person, charging that a particular animal is dangerous, an animal control officer may investigate the incident to determine whether such animal is, in fact, dangerous. If the animal has bitten a human then the animal must be held at the animal shelter or at an approved quarantine veterinarian clinic for the period required by law. Any written sworn notarized affidavit shall contain at least the following information, if known: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the complainant and witnesses; 
(2)  Date, time and location of the incidents; 
(3)  A complete description of the animal including breed, color, sex, size, etc.; 
(4)  Name, address and telephone number of the animal's owner, if known, and/or the premises where the animal is kept; 
(5)  A statement that the animal bit or attacked with as much detail as possible with regard to the incident and whether medical attention was required; and 
(6)  Any other facts that the complainant believes to be relevant. 
(c)  The following will apply regarding the investigation to determine whether an animal shall be declared dangerous: 
(1)  The owner of the animal shall deliver the animal to the animal control officer for impoundment within five days of the notice that a sworn complaint has been filed. 
(2)  The suspect animal shall be seized by the animal control officer pursuant to a sworn complaint, and impounded and if necessary medically examined at the owner's expense if the animal caused serious bodily injury to a person requiring medical treatment. An animal causing serious bodily injury shall be held at an animal shelter pending the outcome of an investigation and determination as to whether the animal is, in fact, classifiable as dangerous. Such an investigation to determine if an animal is dangerous shall be conducted within ten days after receipt of the complaint or seizure of the animal. 
(3)  Notice of the investigation shall be provided by an animal control officer to the owner of the animal either in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. The complainant in the matter shall also be notified either in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the investigation. During the investigation all parties shall be given the opportunity to present evidence on the issue of whether such animal is to be declared dangerous. 
(d)  Upon conclusion of an investigation to determine if an animal is dangerous, the animal control officer may find that the animal is not dangerous. In such case, the animal shall be returned to the owner, provided the animal has been properly vaccinated and registered, and all impoundment and medical fees paid. 
(e)  Notification to an owner that his dog has been declared dangerous shall include the following information: 
(1)  The owner has the right to appeal the decision to a justice or municipal court of competent jurisdiction and that such appeal must be filed, in writing, not late than the 15th day after the date the owner is notified. 
(2)  The owner may appeal that decision of the justice or municipal court in the same manner as appeal for other cases. 
(f)  No animal shall be declared a dangerous animal if the threat, injury or damages caused by the animal were the result of a willful trespass upon another's property; or the person injured was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or its owner, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime at the time of injury.  
Sec. 11-160. - Requirements for owners. 
(a)  Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous animal, the person shall: 
(1)  Register the dangerous animal with the animal control officer and pay the applicable registration fee; 
(2)  Restrain the dangerous animal at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a secure enclosure as described in section 11-1, secure enclosure. A dangerous animal on a leash or in a secure enclosure shall also be subject to the following: 
a.  All dangerous dogs, if not in a secure pen, shall be securely confined indoors; 
b.  No dangerous animal may be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the animal to exit such building of its own volition. In addition, no dangerous animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacles preventing the animal from exiting the structure; 
c.  No person shall permit a dangerous animal to be kept outside its cage, pen or enclosure on a chain, rope or other type of leash unless the owner is in physical control of the chain, rope or other type of leash. Dangerous animals shall not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. Signs giving notice of the dangerous animal shall be prominently displayed so that all persons entering said property are immediately notified a dangerous animal is being kept at the location; 
(3)  Further secure the dangerous animal with a muzzle in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal nor interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal when the dangerous animal is taken off the property of the owner for any reason; 
(4)  Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least $100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous animal causing bodily injury to a person and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility to the animal control officer. Acceptability of such proof of liability insurance coverage shall be subject to the final review and approval of the city attorney, which coverage shall require that it may not be cancelled without prior written notification to the city not less than 30 days prior to cancellation. It shall be unlawful for an owner of any dangerous dog found in the city to fail or refuse to present proof to an animal control officer or a designated representative, upon request of current liability insurance coverage as required under this section; 
(5)  Provide to the animal control officer the name and address of the owner, breed, age, sex, color and any other identifying marks of said animal; the location where the animal is to be kept if not at the address of the owner; two color photographs of the dangerous animal; 
(6)  Provide the dangerous animal with a fluorescent yellow collar visible at 50 feet in normal day light so that the animal can be identified; 
(7)  Spay or neuter the dangerous animal; and 
(8)  Microchip the dangerous animal for its life with a national registry, and present proof to the animal control officer. The owner of the dangerous animal shall microchip the animal by implanting a microchip identification device on the animal within seven calendar days after being notified by the animal control officer or by the municipal court that such animal is dangerous. The cost of the service shall be at the owner's expense. 
(b)  The owner may permanently remove the dangerous animal from the city limits, upon compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  The new owner must comply with local and state regulations for owning a dangerous dog and acknowledge, by sworn affidavit, that he/she has been advised that the dog has been deemed dangerous, is aware of the state law requirements and agrees to be bound by state law requirements. 
(2)  The name, address and phone number of the location the animal will be kept must be submitted to animal control officer. 
(3)  The animal control officer shall notify the local authority of the classification of said animal as dangerous. 
(4)  Proof of compliance with the local and state laws from the local authority relating to dangerous dogs must be provided to the city.  
Sec. 11-161. - Failure to comply with requirements. 
If the owner of an animal determined to be dangerous under this article fails or refuses to comply with all the requirements specified in section 11-160, the animal shall be seized by the animal control officer and euthanized by the animal control officer, or its authorized agent, or a licensed veterinarian.  
Sec. 11-162. - Violations. 
(a)  A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous animal or dangerous dog commits an offense if the person fails to comply with any of the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Criminal responsibility for the keeping of a dangerous dog may be established by intent, knowledge or recklessness. 
(c)  Violation of any section under this article is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00.  
Sec. 11-163. - Defense. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under this article that the person is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed by a recognized animal shelter or person employed by the state or a political subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals, and that the person has temporary ownership, custody or control of the animal; provided, however, that for any person to claim under this section, that person must be acting within the course and scope of his or her official duties as regards to the dangerous animal or dangerous dog. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under this division that the person is an employee of the institutional division of the state department of criminal justice or of a law enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or corrections purposes; provided, however, that for any person to claim a defense under this section, that person must be acting within the course and scope of his or her official duties with regard to the dangerous dog. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under this division that the dog at issue is a trained guard dog in the performance of official duties while confined or under the control of its handler.  
Secs. 11-164—11-169. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REQUIREMENTS FOR ANIMALS OTHER THAN DOGS 
 
Sec. 11-170. - Registration of a dangerous animal other than a dog. 
(a)  The animal control officer shall annually register a dangerous animal if the owner presents proof of: 
(1)  Liability insurance or financial responsibility as required in section 11-160; 
(2)  Current rabies vaccination of the dangerous animal, if such vaccination is available for the species; 
(3)  The secure enclosure in which the animal will be kept; and 
(4)  Payment of an annual registration fee in an amount as established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code to the city. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous animal a registration tag. The owner must place and maintain the tag on the animal's collar. 
(c)  The owner of a dangerous animal shall notify the animal control officer within 24 hours if the dangerous animal is at large, unconfined, has attacked a human being or another animal, has died, or has been sold or given away. If the animal has been sold or given away, the former owner shall provide the animal control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner. If the new owner's address is in the city or if the animal is kept in the city, the animal control officer shall notify the new owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, or in person that the animal has been determined to be a dangerous animal and provide the new owner a copy of the requirements contained in this article. The new owner must be given notice to comply with the requirements for owners of dangerous animals, if the animal is physically located for any time within the city. It shall be unlawful for new owners to fail to comply with any requirement of this article. The same reporting requirements are imposed on any and all subsequent owners of the dangerous animal.  
Sec. 11-171. - Attack by dangerous animal other than a dog. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous animal other than a dog and the animal makes an unprovoked attack on a person or another animal outside the animal's enclosure and causes bodily damage to the person or other animal. 
(b)  An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor, unless the attack causes serious bodily injury or death, in which event the offense is a class A misdemeanor. 
(c)  If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the dangerous animal destroyed by an animal control officer or licensed veterinarian. 
(d)  In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense under this section is liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $10,000.00. The city attorney may file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the penalty. Penalties collected under this subsection shall be retained by the city.  
Secs. 11-172—11-179. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REQUIREMENTS FOR DANGEROUS DOGS 
 
Sec. 11-180. - Dangerous dog determination. 
An owner learns that he/she is the owner of a dangerous dog when one of following events occurs: 
(1)  The owner knows of an attack as described in the V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.041(2)(A) or (B), and as provided herein; 
(2)  The dog makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; 
(3)  The dog commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person; 
(4)  The owner is informed by the animal control officer that the dog is dangerous as determined by the animal control officer through investigations and upon sworn statements. The owner may appeal this decision to the municipal court within 15 days; or 
(5)  The owner receives notice that the municipal court has found the dog is dangerous after a hearing on the matter, either on a report of an attack that caused bodily injury, or after an owner fails to comply with the requirements of an owner of a dangerous dog.  
Sec. 11-181. - Dangerous dog incident. 
A dangerous dog incident means an incident as described in section 11-1, definition of "dangerous dog."  
Sec. 11-182. - Reporting of incident. 
(a)  A person may report a dangerous dog incident as set forth in section 11-159 to the animal control officer. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall provide a sworn report describing the dangerous dog incident to the city prosecutor's office. 
(c)  The city prosecutor's office shall evaluate the case and determine whether to file a dangerous dog incident report with the municipal court ("court"). If such a report is filed, the court shall order the animal control officer or his designee to seize the dog and the court shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The animal control officer shall seize the dog and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions until the court determines one of the following: 
(1)  That the dog is not a dangerous dog pursuant to section 11-183; 
(2)  That the dog is a dangerous dog and the court or animal control officer finds the owner has complied with the requirements for ownership of a dangerous dog pursuant to section 11-187; or 
(3)  That the dog should be humanely destroyed or is deceased. 
(d)  The animal control officer shall furnish written notice to the owner of the dog identified in the report to inform the owner that a dangerous dog report has been filed with the court. Notice shall be by hand delivery to the owner of the dog. If the owner cannot be located, notice shall be delivered to any adult at the dog owner's last known physical address or to any adult at the residence where the dog is believed to be kept, if at a location different than the owner's physical address. The notice shall also include a statement that the owner will be notified by the court of the date and time for a hearing pursuant to section 11-183. 
(e)  If the court determines the dog to be a dangerous dog, the owner shall pay all costs and/or fees assessed by the municipality related to the seizure and impoundment of the dog, including, but not limited to, boarding fees, microchip procedure, city license and rabies vaccination, and the cost of euthanasia of the dog if ordered by the court.  
Sec. 11-183. - Hearing for dangerous dog determination. 
(a)  The court, on receiving a report of an incident under section 11-182, shall set a time for a hearing to determine whether the dog is a dangerous dog. The hearing must be held not later than the tenth day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered. 
(b)  The court shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to: 
(1)  The owner of the dog or the person from whom the dog was seized; 
(2)  The person who made the complaint; and 
(3)  Any witnesses. 
(c)  Any interested party, including the city attorney, is entitled to present evidence at the hearing. 
(d)  The court shall issue its ruling within 24 hours from the conclusion of the hearing. 
(e)  Appeals from convictions under this division shall be handled like other appeals from convictions in municipal court. During the appeal period, the dog shall remain in the custody, care and control of the animal control officer. If the appeal is ultimately unsuccessful, the owner of the dog shall be responsible for the dog's impoundment fees during the period the case was being appealed.  
Sec. 11-184. - Failure to comply. 
(a)  If, upon application, a justice court, county court or municipal court finds that the owner has failed or is failing to comply with this division, the court shall order the animal control officer to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure of the dog. The animal control officer shall seize or cause to be seized the dog and provide for impoundment under secure, humane conditions. The owner shall pay any cost or fee assessed by the city related to the seizure, acceptance and impoundment of the dog. The owner then has 11 days after the seizure to comply or the dog must be ordered humanely destroyed. The court can destroy the dog after 15 days if the owner cannot be found. 
(b)  Failure to comply constitutes a misdemeanor, which upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Subsequent offenses are class B misdemeanors and shall be referred to the appropriate court.  
Sec. 11-185. - Destruction of dog. 
(a)  A dog must be destroyed if the court finds that the dog caused the death of a person. The dog may be ordered destroyed if the court finds it caused only serious bodily injury by attacking, biting or mauling a person. If such findings are not made, the court is to release the dog to the owner, the person from whom the dog was seized or to any other authorized person upon compliance with this article. 
(b)  Exceptions to destruction. Even if the dog caused serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting or mauling, the court may not order its destruction if it also finds one of the following to be true: 
(1)  The dog was being used for protection of a person or a person's property and: 
a.  The attack, bite or mauling occurred in the dog's enclosure; 
b.  The enclosure was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; 
c.  Notice was provided of the presence of the dog; 
d.  The injured person was at least eight years old; and 
e.  Was trespassing in the enclosure at the time of the attack, bite or mauling; 
(2)  The dog was not being used for the protection of a person or a person's property but: 
a.  The attack, bite or mauling occurred in the dog's enclosure; 
b.  The injured person was at least eight years old; and 
c.  Was trespassing in the enclosure at the time of the attack, bite or mauling; 
(3)  The attack, bite or mauling occurred during an arrest or other action by a peace officer while the peace officer was using the dog for law enforcement purposes; 
(4)  The dog was defending a person from an assault or person's property from damage or theft by the injured person; or 
(5)  The injured person was younger than eight years old and: 
a.  The attack, bite or mauling occurred in the dog's enclosure; and 
b.  The enclosure was reasonably certain to keep a person younger than eight years old from entering the enclosure.  
Sec. 11-186. - Failure to surrender dog. 
It shall be a separate violation of this division for any person to refuse or fail to surrender a dog subject to this article, or harbor, hide or secret, transport or secure the transport of a dog subject to this article, for the purpose of preventing its impoundment.  
Sec. 11-187. - Additional requirements for owners of a dangerous dog. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer within 24 hours if the dangerous dog is at large, unconfined, has attacked a human being or another animal, has died, or has been sold or given away. 
(b)  If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address, that owner, not later than the 14th day after the date of the sale or move, shall notify the animal control officer for the area in which the new address is located. Upon selling or moving the registered dangerous dog, that owner must notify the new owner or person who has care and control of the dog that he or she is keeping or owning a dog that has been declared dangerous. On presentation by the new owner of the dangerous dog's prior registration tag and payment of a fee as established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code, the animal control officer shall issue a new registration tag to be placed on the dangerous dog's collar. 
(c)  The owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the office in which the dangerous dog was registered of any attacks the dangerous dog makes on people or other animals.  
Sec. 11-188. - Culpable mental state. 
Criminal responsibility for the keeping of a dangerous dog may be established by intent, knowledge or recklessness.  
Sec. 11-189. - Dogs that attack domestic animals. 
(a)  The animal control or police officer, to the extent applicable, shall adhere to procedures relative to dogs that are a danger to animals, as set forth in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.011 et seq. 
(b)  Dogs deemed to be dangerous due to attacks on domestic animals shall be subject to the procedures set forth in this division for registration, hearing, determination and/or destruction.  
Secs. 11-190—11-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ADOPTIONS AND STERILIZATION 
 
Sec. 11-200. - Requirements for adoption. 
(a)  The animal shelter may not release a dog or cat for adoption unless the animal (1) has a microchip implantation; (2) has been sterilized and (3) has received rabies vaccination according to article V of this chapter or the release is made to an owner who has signed an agreement to have the animal sterilized and vaccinated. 
(b)  The adoption sterilization agreement must contain: 
(1)  A sterilization completion date, which is: 
a.  The 30th day after the date of adoption in the case of an adult animal; or 
b.  The 30th day after a specific date estimated to be the date an adopted infant animal becomes six months old, unless a letter from a veterinarian states medical reasons for waiting; and 
(2)  A statement, printed in conspicuous, bold print, that sterilization of the animal is required, and that if the animal is not sterilized on or before the appropriate date the owner commits a criminal offense punishable as a class C misdemeanor. 
(c)  Except as provided by this subsection, a new owner who signs an adoption sterilization agreement under this section shall have the adopted animal sterilized on or before the sterilization completion date stated in the agreement. If the sterilization completion date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the deadline is extended to the first day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. The animal shelter may extend the deadline for 30 days on presentation of a written report from a licensed veterinarian stating that the life or health of the adopted animal may be jeopardized by surgery. There is no limit of the number of extensions that may be granted for this reason. 
(d)  When adopting an animal from the animal shelter, a new owner must sign an adoption agreement and must present photo identification to the city so that the city can make a copy of it. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a person who obtained a dog or cat from the animal shelter and executed an adoption sterilization agreement for the adopted animal to fail or refuse to have the animal sterilized by the date specified in the sterilization agreement or in subsequent extensions of the deadline as may be granted by the animal shelter pursuant to subsection (c) of this section.  
Sec. 11-201. - Confirmation of sterilization, death or lost or stolen animal. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) and (c) of this section, every new owner who signs an adoption sterilization agreement under section 11-200 shall provide the animal shelter from which the owner adopted a dog or cat, a certificate of sterilization signed by the veterinarian who performed the surgery and briefly describe the animal and provide the date of sterilization. It shall be unlawful for a person who obtains a dog or cat from the animal care and control center and who has executed a sterilization agreement for the subject animal to fail or refuse to provide a certificate of sterilization for the animal to the animal care and control center by seven days from the date the animal is sterilized. 
(b)  If the adopted animal dies on or before the deadline provided by section 11-200, the new owner shall provide to the animal shelter, no later than seven days from the date of the animal's death, a signed letter stating that the animal is dead, describing the cause of death, if known, and providing the date of death. The letter required by this subsection is in lieu of the letter required by subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  If an adopted animal is lost or stolen before the sterilization completion date, the new owner shall deliver to the animal shelter a signed letter stating that the animal is lost or stolen. The letter must be delivered not later than the seventh day after the date of the animal's disappearance and must described the circumstances surrounding the disappearance and provide the approximate date of the disappearance. The letter required by this subsection is in lieu of the letter required by subsection (a) of this section.  
Sec. 11-202. - Noncompliance with sterilization agreement; animal shelter's right of reclamation. 
The animal shelter may issue a citation to the new owner if the animal shelter does not receive the following from the new owner after the expiration of the seventh day after the sterilization completion date agreed to under section 11-200: 
(1)  A certificate of sterilization under section 11-201(a); 
(2)  A letter stating the animal has died under section 11-201(b); or 
(3)  A letter stating that the animal is lost or stolen under section 11-201(c) from the new owner.  
Sec. 11-203. - Affirmative defense. 
It shall be an affirmative defense to sections 11-200 and 11-201 that a dog or cat is claimed from the animal shelter by a person who is the present owner of the animal, provided: 
(1)  The animal is not determined to be vicious; and 
(2)  The animal has not been determined to be a public nuisance, or threat to the public.  
Sec. 11-204. - Mandatory microchip of unrestrained dogs and cats. 
(a)  Mandatory microchip following impoundment. Effective June 1, 2009, the owner of a dog or cat which has been impounded for being at large shall have the animal microchipped within 30 days following the animal's release from impoundment. 
(b)  Exemption made by animal control officer. The animal control officer is authorized to exempt an animal's owner from the requirements of subsection (a) of this section if the owner proves to the satisfaction of the animal control officer that the animal met one of the conditions specified in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  Offenses. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dog or cat required by subsection (a) of this section to be microchipped and the person fails to have an animal microchipped as required. 
(2)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dog or cat required by subsection (a) of this section to be microchipped and the person fails to provide proof that the dog or cat was microchipped as required by this section. 
(d)  Affirmative defense. In a prosecution for a violation of subsection (c) of this section it is an affirmative defense that: 
(1)  At the time of the animal's impoundment: 
a.  The animal was registered with a national registry or was a sporting dog, livestock dog, or working dog; and 
b.  The person was a member of a national breed club, local breed club, local all-breed club, or sporting or hunting club; and the person had not sold 12 or more intact dogs or cats in the preceding year. 
(2)  At the time of the animal's impoundment it was wearing a current city license tag, valid for that animal, and had not previously been impounded for being at large; 
(3)  The animal was at large at the time of its impoundment due to a force majeure; or 
(4)  The animal was at large at the time of its impoundment due to fire or due to the criminal or negligent acts of a third party who was not residing at the animal owner's residence. At trial, evidence of a fire or the criminal or negligent acts of a third party may be presented in one or more of the following manners: 
a.  A certified copy of a city police or fire report verifying the incident; 
b.  The affidavit of city police or fire personnel with direct knowledge of the incident; or 
c.  The testimony of city police or fire personnel with direct knowledge of the incident. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as permitting spayed/neutered dogs and cats to run at large.  
Secs. 11-205—11-224. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - LIVESTOCK 
 
Sec. 11-225. - Adoption of state law. 
The city council hereby expressly adopts the regulations and procedures regarding the securing of livestock outlined in V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code ch. 143, subch. A, as amended.  
Sec. 11-226. - Livestock required to be fenced in. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on premises under his control any livestock without providing adequate fences or barriers that will prevent such livestock from damaging shrubbery and other property situated on adjacent property. All livestock shall be kept in a suitable pen or enclosure situated no less than 300 feet from any inhabited dwelling. This distance requirement shall not apply to the dwelling of the owner of the livestock. 
(b)  All pens and other enclosures wherein livestock are kept within the city shall be maintained and kept in such a manner as to protect the public health and safety and shall not be allowed to become unsanitary, offensive or disagreeable to persons residing in the vicinity thereof, nor shall they be so maintained or kept as to breed flies or other insects or in any manner cause any injury to the public or any person residing in the city.  
Sec. 11-227. - Places prohibited for livestock. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or allow any type of livestock upon any public school grounds, college grounds, public park, property or municipal grounds within the city except those designated as bridle paths or other designated riding or exhibiting areas for animals. On streets, horses shall be ridden as close as possible to the curb and in no event shall horses be allowed on highways. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or allow any type of livestock upon the property of another within the city except with the express consent of the owner of the person in charge of such property obtained prior thereto.  
Sec. 11-228. - Permit required for keeping of livestock. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep livestock in the city without first obtaining a permit from the animal control officer. Such permit shall be valid only for the location for which it was issued. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain a permit. Every person who is a keeper of any livestock shall make application in writing upon forms prescribed and furnished to said person for a permit to keep livestock, and pay the fee required for such permit in an amount as established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. An animal control officer may refuse to issue a permit if it determines that the area in which the livestock is to be kept is insufficient, including, without limitation, an area that is too small for the livestock or an area that is too close to a residential dwelling. For purposes of determining the sufficiency of area for the livestock permit, the animal control officer may consider any publicly available information, the conditions present at the premises where the permit is requested and any other relevant factors.  
Sec. 11-229. - Impounding of livestock. 
The animal control officer shall take appropriate measures for the safety of the public with regard to any livestock found at large.  
Sec. 11-230. - Disposal of impounded livestock. 
(a)  In the event that ownership of livestock impounded under this chapter can not be determined, and after being held for a period of three days, the livestock may be impounded by the Collin County sheriff's department. At such time the livestock shall become the responsibility of the Collin County sheriff's department. Should the owner be located within the three-day period, the owner shall pay all required fees set forth in this chapter. The city, by this provision, intends to comply with any applicable provision of state law relative to the impoundment of strays. 
(b)  If impounded livestock are sold at public auction by Collin County sheriff's department, the county holding facility will apply such amount of the proceeds as necessary to satisfy the fees and costs incurred because of animal impoundment and auction, any fees and costs incurred by the city for impounding the livestock, restitution for any damage sustained by a property owner for said livestock having been at large, upon submission of a notarized affidavit and satisfactory proof of such damage. Upon payment of all fees, costs and restitution, any remaining monies shall be returned to the owner of the livestock, upon submission of a sworn, notarized affidavit that the applicant was in fact the owner of the livestock immediately prior to the sale.  
Sec. 11-231. - Nuisances. 
(a)  Nuisance declared. That the keeping or causing to be kept of livestock, within the city limits, in violation of any of the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  Definition of livestock. The term "large livestock" as used in this section shall mean horses, cows and bulls; the term "small livestock" shall mean sheep and goats; the term "livestock" shall be inclusive of horses, cows, bulls, sheep, goats, pigs, and their offsprings. 
(c)  Area requirements. No person, firm or corporation may keep large livestock at any location within the city limits which provides less than one-acre total area for each animal defined as larger livestock, or one-half acre total area for each animal defined as small livestock, or any combination of the above. 
(d)  Distance requirements. No person, firm or corporation may keep any livestock within 150 feet of any structure or dwelling in which people eat, sleep or dine; unless such person has secured a written, signed waiver from all owners, and tenants of such structures or dwellings indicating no objections to the keeping of livestock in the subject locations. Said waiver does not provide a permanent waiver, and may be revoked by any current or future owners or tenants of such structures or dwellings. 
(e)  Commercial purposes. That under no circumstances are livestock permitted to be kept within the city limits if the primary purpose of the keeping of said livestock is commercial in nature. Commercial purposes shall include the fattening of livestock for slaughter and sale, the breeding of livestock or any other similar activity. 
(f)  Health hazards. Livestock must at all times be kept or maintained in a safe manner; must be kept in clean and sanitary condition; and at all times must be confined securely within a fenced area, so that the keeping of such livestock will not constitute a danger to human life or property. Failure to securely confine, or to allow livestock to run free shall be a violation of this section. 
(g)  Exceptions. In accordance with State law, the provisions contained in subsections (c), (d) and (e) do not apply to locations which have been in continuous agricultural operation since June 10, 1985 or before. 
(h)  Relation to zoning regulations. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to permit or allow any activity otherwise prohibited or regulated under the provisions of chapter 77, or other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 86-12, §§ 2—9, 6-10-1986) 
Ord. No. 86-12, §§ 2—9, adopted June 10, 1986, was not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion those provisions have been included as § 11-231.  
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate housing and other structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq.; building and rehabilitation codes, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.211 et seq.; verification of builder registration required for issuance of local building permit, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.906; regulation of municipal public buildings and grounds generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 281.001 et seq., 301.001 et seq.; plumbing inspector, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.011; plumbing regulations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.012; dangerous buildings, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.002. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Penalty. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, any person or entity found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter may be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00 for each offense. Each day or portion of a day that a violation of this chapter occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0413-003, § 6, 4-13-2010)  
Sec. 14-2. - Regulation of single-family and duplex industrialized housing. 
(a)  Single-family or duplex industrialized housing must have all local permits and licenses that are applicable to other single-family or duplex dwellings. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, single-family or duplex industrialized housing is real property. 
(c)  Any industrialized housing shall: 
(1)  Have a value equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each single-family dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for the county; 
(2)  Have exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with the single-family dwellings located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located; 
(3)  Comply with city design and aesthetic standards, building setbacks, side and rear yard offsets, subdivision control, architectural landscaping, square footage, and other site requirements applicable to single-family dwellings; and 
(4)  Be securely fixed to a permanent foundation. 
(d)  For purposes of subsection (c) of this section, the term "value" means the taxable value of the industrialized housing and lot after installation of the housing. 
(e)  Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, erect, install, or move any industrialized housing into the city shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permits. In addition to any other information otherwise required for said permits, the application shall: 
(1)  Identify each single-family dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is to be located, and show the taxable value for each such dwelling as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for the county; 
(2)  Describe the exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration for each single-family dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is to be located; 
(3)  Describe the permanent foundation and method of attachment proposed for the industrialized housing; 
(4)  State the taxable value of the industrialized housing and the lot after installation of the industrialized housing; and 
(5)  Indicate the deed restrictions otherwise applicable to the real property on which the industrialized housing is to be located. 
(f)  A person commits an offense if the person: 
(1)  Fails to make an application for permit as required by this section; or 
(2)  Constructs, erects, installs or moves any industrialized housing into the city which does not comply with this section. (See generally V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1202, especially V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1202.253). 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0413-007, §§ 1, 2, 4-13-2010)  
Secs. 14-3—14-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING AND TECHNICAL CODES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-27. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense. Each and every day or portion of a day during which the violation continues or otherwise occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0119-005, § 4, 1-19-2010)  
Secs. 14-28—14-53. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 14-54. - Adoption of International Building Code, 2015 Edition. 
The International Building Code, 2015 Edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, is hereby adopted by the city council as the building code for the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The city council hereby extends the application and enforcement of the International Building Code, 2015 Edition, as amended, to the fullest extent allowed by law, to include the incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. The International Building Code, 2015 edition, as amended, shall be applicable to all construction, repair, renovation and remodeling activities within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction as those boundaries may be from time to time adjusted by annexation, disannexation, or otherwise. Unless deleted, omitted, expanded or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such International Building Code, 2015 Edition, as amended, shall be fully applicable and binding and in full force and effect. Any and all references in this article to the Uniform Building Code shall mean the International Building Code, 2015 Edition, as amended. A copy of the International Building Code, 2015 Edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, referred to in this division shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 2004, § 4.116; Ord. No. 2000-01, 5-23-2000; Ord. No. 2006-36, 8-8-2006; Ord. No. O-2011-0322-004, § 2, 3-22-2011; Ord. No. 2017-0425-001, § 2, 5-9-2017)  
Sec. 14-55. - Amending International Building Code; certain roof coverings prohibited. 
(a)  The International Building Code, 2015 Edition, shall be amended as follows: 
(1)  Studs: 16-inch centers, minimum. 
(2)  Ceiling joists: Two inch by six inch minimum on 16-inch centers. 
(3)  Decking: One-half-inch minimum. 
(4)  Section 1805.8.2 shall be amended to read: 
Slab on ground, raft, or mat foundations shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the thickness requirements for concrete parking lots. Commercial will have a minimum six-inch concrete slab and industrial will have a minimum eight-inch concrete slab. 
(b)  In addition to any other restrictions of the city regarding roof coverings, the installation of wood shingle or shake roof on any structure hereafter constructed in the city is prohibited. 
(Code 2004, §§ 4.116.1, 4.116.2; Ord. No. 92-34, 11-24-1992; Ord. No. 2001-37, 8-28-2001; Ord. No. 2004-22, 7-13-2004; Ord. No. 2006-36, 8-8-2006; Ord. No. 2017-0425-001, § 2, 5-9-2017)  
Sec. 14-56. - Building permit fees. 
Fees and charges for building permits, including prepermit plan review, inspections, special fees, and swimming pool/hot tub fees, shall be as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 2004, § 4.119; Ord. No. 2003-33, 8-12-2003)  
Secs. 14-57—14-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL CODE 
 
Sec. 14-86. - Adoption of International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2015 Edition. 
(a)  The International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2015 Edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, is hereby adopted by the city council as a general standard for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories in height in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The city council hereby extends the application and enforcement of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2015 Edition, as amended, to the fullest extent allowed by law, to include the incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. The International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2015 Edition, as amended, shall be applicable to all construction, repair, renovation and remodeling activities within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction as those boundaries may be from time to time adjusted by annexation, disannexation, or otherwise. Unless deleted, omitted, expanded or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2015 Edition, as amended, shall be fully applicable and binding and in full force and effect. A copy of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2015 Edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, referred to in this division shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  The following sections are excepted from adoption: 
(1)  Part VIII-Electrical, Chapter 33 through Chapter 42. 
(c)  The following sections are revised: 
(1)  Section R101.1; insert: City of Farmersville. 
(2)  Section R301.2(1); insert the following Design Criteria: 
Ground Snow Loads: 	Not applicable 
Wind Speed: 	90 mph and lower 
Seismic Category: 	"A" 
Weathering: 	Moderate 
Frost Line Depth: 	18 inches; 
Termite: 	"Very Heavy" 
Decay: 	"Moderate" 
Winter Design Temperature: 	N/A 
Flood Hazard: 	1989 
 
(3)  Section R602.3.3; modified to include: All bearing studs are spaced at 16 inches (406 mm) minimum. 
(4)  Section R602.5; modified to include: All ceiling joists are spaced at 16 inches (406 mm) minimum. The ceiling joists are two-inch by six-inch members. 
(d)  New residential roofs shall include approved guttering along the bottom horizontal edge of the roofline to route rain or water runoff into a downspout. The downspout shall terminate no less than 18 inches from the foundation of the structure. 
(Code 2004, §§ 4.110.12, 4.121.1; Ord. No. 2002-07, 2-12-2002; Ord. No. 2006-36, 8-8-2006; Ord. No. 2007-12, 4-10-2007; Ord. No. O-2011-0322-005, § 2. 3-22-2011; Ord. No. 2017-0425-001, § 3, 5-9-2017)  
Secs. 14-87—14-117. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ELECTRICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 14-118. - Adoption of National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition. 
The National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association, 2017 edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, is adopted as the city's electrical code for regulating the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, electrical signs, special occupancies, special equipment, special conditions and communications systems. The National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is made a part of this Code as if fully set forth in this division. One copy of the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, is on file in the City Secretary's office for permanent record and inspection. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0119-005, § 2, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2017-0425-001, § 4, 5-9-2017)  
Sec. 14-119. - Future amendments. 
Future amendments, not including clarifications or technical notices of any type, of the National Electrical Code, 2008 edition, are not adopted by this article, and may, in the sole discretion of the city council, be subsequently approved and adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0119-005, § 3, 1-19-2010)  
Sec. 14-120. - Application. 
The city council hereby extends the application and enforcement of this division, to the fullest extent allowed by law, to include the incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. This division shall be applicable to all construction, repair, renovation and remodeling activities within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction as those boundaries may be from time to time adjusted by annexation, disannexation, or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2011-0322-006, § 2, 3-22-2011)  
Sec. 14-121. - Electric permit fees. 
Permit fees to be paid for the erection, installation, addition, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, maintenance or use of any electrical system shall be, as from time to time, established in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 2004, § 4.127; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004)  
Secs. 14-122—14-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - MECHANICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 14-151. - Adoption of International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition. 
The International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, is hereby adopted by the city council as a general standard for regulating the erection, installation, addition, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, maintenance or use of any heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration system, incinerators or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances system in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The city council hereby extends the application and enforcement of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, as amended, to the fullest extent allowed by law, to include the incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. The International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, as amended, shall be applicable to all construction, repair, renovation and remodeling activities within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction as those boundaries may be from time to time adjusted by annexation, disannexation, or otherwise. Unless deleted, omitted, expanded or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, as amended, shall be fully applicable and binding and in full force and effect. A copy of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, referred to herein shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 2004, § 4.130; Ord. No. 2006-36, 8-8-2006; Ord. No. O-2011-0322-002, § 2, 3-22-2011; Ord. No. 2017-0425-001, § 5, 5-9-2017)  
Sec. 14-152. - Mechanical permit fees. 
The permit fee to be paid for the erection, installation, addition, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, maintenance or use of any plumbing or gas system shall be as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 2004, § 4.130.1; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004)  
Secs. 14-153—14-177. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PLUMBING CODE 
 
Sec. 14-178. - Adoption of International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition. 
The International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, is hereby adopted by the city council as a general standard for regulating the erection, installation, addition, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, maintenance or use of any plumbing system in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The city council hereby extends the application and enforcement of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, as amended, to the fullest extent allowed by law, to include the incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. The International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, as amended, shall be applicable to all construction, repair, renovation and remodeling activities within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction as those boundaries may be from time to time adjusted by annexation, disannexation, or otherwise. Unless deleted, omitted, expanded or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, as amended, shall be fully applicable and binding and in full force and effect. A copy of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, referred to herein shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 2004, § 4.133; Ord. No. 2006-36, 8-8-2006; Ord. No. O-2011-0322-003, § 2, 3-22-2011; Ord. No. 2017-0425-001, § 6, 5-9-2017)  
Sec. 14-179. - Amending International Plumbing Code. 
The International Plumbing Code is amended as follows: 
Section 504.7 Required pan: Where water heaters or hot water storage tanks are installed, the tank or water heater shall be installed in a galvanized steel pan having a minimum thickness of 24 gauge, or other pans approved for such use. The pan shall be drained by a pipe of those materials listed in table 605.4 extending outside the structure protruding not more than six inches from the structure wall and terminating not more than 18 inches from the exterior grade of the structure. 
(Code 2004, § 4.133.2; Ord. No. 2007-2, 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-180. - Plumbing permit fees. 
The permit fee to be paid for the erection, installation, addition, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, maintenance or use of any plumbing or gas system shall be as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 2004, § 4.133.1; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004).  
Secs. 14-181—14-203. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - FUEL GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 14-204. - Adoption of International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition. 
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, including appendix chapters A, B, C and D as published by the International Code Council, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, is hereby adopted by the city council as a general standard for purposes of regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances as therein provided. Unless deleted, omitted, expanded or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, as amended, shall be fully applicable and binding and in full force and effect. A copy of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, referred to herein shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0413-003, § 1, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 2017-0425-001, § 7, 5-9-2017)  
Sec. 14-205. - Amendments to adopted code. 
The following sections are revised: 
(1)  Section 101.1; insert: City of Farmersville. 
(2)  Section 106.5.2; insert: On file with the city secretary. 
(3)  Section 106.5.3; insert: ten percent. 
(4)  Section 108.4; insert: class C misdemeanor, $500.00. 
(5)  Section 108.5; insert: $500.00. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0413-003, § 2, 4-13-2010)  
Sec. 14-206. - Application. 
The city council hereby extends the application and enforcement of this division, to the fullest extent allowed by law, to include the incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. This division shall be applicable to all construction, repair, renovation and remodeling activities within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction as those boundaries may be from time to time adjusted by annexation, disannexation, or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2011-0322-009, § 2, 3-22-2011)  
Secs. 14-207—14-223. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - EXISTING BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 14-224. - Adoption of International Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition. 
The International Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, is hereby adopted by the city council as a general standard for purposes of encouraging the use and reuse of existing buildings as therein provided. Unless deleted, omitted, expanded or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such International Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition, as amended, shall be fully applicable and binding and in full force and effect. A copy of the International Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, referred to herein shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0413-004, § 1, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 2017-0425-001, § 8, 5-9-2017)  
Sec. 14-225. - Amendments to adopted code. 
The following sections are revised: 
(1)  Section 101.1; insert: City of Farmersville. 
(2)  Section 1301.2; insert: April 13, 2010. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0413-004, § 2, 4-13-2010)  
Sec. 14-226. - Application. 
The city council hereby extends the application and enforcement of this division, to the fullest extent allowed by law, to include the incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. This division shall be applicable to all construction, repair, renovation and remodeling activities within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction as those boundaries may be from time to time adjusted by annexation, disannexation, or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2011-0322-010, § 2, 3-22-2011)  
Secs. 14-227—14-248. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 
 
Sec. 14-249. - Adoption of International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition. 
The International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, is hereby adopted by the city council as a general standard for purposes of regulating and governing energy efficient building envelopes and installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems as therein provided. Unless deleted, omitted, expanded or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, as amended, shall be fully applicable and binding and in full force and effect. A copy of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, referred to herein shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0413-005, § 1, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 2017-0425-001, § 9, 5-9-2017)  
Sec. 14-250. - Amendments to adopted code. 
The following sections are revised: 
Section 101.1; insert: City of Farmersville. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0413-005, § 2, 4-13-2010)  
Sec. 14-251. - Application. 
The city council hereby extends the application and enforcement of this division, to the fullest extent allowed by law, to include the incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. This division shall be applicable to all construction, repair, renovation and remodeling activities within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction as those boundaries may be from time to time adjusted by annexation, disannexation, or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2011-0322-008, § 2, 3-22-2011)  
Secs. 14-252—14-268. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
 
Sec. 14-269. - Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition. 
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, is hereby adopted by the city council as a general standard for purposes of regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, building and structures, providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, including the demolition of such existing structures in the city, providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor. Unless deleted, omitted, expanded or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, as amended, shall be fully applicable and binding and in full force and effect. A copy of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, referred to herein shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2009-36, § 1, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. 2017-0425-001, § 10, 5-9-2017)  
Sec. 14-270. - Amendments to adopted code. 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)  Section 101.1; insert: City of Farmersville. 
(2)  Section 103.5; insert: On file with the city secretary. 
(3)  Section 302.4; insert: Twelve (12) inches. 
(4)  Section 304.14; insert: January 1 to December 31. 
(5)  Section 602.3; insert: October 1 to May 1. 
(6)  Section 602.4; insert: October 1 to May 1. 
(Ord. No. 2009-36, § 2, 11-10-2009)  
Secs. 14-271—14-283. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MOVING BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 14-284. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building means any structure or building for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, chattels, animals, or movable property of any kind. 
Building inspector means the building official or other such person as the city manager may designate. 
(Code 2004, § 4.149)  
Sec. 14-285. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to move from or into, or to relocate a building within, the city limits for the purpose of placing such building upon any lot or tract of land for any use or occupancy of any nature, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city. 
(Code 2004, § 4.149)  
Sec. 14-286. - Application contents, fee, investigation and review. 
(a)  Application. Any person seeking or desiring to move or relocate a building from, into, or within the city limits shall file an application with the city requesting a permit. The application shall be made in writing upon forms provided by the building inspector, and shall be filed in the city secretary's office. 
(b)  Contents. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  A description and size of the building proposed to be moved, giving a description of the construction materials, dimensions, number of square feet and rooms and the condition of the exterior and interior; 
(3)  A street address and legal description of the lot upon which the building is presently located and a street address and legal description of the lot upon which the building is to be relocated; 
(4)  A drawing or plot plan showing the dimensions of the lot or tract of land upon which the building is to be moved or relocated; and 
(5)  The proposed route, including the time and date when the applicant proposes to move or relocate the building, a plan for traffic safety measures and any required state or county permits. 
(c)  Fee. The application for permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. Application fees for permits are nonrefundable. 
(d)  Investigation of application by building inspector. Upon filing of the application, the building inspector shall investigate the application by inspecting the building to be moved or relocated in addition to inspecting the lot or tract of land upon which the building is to be relocated, if it is to be placed in the city. The building inspector shall determine whether or not the building would meet all requirements of the building code and applicable city regulations. If it cannot, the permit shall not be issued. 
(e)  Time limit. Any person to whom a permit has been issued authorizing the moving of a building shall move and relocate such building on the new site within two months after the issuance of such permit. If the building is not moved or relocated on the new site within two months, the permit shall expire. The permit is nontransferable. 
(f)  Review. After receiving the application and conducting his investigation, the building inspector shall grant the request if it meets the requirements of this article. 
(Code 2004, § 4.149.1; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004)  
Sec. 14-287. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
No person shall occupy a building permitted to be moved until the building official issues a certificate of occupancy to the permittee. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the building complies with all conditions of the permit and applicable Code requirements. 
(Code 2004, § 4.149.2; Ord. No. 2000-18, 5-9-2000)  
Sec. 14-288. - Code enforcement and building inspection fees. 
(a)  Building permit fees shall be as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  A reinspection fee as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code is assessed after the first two inspections for all Code inspections. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.25; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004)  
Secs. 14-289—14-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MINIMUM BUILDING AND PROPERTY STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 14-301. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety, morals, and welfare of the citizens of the city by establishing minimum standards applicable to property, buildings, and structures. Minimum standards are established with respect to utilities, facilities, and other physical components essential to make structures safe, sanitary, and fit for human use and habitation. Demolition of structures is provided for as a last resort when compliance with standards cannot reasonably be achieved. 
(b)  This article is found to be remedial and essential to the public interest, and it is intended that this article be liberally construed to effect its purpose. All structures within the city on the effective date of this article, or constructed thereafter, must comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004, § 4.110.1)  
Sec. 14-302. - Definitions. 
Addition. An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure. 
Alter or alteration. Any change or modification in construction or occupancy. 
Apartment. A dwelling unit as defined in this Code. 
Apartment house. Any building or portion thereof used as a multiple dwelling for the purpose of providing three or more separate dwelling units that may share means of egress and other essential facilities. 
Basement. Any building story having a floor below grade. 
Bathroom. An enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs, showers, or both, and which may also include toilets, lavatories, or fixtures serving similar purposes. 
Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind that has enclosing walls for 50 percent of its perimeter. 
Building official. The person designated by the city manager to enforce building standards ordinance. 
Code enforcement officer. The person or persons designated by the city manager to enforce city ordinances. 
Commission. The building and property standards commission. 
Dwelling. A structure or building occupied as a residence. 
Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Extermination. The control and extermination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods. 
Family. One or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, exclusive of household servants. Alternatively, a number of persons, but never exceeding two, living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit shall be deemed to constitute a family even if not related by blood, adoption, or marriage. 
Floor space. The total area of all habitable space. 
Garbage. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
Grade. The natural surface of the ground, or surface ground after completion of any changing contour. 
Grass. Any grass, weeds, or vegetative growth not to include agricultural crops from which the person growing such crop derives a substantial portion of his income and not to include tended and cultivated hedges or other similar utilitarian forms of vegetation. 
Habitable room. A space in a building for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space, and similar areas are not considered habitable space. 
Habitable space. The space occupied by one or more persons while living, sleeping, eating, and cooking; excluding kitchenettes, bathrooms, toilet rooms, laundries, pantries, dressing rooms, closets, storage space, foyers, hallways, utility rooms, heating rooms, boiler rooms, and basement or cellar recreation rooms. 
Infestation. The presence within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents, or other pests. 
Kitchen. A space, 60 square feet or more in floor area with a minimum width of five feet, used for cooking or preparation of food. 
Kitchenette. A space, less than 60 square feet in floor area, used for cooking or preparation of food. 
Multiple dwelling. Any building, or portion thereof, which is occupied as the home or residence of more than two families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the said building, and shall include flats and apartments. 
Nuisance. The following shall be defined as nuisances: 
(1)  Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements, or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors. 
(3)  Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health. 
(4)  Overcrowding a room with occupants. 
(5)  Insufficient ventilation or illumination. 
(6)  Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities. 
(7)  Uncleanliness, as determined by the health officer. 
(8)  Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings, and as defined in this Code, as determined by the health officer. 
Openable area. That part of a window or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
Operating condition. The minimum condition required for proper operation, e.g. free of leaks, safe, sanitary, and in good working order. 
Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
Owner. A person claiming, or in whom is vested, the ownership, dominion, or title to real property, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Holder of fee simple title; 
(2)  The holder of a life estate; 
(3)  The holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five years or more; 
(4)  The buyer in a contract for deed and 
(5)  The mortgagee, receiver, executor, or trustee in control of real property; but not including the holder of a leasehold estate or tenancy for initial term of less than five years. 
Person. Any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, association, or any other legal entity. 
Plumbing fixtures. Gas pipes, water pipes, toilets, lavatories, sinks, laundry tubs, dishwashers, garbage disposal units, clothes washing machines, basins, washbasins, bathtubs, shower baths, sewer pipes, sewage system, septic tanks, drainage, vents, traps, and other fuel burning or water using fixtures and appliances, together with all connections to pipes. 
Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or structures thereon. 
Property. A lot, plot, or parcel of land, including any structures on the land. 
Property manager. A person whom for compensation has managing control of real property. 
Public area. An unoccupied open space adjoining a building and on the same property, that is permanently maintained accessible to the fire department and free of all encumbrances that might interfere with its use by the fire department. 
Public sewer. A sewer operated by a public authority or public utility and available for public use. 
Repair. The replacement of existing work with the same kind of material used in the existing work, not including additional work that would change the structural safety of the building, or that would affect or change required exit facilities, a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring or heating installations, or that would be in violation of a provision of law or ordinance. The term repair or repairs shall not apply to any change of construction. 
Residential buildings. Buildings in which families or households live or in which sleeping accommodations are provided, and all dormitories. Such buildings include, among others, dwellings, multiple dwellings, and rooming houses. 
Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, including the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metal, mineral matter, glass crockery, and dust. 
Sanitary. Any condition of good order and cleanliness that precludes the probability of disease transmission. 
Stairway. One or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one story to another in a building or structure. 
Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and upper surface of the floor or roof next above. 
Structure. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
Temporary housing. Any tent, trailer, or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days. 
Urban nuisance. A premises or structure that: 
(1)  Is reasonably dangerous to the physical health or safety of an occupant or other persons; 
(2)  Because of violations of this article, its state of disrepair is such that it could reasonably cause injury, damage, harm, or inconvenience to a considerable portion of the community and the use and enjoyment of the property materially interferes with the use and/or comfort and enjoyment of surrounding property, which condition is substantially offensive and annoying to persons of ordinary sensibilities, taste, and habits living in the community. 
Valuation or value. The estimated cost to replace the building in kind. 
Ventilation. The process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space. 
Water closet. An enclosed space containing one or more toilets. 
Yard. An unoccupied open space other than a court. 
(Code 2004, § 4.110.2)  
Sec. 14-303. - Code enforcement officer duties. 
(a)  The building official, code enforcement officer, or a designated representative shall have the power to obtain search warrants allowing the inspection of any specified premises to determine the presence of a health hazard or unsafe building condition, including but not limited to any structural, property, or utility hazard, or a violation of any health or building regulation, statute, or ordinance. 
(b)  For the purpose of ascertaining whether violations of this article exist, the building official, code enforcement officer, or a designated representative is authorized at reasonable times to inspect: 
(1)  The exterior of a structure and premises which contain no structure; and 
(2)  The interior of a structure, if the permission of the owner, occupant, or person in control is given. 
(Code 2004, § 4.110.3)  
Sec. 14-304. - Violations/penalty. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to perform an act required of him by this article, commits an offense. A person commits a separate offense each day or portion of a day during which a violation is committed, permitted, or continued. An offense under this article is punishable by a fine as prescribed by section 1-3. 
(b)  In addition to imposing a criminal penalty described in subsection (a) the city hereby implements Chapter 54, subchapters B and C of the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code and may bring a civil action against a person violating a provision of this article. The civil action may include, but is not limited to a suit to recover a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or committed. 
(c)  The penalties provided for in subsections (a) and (b) are in addition to any other enforcement remedies that the city may have under city ordinances and state law. 
(Code 2004, § 4.110.4)  
Sec. 14-305. - Building and property standards commission procedures. 
(a)  The commission may adopt rules not inconsistent with this article. 
(b)  Notice of all proceedings before the commission shall be given: 
(1)  By certified mail, return receipt requested to the record owners of the affected property sent to the last known address, and each mortgagee, lienholder and each holder of a recorded lien against the affected property, as shown by the records of the county clerk of the county in which the affected property is located if the address of the lienholder can be ascertained from the deed of trust establishing lien or other applicable instruments on file in the office of the county clerk; and 
(2)  To all unknown owners by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each improvement situated on the affected property or as close to the front as practicable; 
(3)  The notice shall be mailed and posted before the 10th day preceding the date of the hearing before the commission and must state the date, time, and place of the hearing. In addition, the notice must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city on one occasion before the 10th day preceding the date fixed for the hearing; 
(4)  The notice shall contain the following: 
a.  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description of the building and the property on which it is located; 
b.  A description of the violation of the municipal standards that is present at the building; and 
c.  A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove, repair, or demolish the building or relocate the occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within a reasonable time. 
d.  If the notice sent to the last known address of the person being notified is returned undelivered, the building official may serve the notice personally if the person to be notified can be found in the county. If notice sent to an owner is returned undelivered, and after diligent search, the building official is unable to discover a correct address for the owner or is unable to serve the owner personally, then the building official shall give notice by publication in the official newspaper of the city at least five days before the hearing. 
e.  At each hearing of the commission an owner, lessor, occupant, or lienholder may present witnesses in his own behalf and is entitled to cross examine any witnesses appearing against him. 
f.  After a public hearing, the decision of the commission is final as to the administrative remedies. 
g.  Once the decision of the commission has become final under this article, the person affected by the order may appeal the decision to the state district court, by filing a petition with the district court within 30 calendar days after the date a copy of the final decision of the commission is mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to all persons whom notice is required to be sent. The commission shall mail such copy promptly after the decision becomes final. In addition, a copy shall be published one time in the official newspaper of the city within ten calendar days after the date of the mailing of the copy as herein provided, and a copy shall be filed in the office of the city secretary. On presentation of the petition, the court may allow a writ of certiorari pursuant to subchapter (c), Chapter 54, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, as amended. If no appeals are taken from the decision of the commission within the required period, the decision of the commission shall, in all things, be final and binding. The appeal in district court shall be limited to a hearing under the substantial evidence rule. 
(Code 2004, § 4.110.5)  
Sec. 14-306. - Failure to comply with an order of the commission. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he fails to correct a violation of this article in compliance with a commission order that has become final. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) that the commission order has been appealed to the district court. 
(Code 2004, § 4.110.6)  
Sec. 14-307. - Minimum standards; responsibilities of owner. 
Property standards. An owner shall: 
(1)  Eliminate a hole, excavation, sharp protrusion, and any other object or condition that exists on the land and is reasonably capable of causing injury to a person; 
(2)  Remove dead trees and tree limbs that are reasonably capable of causing injury to a person; 
(3)  Place exterior lights in a manner such that they will not create a traffic hazard or a public nuisance. Exterior lights shall be located in a manner such that they will not directly illuminate beyond the property line; 
(4)  Maintain all sidewalks, walkways, steps, and driveways in a state of good repair. Keep all adjacent public sidewalks, walkways, and steps free of mud, debris, or other obstructions which would impair or prevent their use; and 
(5)  Grass standards. 
a.  Grass over 12 inches tall. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying any real property within the corporate limits of the city to permit grass or any other combustible material to grow to a height greater than 12 inches. Grass that exceeds 12 inches in height shall be presumed to be a fire hazard and constitute a nuisance. 
b.  Grass over 48 inches tall. Notwithstanding the other provisions to this article, the city may abate, without notice, grass that has grown higher than 48 inches and is an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person. 
If the city abates grass under this subsection, the city shall give notice to the property owner in a manner required by this article not later than the 10th day after the date that the city abates grass under this subsection. This notice shall contain: 
a.  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property; 
b.  A description of the violations of the article that occurred on the property; 
c.  A statement that the city abated the grass; and 
d.  An explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing about the city abatement of the grass. 
The commission shall conduct a hearing on the abatement of grass under this subsection if, not later than the 30th day after the date of the abatement of the grass, the property owner files with the city a written request for a hearing. An administrative hearing conducted under this subsection shall be conducted no later than the 20th day after the date a request for hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written information relating to the city's abatement of the grass. 
Expenses under this article may be assessed in liens created under the same conditions expressed in this article. The grant of authority in this article is in addition to all other powers granted by this article. 
(6)  Rubbish, objectionable, and unsanitary matter. It shall be the lawful duty of any person owning or occupying real property, within the corporate limits of the city, to keep such property free from rubbish, and other objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter. It shall further be the lawful duty of any person owning any building, establishment, or real property, to keep such improvements or property free from filth, carrion, or other impure or unwholesome matter. 
(7)  Stagnant water. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying real property, within the corporate limits of the city, to permit stagnant water therein, and it shall be the duty of said persons to fill up, drain, or re-grade any lots, ground or yards which have stagnant water therein. 
(Code 2004, § 4.110.7)  
Sec. 14-308. - Structural standards; responsibility of owner. 
An owner shall: 
(1)  Protect the exterior surfaces of a structure which are subject to decay by application of paint or other coating; 
(2)  Fill hollow, masonry supporting piers, if used, with concrete and anchor the piers to concrete footings with a 5/8-inch steel dowel; 
(3)  Provide and maintain railings for stairs, steps, balconies, porches, and elsewhere as specified in the building code; 
(4)  Repair holes, cracks, and other defects reasonably capable of causing injury to a person in stairs, porches, steps, and balconies; 
(5)  Maintain a structure intended for human occupancy and a structure used as an accessory to a structure intended for human occupancy in a weather tight and water tight condition; 
(6)  Maintain floors, walls, ceilings, and all supporting structural members in a sound condition, capable of bearing imposed loads safely; 
(7)  Provide cross-ventilation as prescribed in the building code; 
(8)  Repair or replace chimney flue and attachments that do not function properly; 
(9)  Repair holes, cracks, breaks, and loose surface materials that are health or safety hazards in or on floors, walls, and ceilings; 
(10)  Provide and maintain a moisture resistant finish or material for the flooring or subflooring of each bathroom, shower room, and toilet room; 
(11)  Provide every habitable room with at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be eight percent of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any such room and such light-obstruction structures are located less than three feet. from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least 15 percent of the total floor area of such room; 
(12)  Provide every habitable room with at least one window or skylight which can be easily opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight-type window size, as required, or shall have other approved, equivalent ventilation; 
(13)  Year round mechanically ventilating conditioned air systems may be substituted for windows, as required herein, in rooms other than rooms used for sleeping purposes. Window type air conditioning units are not included in this exception; 
(14)  Provide every bathroom with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms, except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms equipped with an approved ventilating system; 
(15)  When there is electric service available to the building structure, provide every habitable room or space with at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Bedrooms shall have, in addition, at least one wall switch controlled lighting outlet. In kitchens, three separate and remote receptacle outlets shall be provided, and a wall or ceiling lighting outlet controlled by a wall switch shall be provided. Every hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall contain at least one ceiling-mounted or wall-mounted lighting outlet. In bathrooms, the lighting outlet shall be controlled by a wall switch. In addition to the lighting outlet in every bathroom and laundry room, there shall be provided at least one receptacle outlet. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection; 
(16)  Provide that every common hall and inside stairway in every building, other than one-family dwellings, be adequately lighted at all times with an illumination of at least one foot-candle intensity at the floor in the darkest portion of the normally traveled stairs and passageways; 
(17)  Provide and maintain the building foundation system in a safe manner and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon; 
(18)  Provide every exterior wall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain, or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the building. All siding material shall be kept in repair; 
(19)  Provide roofs which are structurally sound and maintained in a safe manner and which have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building; 
(20)  Provide and maintain all portions, additions or sections of a roof including, but not limited to fascia, eaves, soffit, sheathing, rafter tails, barge rafter, vent screening, gutters, downspouts, roof jacks, and lead or metal flashing. They shall be complete with all trim strips, moldings, brackets, braces and supports in accordance with common building practices. No item shall display signs of deterioration, abuse or improper installation that could be construed to affect the purpose of that item or cause damage to the immediate area or roof structure, that could allow dampness or admit rain to the interior of that building; 
(21)  Provide and maintain every dwelling unit with safe, unobstructed means of egress with a minimum ceiling height of seven feet. leading to a safe and open space at ground level. Stairs shall have a minimum head room of six feet eight inches; 
(22)  Provide and maintain every inside and outside stair, porch and any appurtenance thereto for safe use. It shall be capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; 
(23)  Provide and maintain protective railings on any unenclosed structure over 30 inches from the ground level or on any steps containing four risers or more; 
(24)  Provide and maintain every window substantially weathertight, watertight and rodent-proof, and keep in sound working condition and good repair; 
(25)  Provide and maintain every window sash to be fully supplied with glass window panes or an approved substitute which is without open cracks or holes. Window sash shall be properly fitted and weathertight within the window frame; 
(26)  Provide every window required for light and ventilation for habitable rooms to be capable of being easily opened and secured in position by window hardware; 
(27)  Provide every exterior door, basement or cellar door and hatchway to be substantially weathertight, watertight, and rodent-proof, and kept in sound working condition and good repair; 
(28)  Provide every exterior door with properly installed hardware that is maintained to insure reasonable ease of operation to open, close and secure in an open or closed position, as intended by the manufacturer of the door and the attached hardware; 
(29)  Provide exterior door frames be properly maintained and affixed with weather stripping and thresholds as required to be substantially weathertight, watertight and rodent and insect restrictive when the door is in a closed position; 
(30)  Provide exterior door jambs, stops, headers and moldings securely attached to the structure, maintained in good condition without splitting or deterioration that would minimize the strength and security of the door in a closed position; 
(31)  Provide dwelling units which do not have a properly working central air conditioning system with screens on all exterior openable windows and have a screen door with a self-closing device on all exterior doors except for the main entrance door; 
(32)  Provide all exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. All siding shall be weather resistant and water tight. All masonry joints shall be sufficiently tuck pointed to insure water and air tightness; 
(33)  Provide and maintain garages, storage buildings and all other accessory structures in good repair and sound structural condition; 
(34)  Provide every floor, interior wall and ceiling to be substantially rodent proof, kept in sound condition and good repair and safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon; 
(35)  Provide every toilet, bathroom and kitchen floor surface constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition; 
(36)  Maintain every structural element of the dwelling structurally sound and showing no evidence of deterioration which would render it incapable of carrying normal loads; 
(37)  Provide and maintain interior stairs and stairwells more than four risers high with handrails located in accordance with the requirements of the building code. Handrails or protective railings shall be capable of bearing normally imposed loads and be maintained in good condition; 
(38)  Provide every existing interior door to fit reasonably well within its frame and be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware; 
(39)  Provide every interior door with proper hardware, securely attached and maintained in good condition. Clasp lock assemblies are not permitted on the exterior side of the door of habitable rooms; 
(40)  Provide and maintain the privacy of bathrooms afforded by doors complete with privacy hardware intended by manufacturer for that purpose; 
(41)  Provide existing skirting maintained free from broken or missing sections, pieces or cross members. Skirting shall be securely attached and sized from the ground to the lower outside perimeter of the structure. Replacement or new skirting shall be constructed of materials intended for exterior use and properly sized and mounted to prevent free access to the crawl space of the structure. Crawl space access grille or door and ventilation grilles shall be sized according to local code requirements; 
(42)  Provide every dwelling unit with at least 150 sq. ft. of floor area for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional sq. ft. of floor area per additional occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of the total area of the habitable rooms; 
(43)  Provide in every dwelling unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant with at least 70 sq. ft. of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant with at least 50 sq. ft. of floor area for each occupant thereof; 
(44)  Provide habitable (space) rooms other than kitchens, storage rooms and laundry rooms with a ceiling height of not less than seven feet six inches (or seven feet to the lowest projection). Hallways, corridors, bathrooms, water closet rooms and kitchens shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. If any room in a building has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room is required in only one-half the room area. No portion of the room measuring less than five feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum room area; 
(45)  In the event the basement or cellar space is used as a habitable room or dwelling unit, provide and maintain the following: 
a.  The floor and walls impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and insulated against dampness; 
b.  The total window area in each room equal to at least the minimum required window area size; 
c.  The required minimum window area entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area; and 
d.  Keep the doors and windows of a vacant structure or vacant portion of a structure securely closed to prevent unauthorized entry. 
(Code 2004, § 4.110.8)  
Sec. 14-309. - Utility standards; responsibility of owner. 
An owner shall: 
(1)  Provide and maintain in operating condition connections to discharge sewage from a structure or land into a public sewer system; 
(2)  Provide and maintain in operating condition a toilet in or within each structure intended for human habitation, said toilet shall be connected to a water source and to a public sewer, where available, or a septic system; 
(3)  Provide and maintain in operating condition connections and pipes to supply potable water at adequate pressure to a structure intended for human occupancy; 
(4)  Provide and maintain in operating condition a device to supply hot water of a minimum temperature of 120 °F within each structure intended for human habitation; 
(5)  Provide and connect a kitchen sink, bathtub or shower, and lavatory to a cold and hot water source in each structure intended for human habitation; 
(6)  Connect plumbing fixtures and heating equipment that the owner supplies in accordance with the plumbing and mechanical codes; 
(7)  If screens are not provided, provide and maintain in operating condition, from May 1 through October 15, refrigeration equipment capable of maintaining a maximum inside temperature that is 20 °F lower than the outside temperature or 85 °F, whichever is warmer, in each room of a structure intended for human occupancy; 
(8)  Provide and maintain in operating condition supply lines for electrical service to each structure intended for human occupancy; 
(9)  Provide and maintain in operating condition electrical circuits and outlets sufficient to safely carry a load imposed by normal use of appliances and fixtures; 
(10)  Locate all required plumbing fixtures within the dwelling unit be accessible to the occupants of same. The water closet, tub or shower and lavatory shall be located in a room affording privacy to the user and such room shall have a minimum floor space of 30 sq. ft. with no dimension less than four feet. Bathrooms shall be accessible from habitable rooms, hallways, corridors or other protected or enclosed areas, not including kitchens or other food preparation areas; 
(11)  Provide heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working conditions, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, and bathrooms in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at least 68 °F (20 °C) at a distance three feet above floor level; 
(12)  In the event a central heating system is not provided, provide each dwelling unit with facilities whereby heating appliances may be connected; 
(13)  Un-vented fuel burning heaters shall be prohibited except for gas heaters listed for un-vented use and the total input rating of the un-vented heaters is less than 30 B.t.u. per hour per cu. ft. of room content; 
(14)  Provide all cooking and heating equipment and facilities installed in accordance with the building, mechanical, gas and electrical code and be maintained in a safe and good working condition. Portable cooking equipment employing flame is prohibited; 
(15)  Provide every dwelling unit with adequate garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers, of a type and location approved by the city; 
(16)  Provide each dwelling unit with an approved listed smoke detector, installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and listing. When activated, the detector shall provide an audible alarm. The detector shall be tested in accordance with and meet the requirements of UL 217, Single and Multiple Station Smoke Detectors; 
(17)  Provide every electrical outlet and fixture required by this Code to be installed, maintained and connected to a source of electric power in accordance with the provisions of the electrical code of the city. 
(Code 2004, § 4.110.9)  
Sec. 14-310. - Health standards; responsibility of owner. 
An owner shall: 
(1)  Eliminate rodents and vermin in or on the land; 
(2)  Provide a structure intended for human habitation with a screen for keeping out insects at each opening of the structure if the structure is not cooled with refrigerated air; 
(3)  Maintain the interior of a vacant structure or vacant portion of a structure free from rubbish and garbage; 
(4)  Keep the interior of a structure free from insects, rodents, and vennin; 
(5)  Be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or common areas of the dwelling and premises thereof; 
(6)  Keep the premises clean and remove from the premises abandoned items such as ice boxes, refrigerators, stoves, glass, building materials, building rubbish or similar items, including but not limited to weeds, dead trees, trash, garbage, etc. 
(Code 2004, § 4.110.10)  
Sec. 14-311. - Fences; responsibility of owner. 
An owner shall: 
(1)  All fences shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition and not out of vertical alignment more than 20 percent. 
(2)  All damaged, rotting, removed, or missing portions shall be replaced with materials comparable to the remaining portion of the fence and shall be kept free from deterioration. 
(3)  A fence that has deteriorated to a failing condition shall be repaired, replaced, or removed. 
(4)  Fences shall not be externally braced in lieu of replacing or repairing posts, columns, or other structural members. 
(5)  All damaged or missing parts of chain link or metal fences shall be replaced or repaired. 
(Code 2004, § 4.110.11)  
Sec. 14-312. - Responsibilities of occupant. 
An occupant shall: 
(1)  Maintain those portions of the interior of a structure under his control free from rubbish, garbage and other conditions that would encourage infestation of insects, rodents, or vermin; 
(2)  Remove an animal or animals from a structure if the presence of the animal or animals is a health hazard to an occupant; 
(3)  Connect plumbing fixtures and heating equipment that the occupant supplies in accordance with the plumbing and mechanical codes; 
(4)  Provide city approved solid waste receptacles or containers, when required by the city; 
(5)  Keep the interior of the structure free from insects, rodents and vermin; 
(6)  Keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof; 
(7)  Not occupy as owner-occupant, and, shall not let to another for occupancy, any building or structure which does not comply with the applicable provisions of any code of the city; 
(8)  Keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises thereof which he occupies or which is provided for his particular use; 
(9)  Dispose of all his garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents and all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities or city approved garbage or rubbish storage containers. 
(Code 2004, § 4.110.12)  
Sec. 14-313. - Urban nuisance; repair, demolition, receivership, and civil penalties; notice. 
(a)  The building official shall give notice of a hearing to consider repair, demolition, or receivership of a structure, or the assessment of a civil penalty against the owner, to the owner or owners, lessor, and occupant of the structure, and any mortgagee or lienholder of record of the real property concerned. A structure may be considered for repair, demolition, receivership, or civil penalty if the structure is not maintained in compliance with one or more of the minimum standards of this article, and the structure is an urban nuisance. 
(1)  A public hearing to consider repair, demolition, or receivership of a structure, or the assessment of a civil penalty against the owner, shall be before the commission after notice has been given to the person set forth in subsection (a). At the hearing the building official or his designated representative shall present evidence of the condition of a structure and an owner, lessor, occupant, mortgagee, and lienholder, as well as any interested person, may present evidence on relevant issues. 
(2)  The commission, after hearing evidence from each interested person present, may: 
a.  Find that the structure is not an urban nuisance and refer the matter to the building official for further appropriate actions; 
b.  Grant a variance in order to avoid the imposition of an unreasonable hardship; 
c.  In the case of a single family dwelling occupied by the owner where the health, safety, and welfare of other persons will not be affected, grant an exception to any provision of this article to avoid the imposition of an unreasonable hardship; or 
d.  Find the structure is an urban nuisance and order: 
1.  Demolition of the structure; 
2.  Repair or correction of the structure within a specified period of time; 
3.  Repair or correction of the structure within a specified period of time and demolition of the structure if the repair or correction is not timely effected; 
4.  Repair or correction of the structure by the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder within a specified period of time and repair or correction by the city if not timely effected by the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder; 
5.  Repair, correction, or demolition of the structure within a specified period of time and the assessment of a civil penalty against the owner for each day or part of a day that the owner fails to repair, correct or demolish the structure; 
6.  An action be brought in district court in accordance with Section 214.003 of the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code for the employment of a receiver of the property; 
7.  Vacation of the structure as necessary; or 
8.  Closure of an open and vacant structure. 
e.  Demolition of a structure may be accomplished by an owner, mortgagee, or lienholder in compliance with this article or by the city. Repair of a structure may be accomplished by an owner, mortgagee, or lienholder in compliance with this article, or by the city but only to the extent necessary to bring their structure into compliance with minimum standards and only if the structure is a residential structure with not more than ten dwelling units. Vacation of a structure or relocation of the occupants of a structure may be accomplished by an owner, mortgagee, or lienholder in compliance with this article or by the city. 
f.  The expense of repair, vacation, removal, closure or demolition of a structure when performed under contract with this city or by city forces, and any civil penalty assessed against the owner, constitutes a non-transferable lien against the real property on which the structure stands or stood, unless it is a homestead protected by the Texas Constitution, and the lien runs with the land. The city's lien attaches when notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk in the county in which the property is located. Notice must contain the name and address of the owner, if reasonably determinable, a legal description of the real property, the amount of expenses incurred by the city, and the balance due. The city's lien for demolition, vacation, removal and closure expenses is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens and all previously recorded bona fide mortgage liens attached to the property, if each mortgagee and lienholder is given notice and an opportunity to repair or demolish the structure. The city's lien for repair expenses or civil penalties is inferior to any previously recorded bona fide mortgagee lien attached to real property if the mortgage lien was filed for record in the county clerk's office of the county in which the real property is located before the date the civil penalty is assessed or the repair is begun by the city, but is superior to all other previously recorded judgment liens. A lien acquired by the city under this subsection for repair expenses may not be foreclosed if the structure upon which the repairs were made is the residential homestead of a person 65 years of age or older and is occupied by that person. 
g.  The city may use lawful means in the collection of repair, vacation, removal, closure and demolition costs and civil penalties from an owner. Any civil penalty or other assessment imposed pursuant to this article accrues interest at the rate of ten percent a year from the date of the assessment until paid in full. In any judicial proceeding regarding enforcement of this article, the prevailing party is entitled to recover reasonable attorney's fees from the non-prevailing party. 
h.  The building official shall give notice of demolition, repair by the city, or the assessment of the civil penalty, if the building official determines that the owner has not complied with an order to repair. 
i.  The building official shall give notice of an order of the commission and notice of demolition, repair by the city, or the assessment of a civil penalty, at the time of issue, to each person designated in section 14-312(a) and shall file each order of the commission in the deed records. If an order to demolish or repair is timely effected, the building official or his designated representative shall, upon request and payment of the cost by the owner, file a notice of compliance in the deed records. 
j.  When an order of the commission has been filed in the county deed records, the execution of the order is not affected by a sale or other transfer of the premises. A person acquiring interest in property after an order has been so filed is subject to the requirements of the order. Provisions of this subsection shall be included as part of each order. 
k.  The building official or his designated representative shall serve notice required by this article by certified United States mail, return receipt requested, sent to the last known address of the person being notified. If the certified mail is returned undelivered, the building official or his designated representative may serve the notice personally if the person to be notified can be found in the county. If the notice sent to an owner is returned undelivered, and after diligent search, the building official or his designated representative is unable to discover a correct address for the owner or is unable to serve the owner personally, then the building official or his designated representative shall given notice by publication of the order once in the official newspaper of the city at least five days before the hearing. 
(b)  Vacation of Structure. When the building official or his designated representative has given notice of a hearing to consider vacation of a structure, the building official or his designated representative shall place a sign on the structure or dwelling unit. The sign shall serve as a warning of the unsafe, unsanitary, and dangerous condition of the structure. A person commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Without authority from the building official moves or destroys a sign placed by the building official; 
(2)  Occupies a vacant structure or dwelling unit in which the building official has placed such sign; 
(3)  As the owner of a structure or dwelling unit, authorizes a person to occupy a vacant structure or dwelling unit on which the building official has placed such sign. 
(4)  Each occupant of a structure or dwelling unit that has been ordered vacated shall vacate the structure or dwelling unit within a specified time determined by the commission. No person shall occupy a structure or dwelling unit that has been ordered vacated. 
(5)  The owner shall provide alternative housing to all tenants who are forced to vacate by a decision of the building official or an order of the commission. 
(c)  Closure of a structure. When the building official or designated representative gives notice of a hearing to consider closure of the structure the building official or his designated representative may place a sign on the open and vacant structure or portion of a structure warning of its condition. 
(1)  No person without authority from the building official shall remove such sign. 
(2)  No person shall occupy an open and vacant structure in which such sign has been placed. 
(Code 2004, § 4.110.13; Ord. No. 99-08, 8-24-1999)  
Chapter 17 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of miscellaneous businesses, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.002 et seq.; home rule municipal authority to license any lawful business or occupation that is subject to its police powers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.075; municipal authority to regulate sexually oriented business, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq.; uniformity required in the issuance of local permits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 245.001 et seq.; occupations generally, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1.001 et seq.; Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 431.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 17-1—17-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DRILLING AND MINING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Injection wells, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 27.001 et seq.; plugging leaking wells, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 89.043; movement of oversize or overweight oil well servicing and drilling machinery, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 623.141 et seq.; oil and gas generally, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 81.001 et seq.; mines and mining, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 131.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 17-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Drilling and mining means any activity which is intended to produce, save or make available any oil, gas, water, sulphur, fissionable materials or other minerals in and under the land, and is illustrated by, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Investigating. 
(2)  Exploring. 
(3)  Prospecting. 
(4)  Drilling. 
(5)  Mining. 
(Code 2004, § 5.103.1)  
Sec. 17-20. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefor shall be fined in accordance with section 1-3. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense; provided, however, that such penal provision shall not preclude a suit to enjoin such a violation. 
(Code 2004, § 5.103.5; Ord. No. 86-25, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 17-21. - Prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any drilling or mining, as the term is defined in section 17-19, or to permit any such violation of this article, within the city's corporate limits. 
(Code 2004, § 5.103.2)  
Sec. 17-22. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to any drilling or mining, as the term is defined in section 17-19, within any area which is zoned for mining/drilling activities as such zones are defined in Chapter 77, Zoning, nor shall this article apply to any drilling which is approved under the provisions of a specific use permit issued in accordance with the provisions in Chapter 77, Zoning. 
(Code 2004, § 5.103.3)  
Sec. 17-23. - Public nuisance declared. 
The presence of any drilling and mining activity in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Notwithstanding the penal provision afforded in section 17-20, the city attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the city for injunctive relief, as may be necessary, to prevent the violation of any provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004, § 5.103.4)  
Secs. 17-24—17-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GARAGE SALES 
 
Sec. 17-50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garage sale means a sale or an offer for sale of miscellaneous items to the general public, upon residential property not otherwise being used for commercial purposes. The term "garage sale" also includes the following: 
(1)  Yard sale; 
(2)  Estate sale; 
(3)  Farm sale; 
(4)  Patio sale; 
(5)  Porch sale; 
(6)  Driveway sale; and 
(7)  Any other form of sale or auction held upon residential property within the city's corporate limits. 
Occupant means either the owner-occupant of the premises whereon such sale is to be conducted or the tenant of the owner, provided such tenant is actually residing upon such premises, and dependent members of the immediate family of the owner-occupant or tenant. 
Personal property means property that is owned, utilized, and maintained by an individual or members of his residence and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. This specifically excludes merchandise that was purchased or acquired for resale or attained on consignment. 
(Ord. No. 2009-37, § 2, 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 17-51. - Penalties. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee may revoke any garage sale permit or refuse any application for the issuance of a garage sale permit if the application submitted by the applicant or permit holder contains any false, fraudulent, or misleading information. 
(b)  If any person is convicted of an offense under this article, that person shall not participate in, benefit from, or be issued a permit for any garage sale until the expiration of 12 consecutive months from the date of the conviction. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 or more than $500.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day or portion of a day during or on which the violation continues or otherwise occurs. 
(Ord. No. 2009-37, § 5, 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 17-52. - Permits and fees. 
(a)  No later than three days prior to holding any garage sale, the occupant of the residence where such sale is to occur shall obtain a permit from the city to hold a garage sale. Members of no more than three residences may join together in obtaining a garage sale permit. 
(b)  The application for the permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The full name and address of each applicant; 
(2)  The address/location at which the proposed garage sale is to be held; 
(3)  The dates upon which the garage sale shall be held; 
(4)  The dates of any other garage sales participated in or conducted by each applicant within the current calendar year; 
(5)  If the proceeds of the garage sale are used directly for a bona fide, tax-exempt charitable, religious, fraternal or governmental organization; 
(6)  An affirmative affidavit that the property to be sold is owned by the applicant or was donated for the garage sale and that it was neither acquired nor consigned for resale; and 
(7)  If the garage sale is not for charitable purposes, the affidavit shall state that the property for sale is not from an inventory or a stock of goods in trade. 
(c)  The city secretary shall charge and collect, before the issuance of any garage sale permit, a fee as established by the city council in the master fee schedule contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-37, § 3, 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 17-53. - Restrictions on conduct. 
(a)  No more than three separate residences, locations, and/or family units may join together, participate in, or sell property at any one garage sale, except that any bona fide tax-exempt charitable, religious, educational, fraternal or governmental organization is exempt from this requirement when the proceeds of the garage sale are used directly for the institution's or organization's charitable purposes, and the goods or articles are not sold on a consignment basis. 
(b)  No more than four garage sale permits shall be issued to any one address/location during any one calendar year, provided further that at least ten days must lapse between garage sales conducted at the same address/location. If members of more than one residence join in requesting a garage sale permit, then such permit shall be considered as having been issued for each and all such residences. 
(c)  No property acquired for the purpose of resale may be sold at a garage sale. 
(d)  A copy of the garage sale permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place during the entire time and on the premises where the garage sale is being held. 
(e)  No garage sale shall last in excess of 72 consecutive hours. 
(f)  All personal property offered for sale may be displayed in any portion of the yard of the residence, as well as in the residence, garage or carport, or on the driveway. However, no property shall be displayed or sold on or within 15 feet of any public road, street, highway, or sidewalk. 
(g)  It shall be the seller's responsibility to remove any signs pertaining to his garage sale from any city or state right-of-way within 24 hours of the end of the garage sale. Attaching or otherwise placing signs or advertisements to utility poles at any time and for any purpose is expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2009-37, § 4, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. O-2013-1217-001, § 2, 12-17-2013)  
Sec. 17-54—17-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CONTRACTORS 
 
Sec. 17-100. - Registration required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or business entity in the business of contracting services which require, by state statute or local law, a license to perform such services, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, irrigation, or private sewage disposal system in the city, unless such person, firm, corporation or business entity is the holder of a valid registration with the city. Such person, firm, corporation or business entity shall be herein designated and referred to as contractor, applicant or registrant. 
(b)  Registration shall also be required for any person, firm, corporation or business entity providing removal and disposal of construction debris services, including roofing contractors, in the city. 
(c)  In extending the rights and privileges of such registration, the city makes no statement of the technical competency of those persons, firms, corporations or business entities so registered, and no manner of license is proffered. 
(d)  General, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, and irrigation contractors including backflow testers (referred to collectively as "contractor") shall not be eligible to receive a permit within the city or approve test reports for backflow prevention devices unless they are currently registered with the city; provided, however, property owners performing work on their primary place of residence shall be exempt from the registration requirements. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0127-002, § 2, 1-27-2015)  
Sec. 17-101. - Application for registration. 
An application for registration containing the following required information shall be provided to the city prior to receiving a registration permit: 
(1)  A completed contractor registration application supplied by the city including the complete name, mailing address, physical address (if different from the mailing address), business telephone number and cellular number of the contractor making application. If the applicant is a firm, corporation or business entity, there must be provided the name and private mailing address of a principal of the firm, corporation or business entity who is authorized to bind the firm, corporation or business entity in legal agreements. Each applicant must also provide the names of all employees authorized to obtain a permit under the contractor's name. 
(2)  A copy of the applicant's valid license, issued by the appropriate state board or agency with the authority to issue licenses for that particular trade, i.e., master plumber's license, irrigator's license, backflow tester certification, mechanical license, and/or master electrician's license. 
(3)  Proof of liability insurance in the amount of $500,000.00 or a bond in the amount of $500,000.00. 
(4)  Make, model and registration number on all vehicles used for the jobs located within the city. 
(5)  Valid driver's license of the owner or an officer of the applicant and (a) master plumber, (b) irrigator, (c) backflow tester, (d) licensed mechanical contractor, and/or (e) master electrician through whose license the applicant works issued by his home state or if the person does not possess such a valid driver's license then such other identity card or document issued by the federal or state government containing the picture and signature of said person. 
(6)  Any other information deemed necessary by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0127-002, § 2, 1-27-2015)  
Sec. 17-102. - Transfer of registration prohibited. 
No registrant under this article shall for any purpose allow its registration, by name or any other identification, to be transferred to, assigned to, or in any manner directly or indirectly used by, any person, firm, corporation or business entity other than the one to whom the registration was issued. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0127-002, § 2, 1-27-2015)  
Sec. 17-103. - Requirement to update information. 
If a change occurs in the information previously provided by registrant to city under the provisions of this article, then registrant shall provide written notice of the updated information to the city within 30 days of the change. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0127-002, § 2, 1-27-2015)  
Sec. 17-104. - Registration fee and renewal. 
The city does not charge a registration fee; however, each registration shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance and shall expire annually on the anniversary date of the initial registration or subsequent renewal. The registration shall be routinely reactivated by the contractor's reapplication. No permits will be issued to a contractor who is not registered or whose registration has expired. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0127-002, § 2, 1-27-2015)  
Sec. 17-105. - Suspension or revocation of registration. 
A registrant's privileges under this article may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Providing false or misleading information; 
(2)  Failure to provide updated information within 30 days of any change; 
(3)  Failure to request and obtain a final inspection prior to the expiration of a permit; 
(4)  Allowing the use or occupancy of the structure for which a permit was obtained without first obtaining the required authorization from the city; 
(5)  The contractor has been found by the building official to have been grossly negligent in the performance of his work; 
(6)  Failure to maintain licensure from the appropriate agency having licensing authority; 
(7)  Suspension of licensure; 
(8)  Transferring or allowing another person, firm, or corporation to use the registration; 
(9)  Failure to maintain certificate of liability insurance; 
(10)  Conviction of two violations of this article or any other ordinance of the city within a 12-month period; or 
(11)  For any conviction involving a crime of moral turpitude. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0127-002, § 2, 1-27-2015)  
Sec. 17-106. - Appeal of suspension or revocation. 
A contractor whose registration has been suspended or revoked may appeal the action to the board of adjustment. In the case of an appeal to the board of adjustment, the action of the city manager or his designee shall stand until the final determination of the appeal is made by the board of adjustment. The appeal must be filed within ten business days of the suspension or revocation of the contractor's registration. After hearing the case, the board of adjustment may take the following action: 
(1)  Affirm the suspension; 
(2)  Overrule the suspension or revocation and reinstate the registration of the contractor; 
(3)  Affirm the suspension or revocation, but waive any or all of the reinstatement requirements set forth in this article; or 
(4)  Affirm the suspension or revocation and require conditions for reinstatement in addition to any other requirements set forth in this article including, but not limited to, prohibiting reinstatement for up to six months. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0127-002, § 2, 1-27-2015)  
Sec. 17-107. - Reinstatement of registration. 
A contractor whose registration has been suspended or revoked may reapply for registration if: 
(1)  All circumstances leading to the suspension or revocation have been corrected; 
(2)  The contractor reapplies for registration; 
(3)  In the case of a suspension, a period of at least three months has passed; 
(4)  In the case of a revocation, a period of at least 12 months has passed; and 
(5)  Any additional conditions set by the board of adjustment pursuant to section 18-33(4) [this article] have been met. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0127-002, § 2, 1-27-2015)  
Chapter 20 - COURTS AND JAILS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Courts generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 21.001 et seq.; municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.002 et seq.; justice and municipal courts, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.001 et seq.; code of judicial conduct and candidates for judicial office, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 34.001 et seq.; judicial personnel and officials, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 51.001 et seq.; court administration generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 71.001 et seq.; municipal court fees and costs, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 101.161; municipal and county authority relating to jails, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 361.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL JUDGE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2012-0626-002, §§ 2, 3, adopted June 26, 2012, repealed and rescinded the former Art. II, §§ 20-19—20-22, 20-42—20-49, 20-65—20-67, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. Former Art. II pertained to municipal court and derived from Ord. No. 2011-0125-001, §§ 2(8.134.1—8.134.15), adopted January 25, 2011. 
 
Sec. 20-19. - Municipal judge to oversee the municipal court system for the city. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Recorder. For all purposes concerned herein, any reference to recorder shall have the same meaning as having made reference to judge. 
(b)  Appointment of municipal judge. In accordance with Article 1197(a) of the Vernon's Civil Statutes of the State of Texas Annotated, the city is exercising its right to enact this article by which the mayor of such city shall cease to be the ex officio recorder of the municipal court. The city shall have the right to appoint a recorder (municipal judge) to serve in the capacity to oversee and run the municipal court system. 
(c)  Term of office. The recorder first appointed shall hold his term of office corresponding to the unexpired term of the mayor and every two years thereafter a recorder shall be appointed for a term of two years. 
Any recorder of the municipal court of the city shall hold his term of officer for the term appointed and until his successor has been appointed and qualified. 
(d)  Method of appointment. The appointment of the recorder shall be made by a majority vote of the city council. It is, of course, presumed and required that the majority vote specified herein presupposes that a quorum is required before any such action of the council shall be valid. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0626-002, § 3, 6-26-2012)  
Secs. 20-20—20-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COURT COSTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 20-75—20-91. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TECHNOLOGY FUND 
 
Sec. 20-92. - Creation. 
There is created and established a Municipal Court Technology Fund (the "fund") pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.0172. 
(Code 2004, § 8.142)  
Sec. 20-93. - Fund maintenance. 
The fund may be maintained in an interest-bearing account and the general revenue account. 
(Code 2004, § 8.142.1)  
Sec. 20-94. - Fee amount established; assessment, collection, and remission. 
(a)  Establishment. The fee shall be in the amount of $4.00. 
(b)  Assessment. The fee shall be assessed as a court cost and collected from a defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed upon the person; 
(2)  The person is placed on a community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(c)  Collection. The fee shall be collected upon conviction for an offense committed on or after September 21, 1999. 
(d)  Remission. The clerk of the court shall collect and pay the fee to the city or municipal treasurer, who shall deposit the fee into the Municipal Court Technology Fund. 
(Code 2004, § 8.142.2)  
Sec. 20-95. - Designated uses and administration of fund. 
(a)  Designated uses. The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the municipal court, including: 
(1)  Computer systems; 
(2)  Computer networks; 
(3)  Computer hardware; 
(4)  Computer software; 
(5)  Imaging systems; 
(6)  Electronic kiosks; 
(7)  Electronic ticket writers; or 
(8)  Docket management systems. 
(b)  Administration. The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council. 
(Code 2004, § 8.142.3; Ord. No. 99-12, 9-21-1999)  
Secs. 20-96—20-118. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SECURITY FUND 
 
Sec. 20-119. - Creation. 
There is created and established a Municipal Court Building Security Fund (the "fund") pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017. 
(Code 2004, § 8.141)  
Sec. 20-120. - Fee—Authorized and assessed. 
The municipal court is authorized to assess a municipal court building security fee (the "fee") in the amount of $3.00 against each defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. 
(Code 2004, § 8.141.1)  
Sec. 20-121. - Same—Collection. 
The municipal court clerk is authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the city treasury. All fees so collected and paid over to the city treasury shall be segregated in the fund. 
(Code 2004, § 8.141.2)  
Sec. 20-122. - Use and purpose. 
The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of security devices and/or services for the building housing the municipal court. The term "security devices and/or services" shall include any and all items described in Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017(d). 
(Code 2004, § 8.141.3)  
Sec. 20-123. - Administration. 
The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council or its designated representative. 
(Code 2004, § 8.141.4; Ord. No. 98-21, 5-26-1998)  
Secs. 20-124—20-144. - Reserved.  
Chapter 23 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Disaster Act of 1975, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq.; local emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.101 et seq.; statewide mutual aid system, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.111; disaster mitigation, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.121 et seq.; citizen duties and claims of compensation resulting from disasters, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.151 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Penalties. 
Violations of the provisions under this chapter are hereby deemed violations of ordinances, rules, or police regulations that govern fire safety, zoning, and public health and sanitation, punishable as provided in section 1-3. 
State Law reference— Enhanced penalty for violation ordinances governing fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 54.001(b).  
Secs. 23-2—23-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY OPERATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 23-23. - Authority. 
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article and chapter 2, article III, division 6 shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 2004, § 6.106.7)  
Sec. 23-24. - Conflicts. 
This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or any military or naval order, rule, or regulation. 
(Code 2004, § 6.106.8)  
Sec. 23-25. - Liability. 
(a)  This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of such activity. 
(b)  Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Code 2004, § 6.106.9) 
State Law reference— Personal liability exemption, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.174.  
Secs. 23-26—23-53. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR 
 
Sec. 23-54. - Appointment; responsibilities and duties. 
There exists the office of emergency management director, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(1)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director; 
(2)  The director shall be responsible for conducting a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(Code 2004, § 6.106.1) 
State Law reference— Emergency management directors, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.101.  
Sec. 23-55. - Director to supervise development of emergency management plan. 
(a)  The powers and duties of the director shall include an ongoing survey of actual or potential major hazards which threaten life and property within the city, and an on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(b)  As part of his responsibility in hazard mitigation, the director shall supervise the development of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend that plan for adoption by the city council along with any and all mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential for the implementation of such emergency management plan. 
(c)  The powers of the director shall include the authority to declare a state of disaster, but such action may be subject to confirmation by the city council at its next meeting. 
(d)  The duties of the director shall also include the causing of a survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for in section 23-56, as well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and improvements in the emergency management plan. 
(Code 2004, § 6.106.2) 
State Law reference— Local and interjurisdictional emergency management plans, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.106.  
Sec. 23-56. - Other duties and responsibilities. 
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the: 
(1)  Direction and control of the actual disaster operations of the emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel; 
(2)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization; 
(3)  Marshaling, after declaration of a disaster as provided for in section 23-55(c), of all necessary personnel and equipment or supplies from any city department to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan; 
(4)  Issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of a disaster and the immediate operational effectiveness of the emergency management plan; 
(5)  Issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for the protection of life and property in the city. Such rules and regulations shall be filed in the city secretary's office and receive widespread publicity, unless publicity would be of aid and comfort to the enemy; 
(6)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with representatives of the state and other local political subdivisions of the state, and, if deemed desirable, an agreement with other local governments for the coordination of emergency management efforts; 
(7)  Supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city; and 
(8)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(Code 2004, § 6.106.4) 
State Law reference— Declaration of local disaster, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.108; local and interjurisdictional emergency management plans, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.106.  
Secs. 23-57—23-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERSONNEL 
 
Sec. 23-86. - Responsibilities. 
Each employee or any individual who is assigned a function or responsibility shall solemnly swear or affirm to support and defend the Constitution of the United States, state laws and this Code. 
(Code 2004, § 6.106.13; Ord. No. 83-11-2, 9-27-1983)  
Sec. 23-87. - Obstruction prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by a rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. Convictions for violations of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Code 2004, § 6.106.12) 
State Law reference— Interference with public duties, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 38.15.  
Sec. 23-88. - Expenditures require authorization. 
No person shall have the right to expend any of the city's public funds in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council. 
(Code 2004, § 6.106.10)  
Secs. 23-89—23-119. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 23-120. - Unauthorized or simulated warning signals prohibited. 
Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and subject to the penalties imposed by section 23-1. 
(Code 2004, § 6.106.6) 
State Law reference— Use of siren, whistle and bells restricted, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 547.501.  
Sec. 23-121. - Increased costs for necessary items prohibited. 
No person or any type of business establishment shall have the right to increase the cost of housing, food, gas, oil or any other items necessary for the protection of lives and property during a period of emergency. 
(Code 2004, § 6.106.11)  
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Clean Air Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.001 et seq.; outdoor burning, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.018; pollution prevention, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.501 et seq.; Flood Control and Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.311 et seq.; authorizing municipalities to take all necessary and reasonable actions to comply with the requirements and criteria of the National Flood Insurance Program, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315; Geothermal Resources Act, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 141.001 et seq.; water quality control, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.001. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD CONTROL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-19. - Statutory authorization. 
The state legislature has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. I, § A, 4-14-2009)  
Sec. 26-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows, active processes of erosion, sediment transport and deposition, and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of flooding is unpredictable and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for Zone A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year; also called the base flood. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction, existing structures means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: 
(1)  Overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
(2)  Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the administrator, where the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M, and/or E. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS). See Flood elevation study. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See Flood or flooding. 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term "floodplain management regulations" describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway and regulatory floodway mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term "functionally dependent use" includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include longterm storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a manmade structure which is usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Special flood hazard area. See Area of special flood hazard. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Public Law. 97-348)) includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, the excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the improvement. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions, or any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. 
Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, where specified, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. 2, 4-14-2009)  
Sec. 26-21. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. I, § C, 4-14-2009)  
Sec. 26-22. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. I, § B, 4-14-2009)  
Sec. 26-23. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. I, § D, 4-14-2009)  
Sec. 26-24. - Lands to which article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. 3, § A, 4-14-2009)  
Sec. 26-25. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Collin County, Texas, and Incorporated Areas," dated June 2, 2009, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps dated June 2, 2009, and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. 3, § B, 4-14-2009)  
Sec. 26-26. - Development permit required. 
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. 3, § C, 4-14-2009)  
Sec. 26-27. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. 3, § D, 4-14-2009)  
Sec. 26-28. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and an ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. 3, § E, 4-14-2009)  
Sec. 26-29. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the city council, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. 3, § F, 4-14-2009)  
Sec. 26-30. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. 3, § G, 4-14-2009)  
Secs. 26-31—26-48. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 26-49. - Floodplain administrator—Designation. 
The city manager or designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance—National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. 4, § A, 4-14-2009)  
Sec. 26-50. - Same—Duties and responsibilities. 
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit applications to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB), and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 26-25, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of sections 26-78 through 26-81. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. 4, § B, 4-14-2009)  
Sec. 26-51. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  Certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 26-80(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  Maintenance of records of all such information in accordance with section 26-50(1). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors, including the: 
(1)  Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  Availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. 4, § C, 4-14-2009)  
Sec. 26-52. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 26-51(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article as stated in section 26-21. 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances. 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
a.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) of this section are met, and the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. 4, § D, 4-14-2009)  
Secs. 26-53—26-77. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 26-78. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this court order and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this court order by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this court order or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $2,000.00 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day a violation occurs is a separate offense. Nothing contained in this division shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. 5, § E, 4-14-2009)  
Sec. 26-79. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. 5, § A, 4-14-2009)  
Sec. 26-80. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 26-25, 26-50(8), or 26-81(c), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 26-51(a) is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two feet above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM, that are not subject to the provisions of subsections (4)a and b of this section, be elevated so that either the: 
1.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at two feet above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. 5, § B, 4-14-2009)  
Sec. 26-81. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with sections 26-21 through 26-23. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet the floodplain development permit requirements of sections 26-26 and 26-51 and the provisions of sections 26-78 through 26-80 and this section. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 26-25 or 26-50(8). 
(d)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated by a detailed engineering study for all Zone A areas, within 100 feet of the contour lines of Zone A areas, and other streams not mapped by FEMA, as indicated on the community's FIRM. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(f)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, art. 5, § C, 4-14-2009)  
Chapter 29 - FIRE PREVENTION AND CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal fire protection generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.001 et seq.; municipal authority to adopt and enforce fire regulations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.003; fire control and prevention generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 344.001 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.001 et seq.; fire escapes, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 791.002; city fire loss lists, V.A.T.S. Insurance Code, § 2003.051; arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.02; prescribed burning standards, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 153.047. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 29-1. - Burning prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or cause to be burned or allow to be burned on any public street, alley or premises owned or occupied by such person any rubbish, trash, waste, leaves, grass, lumber or any other combustible materials within the city. 
(Code 2004, § 6.101.1)  
Sec. 29-2. - Nuisance declared. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or cause to be burned, any rubbish, trash, waste, leaves, grass, lumber or any other combustible materials in the city on any lot or parcel of land and to allow or permit such fire to spread onto any public street, alley, place or premises owned or occupied by another, or to permit or allow the smoke or fumes from such burning to spread onto the property of another in such a manner so as to constitute a nuisance. 
(Code 2004, § 6.101.2)  
Secs. 29-3—29-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Fire and Police Employee Relations Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 174.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 29-19. - Creation. 
The city has created and established a fire department in the city known as the city fire department. 
(Code 2004, § 8.128)  
Sec. 29-20. - Function. 
The function of the city fire department shall be to protect lives and property endangered by fire, accidents, and disaster, and to provide fire prevention education to the citizens of the city. 
(Code 2004, § 8.128.1)  
Sec. 29-21. - Composition. 
Members of the city fire department shall be composed of all members of the volunteer fire department. The volunteer fire department shall choose members in accordance with its bylaws and any state laws regarding volunteer fire personnel. While performing their duties, all members of the city fire department shall be under the direction of the fire chief or, in his absence, the ranking officer on the scene. 
(Code 2004, § 8.128.2)  
Sec. 29-22. - Officers. 
The officers of the city fire department shall be a fire chief, two assistant chiefs, and such other officers as the city council may from time to time determine. All officers of the department shall be elected annually by members of the volunteer fire department, subject to approval by the city council. Should the city council not approve an elected officer, the volunteer fire department shall elect another officer to stand for approval. The mayor shall commission all officers approved by the city council. 
(Code 2004, § 8.128.3)  
Sec. 29-23. - Duties of fire chief. 
The fire chief shall be accountable to the city manager, and shall make regular reports to the city manager. The fire chief will be responsible for the operation of the city fire department. He shall be responsible for the immediate repair to equipment and apparatus provided and used for firefighting, and for providing such training and education as is necessary to ensure safe and effective execution of accepted techniques in fulfilling the functions of the department. 
(Code 2004, § 8.128.4; Ord. No. 89-2, 6-13-1989)  
Sec. 29-24. - Fire service fees. 
(a)  Calls for service at residential structures, single-family residence fires or any calls for service requiring response from the city fire department within the city limits shall be subject to the city fire department service charges as provided in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  The city fire department, or its authorized agent, shall promptly submit an invoice to the person, entity or relevant insurance company covering the particular loss for the emergency services rendered. If it can be reliably determined that there is not insurance coverage for a particular emergency call, which causes the city fire department to use or incur loss, damage, wear and tear to apparatus, tools, equipment, or materials, the city fire department may collect any such fees from the person or entity that received the emergency services, or the person or entity responsible for the debts and obligations of the person or entity that received such emergency services. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0914-006, § 1(1.2, 1.3), 9-14-2010)  
Secs. 29-25—29-51. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to adopt and enforce fire regulations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.003. 
 
Sec. 29-52. - Adoption of International Fire Code, 2015 Edition. 
The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, including appendix chapters B, C, D, E, F, and G (see International Fire Code Section 101.2.1, 2015 edition), as published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted by the city council as a general standard for purposes of regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said fire code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, of this section. Unless deleted, omitted, expanded or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, as amended, shall be fully applicable and binding and in full force and effect. A copy of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, together with such other amendments as are set forth herein, referred to herein shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 0-2010-0413-006, § 1, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. O-2013-0326-001, § 1, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 2017-0425-001, § 11, 5-9-2017)  
Sec. 29-53. - Amendments to adopted code. 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1, insert: City of Farmersville. 
Section 109.3, insert: Class C Misdemeanor, $500.00. 
Section 111.4, insert: $500.00. 
(Code 2004, § 4.139; Ord. No. 2006-36, 8-8-2006; Ord. No. 0-2010-0413-006, § 2, 4-13-2010)  
Sec. 29-54. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the fire code adopted in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Jurisdiction. Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the International Fire Code, it means the City of Farmersville. 
Fire marshal. Where the party responsible for the enforcement of the International Fire Code is given the title of "fire marshal," add the following definition: 
Fire marshal means the chief of the bureau of fire prevention. 
(Code 2004, § 4.139.2)  
Sec. 29-55. - Amending the International Fire Code. 
The International Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 903.2.10.4 as follows: 
903.2.10.4 Buildings over 6,000 square feet. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all buildings with a building area over 6,000 square feet. For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define separate buildings. Exceptions: Group A-2 shall be in compliance with section 903.2.1.2 of the International Fire Code, Groups R2 and R3 shall be in compliance with the International Building Code and the Residential Code. 
(Code 2004, § 4.139.3; Ord. No. 2005-40, 9-6-2005)  
Sec. 29-56. - Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in outside above-ground tanks. 
The limits referred to in section 3404.2.9.5.1 of the International Fire Code in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids is restricted are hereby established as follows: The storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within all areas of the city's incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Code 2004, § 4.139.4; Ord. No. 2006-36, 8-8-2006; Ord. No. 2011-0322-007, § 2, 3-22-2011) 
State Law reference— Authority of municipal fire marshal to enforce state law regarding flammable liquids, V.T.C.A, Health and Safety Code § 753.008; authority of municipalities to regulate the storage and transportation of explosives subject to certain exceptions relating to black powder, V.T.C.A, Local Government Code § 229.001.  
Sec. 29-57. - Storage of liquefied petroleum gas. 
The limits referred to in section 3804.2 of the International Fire Code, in which storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, are hereby established as follows: The storage of liquefied petroleum gases is restricted in all areas within the city's incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Code 2004, § 4.139.5; Ord. No. 2006-36, 8-8-2006; Ord. No. 2011-0322-007, § 2, 3-22-2011)  
Sec. 29-58. - Storage of explosives and blasting agents. 
The limits referred to in sections 3302 and 3304 of the International Fire Code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: The storage of explosives and blasting devices is prohibited within the city's incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Code 2004, § 4.139.6; Ord. No. 2006-36, 8-8-2006)  
Sec. 29-59. - Storage of compressed natural gas. 
The limits referred to in section 3004 of the International Fire Code in which the storage of compressed natural gas is prohibited are hereby established as follows: The storage of compressed natural gas is prohibited within the city's incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Code 2004, § 4.139.7; Ord. No. 2006-36, 8-8-2006)  
Sec. 29-60. - Storage of stationary tanks of flammable cryogenic fluids. 
The limits referred to in section 3204.3.1.1 of the International Fire Code in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited are hereby established as follows: The storage of stationary tanks of flammable cryogenic fluids is prohibited in areas zoned or used for residential purposes within the city's incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Code 2004, § 4.139.8; Ord. No. 2006-36, 8-8-2006; Ord. No. 2011-0322-007, § 2, 3-22-2011)  
Sec. 29-61. - Storage of hazardous materials. 
The limits referred to in section 2704 of the International Fire Code in which the storage of hazardous materials is prohibited or limited is hereby established as follows: The storage of hazardous materials is limited to Industrial zoned areas only. 
(Code 2004, § 4.139.9; Ord. No. 2006-36, 8-8-2006)  
Sec. 29-62. - Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks. 
The limits referred to in section 3406.2.4.4 of the International Fire Code in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids is restricted are hereby established as follows: The storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited in all areas within the city's incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2011-0322-007, § 2, 3-22-2011)  
Sec. 29-63. - Application of article. 
The city council hereby extends the application and enforcement of this article, to the fullest extent allowed by law, to include the incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. This article shall be applicable to all construction, repair, renovation and remodeling activities within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction as those boundaries may be from time to time adjusted by annexation, disannexation, or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2011-0322-007, § 3, 3-22-2011)  
Secs. 29-64—29-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE MARSHAL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 29-80. - Appointment and authority. 
The city has created the office of fire marshal. The fire marshal shall be appointed by the city manager and report directly to the city manager. Compensation shall be determined by the city manager and commensurate with the duties given to the fire marshal. The salary shall be publicly stated at the time of appointment. The fire marshal serves at the pleasure of the city manager. He shall be certified, or able to complete certification, within one year after appointment and responsible for the administration and enforcement of the city's fire code. 
(Code 2004, § 8.130.1(A))  
Secs. 29-81—29-103. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DUTIES, AUTHORITY AND PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 29-104. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the International Fire Code as adopted and hereinafter referred to as the city's fire code, or whenever the fire marshal has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or city fire code violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the fire marshal may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the fire marshal by the city's fire code, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the fire marshal shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  When the fire marshal has obtained a proper inspection warrant or other legal remedy to secure entry, no owner, occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made, to promptly permit entry by the fire marshal for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the city's fire code. 
(Code 2004, § 8.130.1(B))  
Sec. 29-105. - Inspections of unsafe buildings. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall inspect, as often as may be necessary, all buildings and premises, including such other hazards or appliances, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions which would reasonably tend to cause fire or contribute to its spread, or any violation of the purpose or provisions of the city's fire code and of any other law or standard affecting fire safety. 
(b)  All buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which, in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster damage or abandonment as specified in the city's fire code or any other effective article, are for the purpose of this section, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure adopted by the city. 
(Code 2004, § 8.130.2(A))  
Sec. 29-106. - Investigations and reports. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall investigate promptly the cause, origin and circumstances of each and every fire occurring in the city involving loss of life, injury to person, destruction or damage to property and, if it appears to the fire marshal that such fire was by design, he shall take immediate charge of all physical evidence relating to the cause of the fire and pursue the investigation to its conclusion. The fire marshal shall have the same powers of a police officer during the performance of his duties. If the fire marshal has not yet received his official certification, he shall work in conjunction with a commissioned police officer throughout the investigation. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall keep a record of all fires occurring within the city limits and all facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby, together with such other information as may be required by the city manager. 
(Code 2004, § 8.130.2(B))  
Sec. 29-107. - Notice to eliminate dangerous conditions. 
(a)  Whenever the fire marshal shall find in any building or upon any premises dangerous or hazardous conditions or materials as indicated in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(5) of this section, there shall be issued such notice or orders to remove or remedy the conditions as may be necessary for the protection of life and property from fire and smoke. The list below is not inclusive, and is intended to provide examples of when notices shall be given: 
(1)  Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials; 
(2)  Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed equipment for handling or using combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials; 
(3)  Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, wastepaper, boxes, shavings or other highly combustible materials; 
(4)  Accumulations of dust or waste material in air conditioning or ventilating systems or grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts, or inadequate clearances to unprotected combustible material from hoods, grease extractors and ducts, or obstructions liable to interfere with the operations of the city fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire; 
(5)  Any building or other structure which, for want of repairs, lack of adequate exit facilities, automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or from any other cause, creates a hazardous condition. 
(b)  Whenever the fire marshal deems any chimney, smokestack, stove, oven, incinerator, furnace or other heating device, electric fixture or any appurtenance thereto, or anything regulated under a nationally approved standard in or upon any building, structure or premises not specifically mentioned in the city's fire code, to be defective or unsafe so as to create an immediate hazard, he shall serve upon the owner or the person having control of the property a written notice to repair or alter as necessary, and shall notify any other authority enforcing codes regulating such equipment. He may affix a condemnation tag prohibiting the use thereof until such repairs or alterations are made. When affixed, such tag may be removed only by the order of such fire marshal after the hazard to which the order pertains has been eliminated in an approved manner. Until removed, that item or device which has caused the hazard shall not be used or be permitted to be used. 
(Code 2004, § 8.130.2(C))  
Sec. 29-108. - Orders and notices. 
Any order or notice authorized or required by the city's fire code shall be given or severed upon the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the condition or violation either by verbal notification, personal service, or by delivering the same to and leaving it with some person 16 years of age or older upon the premises or, if no such person is found on the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door of the entrance of the premises and mailing a copy thereof to such person by registered or certified mail to his last known address. Orders or notices which are given verbally shall be confirmed in writing, as soon as practicable; provided, however, that if such owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order he may, within five days, appeal to the city manager. The city manager shall investigate the cause of the complaint and unless, by his authority, the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant. 
(Code 2004, § 8.130.2(D))  
Sec. 29-109. - Alternate materials and methods. 
(a)  The fire marshal may modify any of the provisions of the city's fire code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or his duly authorized representative where there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the city's fire code, provided that the spirit of the city's fire code shall be complied with, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications shall be made in writing and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant and city manager. The fire marshal, upon notice to the building department, may approve any alternate material or method, provided he finds that the proposed design, use or operation satisfactorily complies with the intent of the city's fire code and that the material, method of work performed or operation is, for the purpose intended at least, the equivalent of that prescribed in the city's fire code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety; provided, however, that any approval under the authority herein contained shall be subject to the approval of the building inspector whenever the alternate material or method involves matters regulated by the building code. 
(b)  The fire marshal may require tests as proof of compliance with the intent of the city's fire code, such test to be made by an approved agency at the expense of the person requesting approval of the alternate material or method of construction. 
(Code 2004, § 8.130.3(A); Ord. No. 91-20, 8-13-1991)  
Sec. 29-110. - Scope. 
The provisions of the city's fire code shall apply to existing conditions, as well as to conditions arising after the adoption thereof. However, conditions legally in existence at the adoption of the city's fire code, and not in strict compliance therewith, shall be permitted to continue unless, in the opinion of the fire marshal, they constitute a distinct hazard to life or property. 
(Code 2004, § 8.130.3(B); Ord. No. 91-20, 8-13-1991)  
Sec. 29-111. - Liability for damages. 
The city's fire code shall not be construed to hold the public entity or any officer or employee responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized and provided herein, or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment or process authorized herein, or for any action in connection with the control or extinguishment of any fire or in connection with any other official duties. 
(Code 2004, § 8.130.3(C); Ord. No. 91-20, 8-13-1991)  
Sec. 29-112. - Appeals and penalty. 
(a)  When the fire marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed the provisions of the city's fire code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of such code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal to the city council within 30 days from the date of the decision. Such appeal shall be submitted in writing to the city manager stating precisely the provisions and decisions being appealed or modified by the fire marshal. 
(b)  Within the time fixed in subsection (a) of this section, each such violation or noncompliance, respectively, shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-3. The imposition of such penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violation or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2004, § 8.130.3(D); Ord. No. 91-20, 8-13-1991)  
Secs. 29-113—29-137. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FIREWORKS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of fireworks and fireworks displays, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.001 et seq.; authority for local ordinances regulating fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.004; fireworks safety and education program, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.253. 
 
Sec. 29-138. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fireworks means any firecrackers, cannon crackers, skyrockets, torpedoes, Roman candles, sparklers, squibs, fire balloons, star shells, gerbs or any other substance in whatever combination by any designated name intended for use in obtaining visible or audible pyrotechnic display, and shall include all sections or substances within the commonly accepted meaning of fireworks, whether herein specially designated and defined or not. 
Person means any natural person, association of persons, partnerships, corporations, agents or officers of corporations, and shall also include all warehousemen, common and private carriers, bailees, trustees, receivers, executors and administrators. 
(Code 2004, § 7.101.1)  
Sec. 29-139. - Penalties. 
(a)  Manufacture, transport, and sales. Any person who shall manufacture, assemble, store, transport, receive, keep, sell, offer for sale or have in his possession with intent to sell any fireworks shall be fined not less than $25.00 or more than $2,000.00 for each offense. If the fireworks are separately wrapped or packaged, the doing or omitting to do any act prohibited by this article shall be a separate offense as to each such separately wrapped or separately packaged fireworks. Each day that a violation of this article shall continue with respect to any package of fireworks shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Use, discharge, and ignition. Any person who shall use, discharge, cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any fireworks shall be fined not less than $25.00 or more than $2,000.00. Any parent or guardian of any minor child below the age of 14 years who permits or allows such minor child to use, discharge, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any fireworks shall be fined not less than $25.00 or more than $2,000.00. 
(Code 2004, § 7.101.2)  
Sec. 29-140. - Territorial applicability. 
This article shall be applicable and in force throughout the territory of the city within its corporate limits and within 5,000 feet outside its corporate limits. 
(Code 2004, § 7.101.3)  
Sec. 29-141. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to signal flares and torpedoes of the type and kind commonly used by any railroad and which signal flares and torpedoes are received by and stored or transported by any such railroad for use in railroad operation, nor shall this article apply to signal flares or rockets for military or police use. Any public fireworks display authorized or permitted by the city's fire code shall be permitted under this article. 
(Code 2004, § 7.101.4)  
Sec. 29-142. - Unlawful to assemble, transport, sell or possess. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, assemble, store, transport, receive, keep, sell, offer, or have in his possession with intent to sell, use, discharge, cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any fireworks of any description. 
(Code 2004, § 7.101.5; Ord. No. 83-10, 9-13-1983)  
Chapter 32 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Health and the safety of food, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 431.001 et seq.; municipal regulatory authority concerning food service employees not preempted by state regulation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 438.031 et seq.; municipality which is member of public health district not prohibited from regulating or administering permit system concerning food service establishments, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 437.004(d); municipal public safety generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.001 et seq.; practices related to health and safety, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1951.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Penalties. 
Violations of the provisions under this chapter are hereby deemed violations of ordinances, rules, or police regulations that govern fire safety, zoning, and public health and sanitation, punishable as provided in section 1-3. 
State Law reference— Enhanced penalty for violation ordinances governing fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 54.001(b).  
Secs. 32-2—32-21. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 32-22. - Adoption of state rules on food service sanitation. 
The city hereby adopts by reference the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code Chs. 437 and 438, the current Texas Food Establishment Rules ("TFER") set forth in 25 Tex. Admin. Code Ch. 228, as amended, and 25 Tex. Admin. Code Ch. 229, as amended, which establish regulations, permitting fees and inspection fees regarding food, food establishments, mobile food units, food trucks and temporary food establishments, save and except the deletions and additions set forth below (collectively the "State Law Food Establishment Requirements"). The State Law Food Establishment Requirements are made part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Copies of the TFER are on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and designated as the TFER, published by the state department of state health services. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 2, 12-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-23. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning given below: 
Approved. Acceptable to the regulatory authority, as hereinafter defined, based on a determination of conformity with principles, practices, and generally recognized standards that protect public health. 
Authorized representative. The city manager, or his/her authorized designee. 
Central preparation facility. A facility used in conjunction with a mobile food unit in which: 
(1)  Food is prepared, stored, and/or wrapped; 
(2)  Fresh water and ice are supplied; 
(3)  The mobile food unit's waste water is emptied into a proper waste disposal system; and/or 
(4)  The mobile food unit is cleaned, including washing, rinsing, and sanitizing of those food-contact surfaces or items not capable of being immersed in a utensil-washing sink located in the mobile food unit. 
Concession stand. A food establishment operated on a seasonal basis for the purpose of providing food at sporting events associated with an independent school district, the city, privately owned school, university, or community college. 
Conditional employee. A potential food employee to whom a job offer is made, conditional upon responses to subsequent medical questions or examinations designed to identify potential food employees who may be suffering from a disease that can be transmitted through food and done in compliance with Title 1 of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990. 
County. Collin County, Texas or its authorized designee. 
Food. A raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage, or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption, to also specifically include chewing gum. 
Food employee. An individual working with unpackaged food, food equipment or utensils, or food-contact surfaces. 
Food establishment. An operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for human consumption. 
Food establishment—Grocery. Any retail food establishment that sells fresh produce, fresh meats, or fresh seafood for either on-premise or off-premise consumption. 
Food establishment—Restaurant. A retail food establishment that prepares and/or sells food for either on-premise or off-premise consumption. 
Food establishment—Convenience. A retail food establishment that sells a limited selection of foods, not to include fresh produce, fresh meats, or fresh seafood, exclusively for off-premise consumption. Any food establishment with a seating area accessible to the general public that contains at least one table and/or one chair is presumed to prepare foods for on-premise consumption. 
Food establishment—To-go. A retail food establishment that prepares and/or sells food exclusively for off-premise consumption. Any food establishment with a seating area accessible to the general public that contains at least one table and/or one chair is presumed to prepare foods for on-premise consumption. 
Imminent health hazard. A significant threat or danger to health due to a practice, circumstance, or event which creates a situation that would likely lead to injury or a food borne illness, as determined by the Regulatory Authority, as hereinafter defined. Imminent health hazards include but are not limited to: lack of hot water, no electrical power, sewage back up, no water service, rodent or insect infestation as determined by the regulatory authority, or a food establishment receives more than 30 demerits during an inspection. 
Inspector. A person conducting inspections of food establishments as a representative of the regulatory authority, as defined herein. 
Mobile food unit. A vehicle mounted, self-propelled, self-contained food establishment, designed to be readily moveable and used to store, prepare, display, serve or sell food. Mobile food units must completely maintain their mobility at all times. Unless otherwise provided, a mobile food unit does not mean a stand, booth, push cart, or trailer. 
Person in charge (PIC). The person present at a food establishment at the time of the inspection who is responsible for the food establishment's operations. 
Private event. An event at which food and/or beverages are offered to participants and that is held on publicly or privately owned premises that is not available for use by the general public and where entry to the event is governed by regulations or invitation, or where food and/or beverages are offered, sampled, sold or given only to event volunteers or event staff. 
Regulatory authority. The city or its authorized designee. 
Temporary food establishment. A food establishment operated for a temporary event not to exceed 14 consecutive days. A concession stand is not a temporary food establishment. 
Time as a public health control. Using time only to monitor food instead of temperature. 
Time/temperature controlled for safety (TCS) food. A food that requires time/temperature control for safety to limit pathogenic microorganism growth or toxin formation. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 2, 12-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-24. - Regulations, permits, and preoperational inspections. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment within the corporate limits of the city without having been issued a valid food establishment permit, the fee for which is based on the type of food establishment being operated, as set forth in appendix A of the Code in addition to any other permit or inspection fee required by Collin County and/or state law. Only a person who complies with the requirements in this article shall be entitled to receive or retain a permit, and notwithstanding the fact that all inspections necessary for obtaining a food establishment permit have been completed, such permit shall not be issued until after the building or suite in which the establishment is to be located has been issued a certificate of occupancy by the city. Permits are not transferable from one person, place or entity to another person, place, or entity. A valid permit shall be posted in or on a conspicuous place of every food establishment in public view. Permits shall remain in effect until the last day of the month of issuance unless sooner revoked for cause, or as otherwise provided herein. 
(b)  A temporary food establishment may apply for a temporary health permit, which shall be in effect for a period of time not to exceed 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration. 
(c)  Mobile food units shall be considered food establishments and shall comply with all pertinent regulations contained herein, including obtaining a mobile food establishment permit; provided however, a mobile food establishment permit shall be issued for six month periods, twice a year, commencing on January 1 and remaining in effect until June 30 and July 1 remaining in effect until December 31. Any permit issued during the first six months of the year shall expire on June 30, irrespective of the date of issuance. Any permit issued during the second six months of the year shall expire on December 31, irrespective of date of issuance. There shall be no pro-ration of fees assessed after the first month of each period. Mobile food units shall operate from a central preparation facility or other permitted food establishment and shall report to such location daily for supplies and for cleaning and servicing operations. Mobile food units that use a central preparation facility must obtain a central preparation facility permit in addition to a mobile food establishment permit. Use of a private residence as a central preparation facility is prohibited. Mobile food unit applications must provide a valid driver's license, proof of insurance for the mobile food unit, route schedule for operations, notarized central preparation facility letter, and the latest central preparation facility inspection report from the regulatory authority. 
(d)  Vendors that participate in the farmers and fleas market who provide time/temperature control for safety foods shall obtain a farmer's market temporary permit. A farmer's market temporary permit shall remain valid until December 31 of each year. There shall be no proration of fees regardless of when the application is filed or when the permit is issued. 
(e)  A temporary food establishment operated by or solely for the benefit of a nonprofit organization is exempt from the permit fee requirement. However, such food establishment is not exempt from the remaining permit requirements of this article, or from compliance with the rules. 
(f)  Any person desiring to operate a food establishment shall make application for a permit in person at the city hall, located at 205 S. Main Street, Farmersville, Texas 75442. The application shall include the name and address of each applicant and the location and type of food establishment. An application for a temporary food establishment shall include the inclusive dates of the proposed temporary food establishment and the location of the event. Applications for a temporary food establishment shall be submitted no later than seven days prior to the event. 
(g)  The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit fee, as set forth in appendix A in addition to any other permit or inspection fee required by Collin County and/or state law, on file and available for inspection in the office of the city secretary. 
(h)  The Farmersville Independent School District shall be exempt from the permit fee. This exemption extends to any concession stand situated on property owned by the Farmersville Independent School District. 
(i)  Every permit holder or person in charge shall at all times have available on the premises for inspection the certified food manager certificate and food handler cards for all employees of the food establishment. 
(j)  A food establishment permit that lapses for non-payment of the annual food establishment permit fee, will be reinstated upon payment of a reinstatement fee, except that permits lapsed for more than one month may not be reinstated without the appropriate plan review application, plan review fee, and food establishment permit fee. 
(k)  Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled, and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, or a change of ownership occurs, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review and approval before construction, remodeling or conversion is commenced. The plans and specifications shall include a proposed menu, proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans, and construction materials of work areas, finish schedules and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. No food establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted except in accordance with said approved plans and specifications. Plans shall be submitted in person at the city hall, located at 205 S. Main Street, Farmersville, Texas 75442. Deviation from the approved plans and specifications shall result in a food establishment permit denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(l)  If a food establishment is required to install a grease trap or grease interceptor, the trap or interceptor shall be located outside. The city manager or their designee will be responsible for determining the size of the grease trap or interceptor to be installed to service a food establishment. 
(m)  The provisions in 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 228.106(x) relative to food equipment acceptability, certification and classification is amended to read: "Food equipment that is certified or classified for sanitation by the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) or the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) will be deemed to comply with [25 Tex. Admin. Code] §§ 228.101—228.106 of this Title." Equipment labeled "For Household Use Only" shall not be used in a food service establishment. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 2, 12-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-25. - Inspections. 
(a)  Prior to the regulatory authority issuing a food establishment permit, the county shall inspect the food establishment to determine compliance with any approved plans and specifications, compliance with other requirements of this chapter and shall determine whether a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the building in which the establishment is to be located. Upon the county making such findings, the regulatory authority may issue a food establishment permit, subject to annual renewal, continued compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and the existence of a valid certificate of occupancy for the building in which the establishment is located. 
(b)  The county shall inspect a food establishment at least twice annually and shall prioritize inspections based upon assessment of a food establishment's compliance and potential of causing foodborne illness. Inspection frequency of a food establishment may be increased, at the county's discretion, based on the food establishment's history of compliance with this chapter and the potential for causing foodborne illness, including: 
(1)  Prior nonconformance with this chapter or with state or federal regulations, including priority items or priority foundation items, as defined in 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 228.2; 
(2)  Prior violations of this chapter or with state or federal requirements, including core items as defined in 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 228.2; 
(3)  Prior complaints investigated and found to be valid by the county or regulatory authority; 
(4)  Hazards associated with the particular foods that are prepared, stored, or served at the food establishment; 
(5)  The type of operations, including the methods and extent of food storage, preparation, and service; 
(6)  If the primary population served is a highly susceptible population; and 
(7)  Any other risk factors deemed relevant to the operation by the regulatory authority. 
(c)  Food establishments shall receive three demerits for each violation of a priority item, as defined in 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 228.2; two demerits for each violation of a priority foundation item, as defined in 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 228.2; and one demerit for each violation of a core item, as defined in 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 228.2 found by an inspector during an inspection. Food establishments that score between 21-29 demerits will be inspected quarterly until three consecutive inspections of 15 demerits or less are met. Food establishments that score 30 demerits or more are inspected one time per month for three consecutive months. During these three consecutive months, a re-inspection fee will be paid for each inspection. The food establishment must attain a demerit score of 20 or less in each of consecutive inspections. 
(d)  The city manager or their designee shall classify food establishments as high priority, medium priority, or low priority; according to the type of operations, particular foods that are prepared, numbers of people served, susceptibility of the population served, and any other risk factor deemed relevant to the operation. 
(e)  Additional inspections of the food establishment shall be performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(f)  If during a routine inspection, immediate correction of a priority foundation item, as defined by 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 228.2, is not achieved, the regulatory authority shall verify correction of the violation within ten calendar days. If said priority foundation item is not corrected during the initial inspection, a re-inspection fee as set forth in the fee schedule attached hereto as appendix A, as amended, in addition to any other permit or inspection fee required by Collin County and/or state law shall be assessed prior to follow up inspection. 
(g)  When an inspection of a food establishment results in 31 demerits or more, it shall constitute an imminent health hazard and the food establishment shall immediately cease operations and remain closed until the regulatory authority conducts a re-inspection. It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to contact the regulatory authority to schedule a re-inspection and pay the re-inspection fee prior to the re-inspection being conducted. The regulatory authority shall conduct a re-inspection within one business day of the permit holder requesting the re-inspection. The food establishment shall remain closed until a re-inspection of the food establishment results in 20 total demerits or less. 
(h)  Denial of access by a food establishment to the regulatory authority shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the food establishment's food establishment permit. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 2, 12-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-26. - Certified food protection manager and food handler requirements. 
(a)  There shall be a certified food manger on duty at all times at each permitted food establishment. Certification must be obtained by passing an examination approved by the department of state health services and the regulatory authority. Temporary food establishments and food establishments that serve, sell, or distribute only prepackaged non-time and temperature controlled for safety foods and beverages are exempt from this section. 
(b)  A certified food manager is required for each section of each food establishment. The regulatory authority may require additional certified food managers in sufficient number to ensure that all areas of food preparation and food service are under the direction of such certified personnel. 
(c)  Upon termination or transfer of a certified food manager, the food establishment shall employ another certified food protection manager within 15 days of such termination or transfer. 
(d)  All food employees shall be required to successfully complete a food handler class approved by the department of state health services within 15 days of hire. 
(e)  Temporary food establishments and concession stands must have at least one certified food handler on duty during all hours of operation. A food handler certificate must be submitted to the regulatory authority upon submission of the temporary health permit application. 
(f)  A permitted food establishment that handles only pre-packaged food and does not prepare or package food is only required to obtain a food handler certification. One certified food handler per establishment must be on duty at all times during business hours, to meet the intent of safe food practices of this chapter. 
(g)  In the event of a change of ownership of a food establishment, the new owner/operator of a food establishment shall provide proof to the regulatory authority that the appropriate number of certified food protection managers will be on duty within 15 days of the change of ownership. 
(h)  A food establishment shall provide proof of food protection manager certification to the regulatory authority prior to being issued a food establishment permit. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 2, 12-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-27. - Employee health. 
Responsibility of permit holder, person in charge, and conditional employees. The permit holder shall require food employees and conditional employees to report to the person in charge, information about their health and activities as they relate to diseases that are transmittable through food. A food employee or conditional employee shall report the information in a manner that allows the person in charge to reduce the risk of foodborne disease transmission, such as the date of onset of symptoms and an illness, or diagnosis of a communicable disease by a medical professional. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 2, 12-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-28. - Time as a public health control. 
A food establishment that uses time as a public health control shall submit written procedures on a form provided by the regulatory authority before using such control. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 2, 12-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-29. - Hair restraints. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (2) herein, all food employees regardless of title, position, or establishment's own policy, shall wear hair restraints such as hats, visors, hair coverings or nets, beard restraints, and clothing that covers body hair, that are designed and worn to effectively keep their hair from contacting exposed food; clean equipment, utensils, and linens; and unwrapped single-service and single-use articles. 
(b)  This section does not apply to food employees such as counter staff who only serve wrapped or packaged foods or beverages, bartenders, hostesses and wait staff if they present minimal risk of contaminating exposed food; clean equipment, utensils, and linens; and unwrapped single-service and single-use articles. 
(c)  If during the process of conducting an inspection, an inspector observes a food employee wear a hair restraint in an ineffective manner, the food employee will be asked to provide an effective means to restrain their hair from food and the violation will be noted on the inspection. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 2, 12-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-30. - Physical facilities. 
(a)  Floors and floor coverings of all food preparation, food service, food storage, warewashing areas, walk-in refrigeration units, dressing rooms, locker rooms, and toilet rooms shall be durable, smooth, non-absorbent, light colored, and easy to clean. 
(b)  Terrazzo, ceramic, or quarry tile may be installed as an approved floor covering. Floors shall be coved at the juncture of the floor and wall, with a 3/8 -inch minimum radius coving which shall extend up the wall at least four inches in all areas. 
(c)  Polished/sealed concrete used as flooring shall have a finished product thickness sufficient for the flooring to be smooth and easily cleanable. Floors shall be coved at the juncture of the floor and wall with a 3/8 -inch minimum radius coving which shall extend up the wall at least four inches in all areas. 
(d)  Epoxy resin and other poured monolithic floors, and other durable seamless flooring systems shall be installed to a finished product thickness sufficient for the flooring to be smooth and easily cleanable. Floors shall be coved at the juncture of the floor and wall with a 3/8 -inch minimum radius coving which shall extend up the wall at least four inches in all areas. 
(e)  All food establishments, including food warehouses, with dry storage areas not exposed to excessive moisture may install sealed concrete, vinyl composition tile, or an equivalent material as approved by the regulatory authority. A more moisture-resistant flooring may be required if the dry storage area is subject to moisture. 
(f)  Prohibited floor covering. The use of cardboard, sawdust, wood shavings, peanut hulls, or similar materials as a floor covering is prohibited. 
(g)  Floors shall be smooth, durable, and nonabsorbent, and shall be maintained in a condition that facilitates thorough and rapid cleaning. Floors shall be free of cracks, chips, holes, and deterioration. The regulatory authority shall require repair or replacement of any floor which fails to meet the requirements of this section. Any flooring in an existing food establishment that prepares food as listed above and needs repairing shall meet the minimum requirements for flooring for their food service operations. 
(h)  Utility line installation. Exposed utility service lines and pipes shall be installed in a way that does not obstruct or prevent cleaning of the floor. In all new or extensively remodeled establishments, installation of exposed horizontal utility lines or pipes on the floor is prohibited. 
(i)  Walls and ceilings. 
(1)  Maintenance. Walls and ceilings, including doors, windows, skylights, and similar closures, shall be clean and maintained in good repair. 
(2)  Construction. The walls, including non-supporting partitions, wall coverings, and ceilings of walk-in refrigerating units, refrigeration storage areas, food preparation areas, dry storage areas, food storage areas, equipment-washing and utensil washing areas, toilet rooms, and vestibules shall be light colored, smooth, nonabsorbent, and easily cleanable such as fiberglass reinforced paneling (FRP), stainless steel ceramic, quarry or terrazzo tile or equivalent approved by the regulatory authority. 
(3)  The regulatory authority shall require durable and easily cleanable FRP in areas exposed to excessive splash in food establishments not involved in food preparation. 
(4)  Ceilings shall be light of color, smooth, nonabsorbent, durable and easily cleanable. Ceiling materials may be washable drop-in panels, vinyl-coated panels, taped and bedded sheetrock with light-colored epoxy or enamel paint, or an equivalent material as approved by the regulatory authority. 
(5)  Fibrous acoustical drop-in panels shall be prohibited in all food preparation, tableware and utensil warewashing areas, service areas, dry storage, toilet rooms, mop sink area, and any other area subject to moisture. 
(6)  Exposed construction. Studs, joists, and rafters shall not be exposed in those areas listed in food preparation areas. If exposed in other rooms or areas, they shall be finished to provide an easily cleanable surface. 
(j)  Hand sinks shall be located within 25 unobstructed linear feet of a food preparation, warewashing, or food dispensing area. A door or doorway is considered an obstruction and hand sinks must be installed on both sides of a door or doorway of these areas. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 2, 12-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-31. - Outdoor areas, surface characteristics. 
The outdoor walking and driving areas shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt, or other materials that have been effectively treated to minimize dust, facilitate maintenance, and prevent muddy conditions. These surfaces shall be leveled to prevent pooling of water, kept free of litter, and maintained in good repair. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 2, 12-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-32. - Suspension of a food establishment permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing suspend a food establishment permit if the holder of such permit does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, or the operation of the food establishment does not comply with the requirements set forth herein, or, if the operation of the food establishment otherwise constitutes an imminent health hazard. If a food establishment is experiencing an imminent health hazard according to the regulatory authority, the food establishment may be closed for operations until the imminent health hazard has been eliminated. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice in accordance with section 32-36, herein, as amended. When a permit is suspended, food service operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder thereof shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within 20 days after receipt by the regulatory authority of a written request for hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder thereof or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that an opportunity for a hearing shall be provided if a written request for hearing is filed with the regulatory authority within ten days after receipt of notice. If no written request for hearing is filed within a ten-day period, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may terminate the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 2, 12-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-33. - Revocation of a food establishment permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for hearing, revoke a food establishment permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this section or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. 
(b)  Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify, in writing, the permit holder or the person in charge, of the specific reason(s) for which the food establishment permit is to be revoked and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten days after service of such notice unless a written request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(c)  The holder of the revoked permit may make written application for a new permit. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 2, 12-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-34. - Examination and condemnation of food. 
(a)  Any food subject to a hold order shall be tagged, labeled, or otherwise identified as such by an inspector. Food establishments are prohibited from using, serving, or moving any food subject to a hold order. An inspector's hold order shall permit storage of the food under the conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. 
(b)  A hold order shall state that a request for a hearing may be filed within ten days after issuance thereof and that if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. On the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated, or the owner or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 2, 12-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-35. - Hearings. 
(a)  The authorized representative shall hear all appeals taken under this chapter for denials, revocations and suspensions. 
(b)  The authorized representative shall designate the time and the place for the hearings provided herein. Based upon the evidence presented at such hearing, the authorized representative shall make a final finding by sustaining, modifying, or rescinding any notice or order considered in the hearing. The authorized representative shall furnish a written report of the hearing decision to the permit, license, or certificate holder. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 2, 12-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-36. - Notice of hearings. 
A notice provided for in this section is properly served when it is delivered to the permit holder or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 2, 12-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-37. - Fee schedule. 
All fees referenced herein shall be as set forth in appendix A of the Code of Ordinance of the city, as amended, in addition to any other fees required by Collin County and/or state law. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 2, 12-10-2019)  
Sec. 32-38. - Dogs in food establishments. 
(a)  In accordance with state law, a food establishment may permit a customer to be accompanied by a dog in an outdoor dining area if: 
(1)  The establishment posts a sign in a conspicuous location in the area stating that dogs are permitted; 
(2)  The customer and dog access the area directly from the exterior of the establishment; 
(3)  The dog does not enter the interior of the establishment; 
(4)  The customer keeps the dog on a leash and controls the dog; 
(5)  The customer does not allow the dog on a seat, table, countertop, or similar surface; and 
(6)  In the area, the establishment does not: 
a.  Prepare food; or 
b.  Permit open food other than food that is being served to a customer. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 2, 12-10-2019)  
Secs. 32-39—32-181. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS 
 
Sec. 32-182. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public swimming pool means any swimming pool, other than a private residential swimming pool, intended to be used collectively by numbers of persons for swimming or bathing and operated by any person, whether he is the owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for such use. 
Semipublic swimming pool means any swimming pool which is privately owned and open only to an identifiable class of persons including, but not limited to, motel guests, apartment residents, association members and club members. 
Swimming pool means a receptacle for water or an artificial pool of water having a depth at any point of more than two feet and intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings and includes: 
(1)  Private swimming pools; 
(2)  Public and semipublic swimming pools; 
(3)  Spas and hot tubs; and 
(4)  Above-ground, on-ground, or in-ground swimming pools. 
(Code 2004, § 4.146)  
Sec. 32-183. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, enlarge, or alter any swimming pool in the city unless a building permit has first been obtained from the city. 
(Code 2004, § 4.146.1)  
Sec. 32-184. - Condition and design. 
(a)  Swimming pools shall be maintained in a safe, clean, sanitary, secure, and structurally and mechanically sound manner. 
(b)  Swimming pool walls and floors shall be constructed of any impervious material which will provide a tight tank with white or light colored finish and easily cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom surface of the pool shall have a nonskid finish which is as smooth as possible. 
(c)  Swimming pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within, and to resist the pressure of the earth when the pool is empty, to a pressure of 2,200 pounds per square foot. 
(d)  Two or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be provided for all swimming pools. At least one such means of egress shall be located on a side of the pool at both the deep end and shallow end of the pool. Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of nonslip material and at least three inches wide for their full length. Steps and ladders shall have a handrail on both sides. 
(Code 2004, § 4.146.2)  
Sec. 32-185. - Enclosure design. 
(a)  Every outdoor swimming pool shall be completely enclosed by a fence or wall not less than four feet in height. 
(1)  Four inches in diameter to pass under the fence or wall. 
(2)  If the fence or wall is constructed with horizontal and vertical members, and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is at least 45 inches, the openings may not allow a sphere four inches in diameter to pass through the fence or wall. 
(3)  If the fence or wall is constructed with horizontal and vertical members, and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches, the openings may not allow a sphere 1¾ inches in diameter to pass through the enclosure. 
(4)  If the fence or wall is constructed with diagonal members and no vertical members, such as a lattice fence, the openings may not allow a sphere 1¾ inches in diameter to pass through the fence or wall. 
(5)  If the fence or wall is constructed with chain link metal fencing material, the openings may not allow a sphere 1¼ inches in diameter to pass through the fence or wall. 
(6)  Decorative designs or cutouts on, or in, a fence or wall may not contain any openings greater than 1¾ inches measured in any direction. 
(7)  Temporary or permanent equipment or structures may not be constructed or placed in a manner that will make them readily available for climbing over a swimming pool fence or wall. 
(b)  All gates or doors shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device. The latching device shall be located on the pool side, and comply with the requirements of the building codes adopted by the city. 
(c)  Prior to the excavation for an in-ground swimming pool, a temporary fence shall be installed and maintained until completion of a permanent fence. A permanent fence will suffice for a temporary fence during construction. 
(Code 2004, § 4.146.3)  
Sec. 32-186. - Public and semipublic swimming pools. 
(a)  Permit required; suspension of permit. 
(1)  A person shall not operate a public or semipublic swimming pool without a permit. 
(2)  The city may suspend a permit to operate a swimming pool if: 
a.  The condition of the pool is hazardous to the health or safety of the swimmers or the general public; 
b.  The owner fails to keep all pool equipment and devices working properly. 
(3)  The suspension of a permit as the result of a violation of a provision of this article shall continue until the cause of suspension is corrected. 
(b)  Safety equipment required. 
(1)  Every public or semipublic swimming pool shall be equipped with the following: 
a.  One unit of safety equipment; 
b.  Depth markers visible on the horizontal deck and vertical walls. The number must be at least four inches in height with unit measurement adjacent to the number (i.e., ft., feet); 
c.  A buoyed line separating the shallow from the deep portion of a swimming pool at the break point depth; 
d.  An accessible telephone available at all times while the pool is in use; and 
e.  Where no life guard is on duty, a warning sign shall be in plain view and shall state "Warning No Lifeguard On Duty" with clearly legible letters at least four inches high. The sign shall also state "Children Should Not Use The Pool Without An Adult In Attendance." 
(2)  The following shall be defined as one unit of safety equipment and readily available for use at any public or semipublic swimming pool at all times: 
a.  A life pole or shepherd's crook capable of reaching each part of the swimming pool; and 
b.  A ring buoy with at least 60 feet of floating rope. 
(Code 2004, § 4.146.4)  
Sec. 32-187. - Water quality. 
(a)  Acidity; alkalinity. The water in a swimming pool must be maintained so the pH of the water is between 7.2 and 7.8. 
(b)  Clarity. The water in any swimming pool must be sufficiently clear to permit a distinct view of the main drain from any area outside the pool. 
(c)  Disinfectant. Any pool disinfectant capable of killing bacteria and algae, but not harmful to humans, shall be added to the swimming pool water through a continuous feed machine. If chlorine is used, a residual level shall be maintained of one part per million of chlorine, not to exceed three parts per million. Hot tubs and spas must maintain two parts per million, not to exceed five parts per million. 
(d)  Algae. All swimming pools must be kept free from algae. 
(e)  Circulation. The recirculation system of any pool must be in operation at all times. 
(f)  Level. Fresh water must be added to any pool at a rate that will keep the water at a level sufficient to allow skimming devices or overflow gutters to work properly. 
(g)  Cleaning. The walls, floors, equipment and appurtenant facilities of any swimming pool shall be maintained in clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(Code 2004, § 4.146.5)  
Sec. 32-188. - Filling neglected pools. 
(a)  The owner of any swimming pool that is not maintained as a swimming pool in accordance with this article shall drain all water from the swimming pool and render it incapable of holding water and fill the swimming pool with dirt or sand. 
(b)  A swimming pool that remains drained of water for 60 days is presumed to be no longer maintained. 
(Code 2004, § 4.146.6; Ord. No. 2000-08, 3-28-2000)  
Secs. 32-189—32-215. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MOSQUITO CONTROL 
 
Sec. 32-216. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Artificial container means any bucket, barrel, tire, bottle, tub, tank, gutter, birdbath, swimming pool, ornamental pond, flower pot, jar or any other such manmade items capable of collecting and/or holding water. 
Breeding source means any condition capable of sustaining the reproduction of mosquitoes. The term "breeding source" includes both artificial containers and natural conditions or containers. 
Enforcement officer means the chief of police, code enforcement officers, or any otherwise qualified individuals designated by the city manager. 
EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Evidence of mosquito breeding means the natural presence of mosquito larva, pupa, or their remains. 
Insecticide means a chemical agent which kills or prevents the reproduction of insects. 
Larva means the immature, fully aquatic stage of mosquito development in which the insect appears as a small, wingless, worm-like form. 
Larvicide means a chemical agent which kills or prevents the reproduction of mosquito larvae. 
Mosquito means a small long-legged, two-winged insect of the family Culicidae, in which the female of the species is distinguished by a long proboscis for sucking blood. 
Natural body of water means any spring, stream, pond, lake, or wetland that was historically present in a natural state but may have been physically altered over time. A pond built in an area where there was no surface water or wetland present is not considered a natural body of water for purposes of this article. 
Occupant means the person who has the use of or occupies any building or any part thereof or who has the use or possession, actual or constructive, of the premises, whether the owner or tenant. In the case of vacant buildings or vacant portions of a building, or in case of occupancy in whole or in part by the owner, the owner of the building shall be deemed to be, and shall have the responsibility of, an occupant of such building. 
Owner means the person owning the building or premises. 
Premises means a parcel of real property, including all buildings and structures located thereon. 
Pupa means the immature, fully aquatic stage of mosquito development immediately following the larva stage and preceding the adult form, in which stage the insect appears as a small, wingless, worm-like shape with a greatly enlarged head. 
Stock tank means a manmade pond or artificial container used to provide drinking water for livestock, such as cattle or horses. 
(Ord. No. 2009-43, § 2, 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 32-217. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the intent of this article to control and reduce the mosquito population by removing, draining, treating, altering, or otherwise eliminating breeding sources for mosquitoes. The goal is to establish an effective program of mosquito control through such things as the elimination or treatment of breeding sources for mosquitoes, elimination of identified mosquito populations, and alleviation of all other such conditions found to be conducive to the reproduction or continued existence of mosquitoes. The city will have primary responsibility for enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 2009-43, § 2, 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 32-218. - Control required. 
(a)  All premises within the city shall be maintained in such a manner as to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes. Artificial containers, ditches, streams, and all other such sources of standing water or other liquid that serve as breeding sources must be removed, drained, treated, altered, maintained, or otherwise eliminated by the person occupying the premises or, in the absence of an occupant, by the owner, in such a manner as to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes. 
(b)  Where there is evidence of mosquito breeding, effective methods of eliminating and treating mosquito breeding sources shall be instigated by the person occupying the premises or, in the absence of an occupant, by the owner within 48 hours after discovering or being informed of the evidence of mosquito breeding on the premises. 
(c)  The owner or occupant of a premises with a natural body of water shall not be responsible for maintaining such natural body of water to eliminate mosquito breeding, but shall cooperate with the city and appropriate county health department officials and/or state department of health officials in eliminating the breeding source if the natural body of water is suspected of or has been determined to be a breeding source. 
(d)  The owner or occupant of premises with a stock tank shall manage the stock tank to minimize breeding of mosquitoes without using any substance that will impair the use of the water for livestock. 
(Ord. No. 2009-43, § 3, 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 32-219. - Methods of eliminating and treating mosquito breeding sources. 
Breeding sources for mosquitoes shall be treated by one or more of the following methods to eliminate the breeding source: 
(1)  Filling, draining, removing, or otherwise eliminating the breeding source. 
(2)  Completely emptying the breeding source of all water at least every five calendar days. Where an artificial container is a water basin (i.e., swimming pool, pond, birdbath, etc.) designed for the purpose of holding water, such containers shall be maintained or altered to prevent mosquito breeding or be removed. 
(3)  Treating the breeding source with an effective insecticide and/or larvicide in accordance with the label and/or directions established by or with the EPA. 
(4)  Completely emptying artificial containers of all liquid and storing such containers in an enclosed structure that is constructed in such a manner as to prevent the permanent collection of liquid in such containers. 
(5)  Proper disposal, by removal or destruction, of cans, boxes, broken or empty bottles, discarded vehicle tires, and similar objects likely to hold water. 
(6)  Maintain all natural or manmade stormwater or surface water drainage ways in a manner to prevent the ponding of water sufficient to provide breeding for mosquitoes. 
(7)  Other methods proven to be effective in controlling mosquitoes as approved by the enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-43, § 4, 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 32-220. - Right of entry; inspection. 
(a)  The enforcement officer shall have the right of entry upon any premises where entry is necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. If consent for entry is not given or obtained, an administrative search and inspection warrant shall be obtained. If an imminent hazard exists, no warrant is required for entry upon the premises in accordance with state statutes. 
(b)  The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding therein, and failure to prevent such breeding within three calendar days after notice by the enforcement officer shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(c)  Should the occupant, owner, or other person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent the same within three calendar days after due notice has been given to him, the enforcement officer is authorized to so act, and all necessary cost incurred by the enforcement officer for this purpose shall be charged against the occupant, owner, or other person offending, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 2009-43, § 5, 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 32-221. - Health department action. 
Where the existence of a mosquito population presents an imminent threat to the health of the community, the county health department is also authorized to take action to enforce this article. Before taking such action, the county health department shall notify the enforcement officer. The county health department may then notify the owner, occupant or other person responsible for the conditions, of actions required to eliminate a mosquito breeding source. Failure to comply with such notice within 48 hours of receiving the notice shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-43, § 6, 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 32-222. - Notice. 
Whenever this article provides for notice to be given to a person, that notice may be given by personally delivering a written notice to the person or by mailing a written notice to the person. 
(Ord. No. 2009-43, § 7, 12-8-2009)  
Secs. 32-223—32-252. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SMOKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Smoking tobacco in certain locations prohibited, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 48.01; Texas Clean Air Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.001 et seq.; authority of municipalities to enact and enforce ordinances regarding air pollution, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.113. 
 
Sec. 32-253. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City building means any building or facility owned, operated, or leased by the city. 
Smoke or smoking means the act of burning any tobacco product, weed, filter or plant of any kind, or any cigarette, cigar, pipe, hookah, water pipe, or any other device. 
Tobacco product means cigarette, cigar smoking including any granulated, plug-type, crimp cut, ready rug or any form of tobacco suitable for smoking in a pipe or cigarette, or chewing tobacco, including Cavendish twist, plug, scrap or any kind of tobacco or tobacco derivative suitable for chewing, snuff or any preparation of pulverized tobacco, and any other article or product that is made of tobacco or having or containing a tobacco product. 
(Code 2004, § 6.103(A); Ord. No. 2006-07, 2-14-2006)  
Sec. 32-254. - Penalty. 
(a)  The city has the right to inform persons violating this section that they shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. 
(b)  Enforcement shall be implemented by the city manager or through a city staff person designated by him. Such person shall have authority to issue persuasive letters or citations based upon reasonable cause, in a matter most suitable to the particular incident. 
(Code 2004, § 6.103(D); Ord. No. 2006-07, 2-14-2006)  
Sec. 32-255. - Use in city facilities. 
No person may smoke or use any tobacco product in any city facility. Enclosed city buildings or facilities shall be subject to the pertinent provisions of this section without exception. Any person at any city facility may use tobacco products or otherwise smoke tobacco products only at an area designated by the city manager or his designee, provided that no city employee shall go into such area to smoke except during authorized breaks or lunch periods. 
(Code 2004, § 6.103(B); Ord. No. 2006-07, 2-14-2006)  
Sec. 32-256. - Posting of signs. 
Any smoking or tobacco use sign or no-use tobacco signs with letters of not less than one inch in height shall be conspicuously posted in every room, building, or other place where smoking or the use of tobacco is controlled by this article, by the owner or the city or person having control of such premises. Such signs may have additional or different wording to explain the applicable rule in a particular area, room or location. 
(Code 2004, § 6.103(C); Ord. No. 2006-07, 2-14-2006)  
Chapter 35 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Fair Housing Act, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.001 et seq.; rights and responsibilities of persons with disabilities, V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 121.001 et seq.; health and human services, V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 131.001 et seq.; rights of the elderly, V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 102.003; fair campaign practices, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 258.004. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 35-1—35-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING 
 
Sec. 35-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under this article. 
Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied or designed and intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
Familial status means one or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18 years) being domiciled with: 
(1)  A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or 
(2)  The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person. 
The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Family includes a single individual. 
Handicap means, with respect to a person: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities, 
(2)  A record of having such an impairment, or 
(3)  Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance (as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802)). 
Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, fiduciaries, and any other organization or entity of whatever character. 
To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 2004, § 4.101.2; Ord. No. O-2016-0426-001, § 2, 4-26-2016)  
Sec. 35-20. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined a sum not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. Each day a violation continues, after the passage of 75 days from the date of filing of the initial complaint with the administrator, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this article may be enjoined by a suit filed by the city in a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy is in addition to any other penalty provision. 
(Code 2004, § 4.101.14)  
Sec. 35-21. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is declared to be city policy to bring about through fair, orderly and lawful procedures, the opportunity for each person to obtain housing without regard to his race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(b)  This policy is based upon a recognition of the right of every person to have access to adequate housing of his own choice without regard to race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin; and, further, that the denial of such rights through considerations based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin is detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the city's inhabitants and constitutes an unjust denial or depravation of such rights, which is within the power and proper responsibility of government to prevent. 
(Code 2004, § 4.101.1; Ord. No. O-2016-0426-001, § 3, 4-26-2016)  
Sec. 35-22. - Discrimination—Sales and rentals. 
Except as exempted by this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make available or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(3)  Make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(4)  Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  Induce or attempt to induce, for profit or with the hope or expectation of profit, any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(6)  Influence or attempt to influence, for profit or with the hope or expectation of profit, by any words, acts, or failure to act, any seller, purchaser, landlord or tenant of a dwelling so as to promote the maintenance of racially segregated housing or so as to retard, obstruct, or discourage racially integrated housing. 
(Code 2004, § 4.101.3; Ord. No. O-2016-0426-001, § 3, 4-26-2016)  
Sec. 35-23. - Same—Financing. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part of the making of commercial or residential real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against any such person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, brokerage points, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or their financial assistance because of the: 
(1)  Race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance; or 
(2)  Race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling for which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Code 2004, § 4.101.4; Ord. No. O-2016-0426-001, § 3, 4-26-2016)  
Sec. 35-24. - Same—Brokerage services. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(Code 2004, § 4.101.5; Ord. No. O-2016-0426-001, § 3, 4-26-2016)  
Sec. 35-25. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  There shall be exempted from the application of section 35-22 all transactions involving the: 
(1)  Rental of units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such units as his residence. 
(2)  Rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than one family if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains and occupies the remainder of such dwelling as his residence and not more than four such rooms are offered. 
(3)  Sale or rental of any single house by a private individual who owns such house provided that: 
a.  The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesperson, or person; 
b.  The sale is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this article. This shall not prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; 
c.  The owner does not own more than three single-family houses at the time of the sale; 
d.  The owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time. 
(b)  If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of sale or was not the most recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this section shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society or any non-profit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious association or society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a bona fide private club not, in fact, open to the public and which, as an incident to its primary purpose, provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing accommodation. 
(Code 2004, § 4.101.6; Ord. No. O-2016-0426-001, § 3, 4-26-2016)  
Sec. 35-26. - Administrator appointed. 
The mayor shall appoint and council shall confirm a council person to serve without pay as the fair housing administrator (hereinafter referred to as "administrator") and have the responsibility for implementing this article. The administrator may delegate his authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other city employees. 
(Code 2004, § 4.101.7)  
Sec. 35-27. - Complaint procedure. 
(a)  Only the person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring (hereafter referred to as "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the administrator. Such complaints shall be in writing and identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The administrator shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request. 
(b)  If at any time the administrator shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person or persons have committed or are committing a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed, the administrator may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name and such complaint thereafter shall be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(c)  The administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of Housing and Development pursuant to the provisions of the federal Fair Housing Act, 42 USC 800 et seq., and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  All complaints shall be filed within 60 days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the persons named therein who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The accused may file an answer to the complaint within 15 days of receipt of the written complaint. 
(e)  All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(Code 2004, § 4.101.8)  
Sec. 35-28. - Investigation procedure. 
(a)  Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the administrator shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint. 
(b)  During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaint, the administrator shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this article. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the administrator, by the complainant or by any other party to the proceedings without the written consent of all persons concerned. 
(c)  Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator, but within 30 days of the filing of the complaint with the administrator, if the efforts of the administrator to secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, and if the administrator has made a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, the administrator shall recommend that such violation be prosecuted in municipal court. If the city attorney determines to prosecute, he shall institute a complaint and prosecute same to conclusion within 30 days after such determination or as soon thereafter as practicable. 
(Code 2004, § 4.101.9)  
Sec. 35-29. - Cumulative legal effect. 
This article is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal remedies which the person aggrieved may pursue. 
(Code 2004, § 4.101.10)  
Sec. 35-30. - Unlawful intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group or business because he or they have complied with the provisions of this article, or enjoyed the benefits of this article, or because he or they have made a charge, testified or assisted in any manner in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder, or have made any report to the administrator. 
(Code 2004, § 4.101.11)  
Sec. 35-31. - Cooperation with Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. 
The administrator is authorized to cooperate with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and the U. S. Attorney General pursuant to the provisions of the federal Fair Housing Act, 42 USC 800 et seq., and may render such service to the Secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this article. 
(Code 2004, § 4.101.12)  
Sec. 35-32. - Education and public information. 
In order to further the objectives of this article, the administrator may conduct educational and public information programs. 
(Code 2004, § 4.101.13; Ord. No. 86-29, 9-9-1986)  
Chapter 38 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal police forces generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.001 et seq.; municipal authority relating to jails, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 361.001 et seq.; municipal contracts with county or private entity for jail facilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 361.061 et seq.; general duties of officers, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 2.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 38-1—38-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-19. - Created. 
The city has created the city police department, which is the regular police force of the city for the health, safety, and welfare of the general public and the protection of the citizens of the city. The police department shall be headed by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0209-001, § 8.123.4, 2-9-2010) 
State Law reference— Authority of home rule municipality to establish police force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.003.  
Sec. 38-20. - Members. 
The regular police force of the city shall consist of the chief of police and such members of the police force as the city manager and city council shall from time to time determine. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0209-001, § 8.123.5, 2-9-2010)  
Sec. 38-21. - Duty to act. 
All members of the force must be prepared to act whenever their services are demanded by a superior officer or at all times upon viewing a violation of a Code provision or state law. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0209-001, § 8.123.8, 2-9-2010)  
Sec. 38-22. - Services provided; fees. 
The city police department provides certain services to the community as authorized and directed by the city council from time to time. The fees for such services are payable upon application therefor in the amount provided in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code.  
Secs. 38-23—38-47. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - POLICE CHIEF 
 
Sec. 38-48. - Duties and authority. 
(a)  The director of the police department, or police force, shall be the chief of police. The chief of police shall have immediate direction and control of the police department, subject to the appointment and supervision of the city manager. The chief of police serves at the will and pleasure of the city manager, subject to such rules, regulations and orders as the city manager may prescribe, not inconsistent with Code provisions or state laws. The chief of police shall promulgate all orders, rules and regulations for the government of the police force subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(b)  The chief of police shall meet all the qualifications established by the city manager, in consultation with the city council and city attorney, and be certified by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education (TCLEOSE). 
(c)  The chief of police shall devote his whole time to the discharge of his duties and see that the laws and Code provisions are enforced as far as possible by those under his command. The chief of police shall see that police officers are on duty during the whole time of their watch and in no case absent himself from the city for more than 48 hours at any given time without first notifying the city manager of his intended absence. Any absence from the city of more than 48 hours, save and except unanticipated emergencies, shall require reasonable advance notification to and the formal approval of the city manager, which approval shall be contingent upon the city being sufficiently policed during such absence. 
(d)  The chief of police shall keep a record of all persons committed to jail. Such record shall contain information regarding any person committed to jail, including the offense with which any such person is charged, the dates of any such person's commitment to and release from jail, and a description of such money, property or valuables as the committed person may have at the time of arrest and commitment. In addition, the chief of police shall, as often as may be required by the city manager, make a report in writing of all arrests made, by whom made, and the nature of the charge and how disposed of, and a statement of all property recorded by him and how disposed of. 
(e)  The chief of police or his designee shall have the right to initiate action to discipline, suspend and dismiss any of the officers or employees who may be under his jurisdiction and control for just and reasonable cause, subject to the officer's or employee's rights of appeal to, and review by, the city manager as established in the city's personnel policies and procedures manual as it may be adopted and/or amended from time to time. Pursuant to this authority, the chief of police may establish such rules and regulations as may be necessary and proper for the establishment of officer and employee standards of conduct and procedures to implement and enforce the same, subject to their coordination with the city attorney's office and approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0209-001, § 8.123.2, 2-9-2010)  
Sec. 38-49. - Uniforms, equipment and arms. 
The chief of police shall, subject to budgetary constraints and any required city council approvals, prescribe the uniforms, badges and equipment for the members of the police department and direct the manner in which the members of the department shall be armed. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0209-001, § 8.123.3, 2-9-2010)  
Secs. 38-50—38-71. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REGULAR PERSONNEL 
 
Sec. 38-72. - Qualifications. 
Upon the appointment of any police officer by the chief of police, subject to the approval of the city manager, there shall be issued to him a commission as such police officer, and upon the receipt of such commission, the person so appointed shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe to the oath of office prescribed by the state constitution and this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0209-001, § 8.123.6, 2-9-2010)  
Sec. 38-73. - Powers and duties; compensation. 
(a)  The individual peace officers constituting the police department shall be and are invested with all the power and authority given to them as peace officers under the state laws in taking cognizance of and enforcing the state criminal laws and the Code provisions within the city limits. It shall be the duty of each such officer to use his best endeavors to prevent, within the city, the commission of offenses against the state laws and Code provisions, observe and enforce all such laws and Code provisions, detect and arrest offenders against the same, preserve the good order of the city and secure the inhabitants thereof from violence and the property therein from injury. 
(b)  Such police officers shall have no power or authority in civil matters save that which is necessary for the performance of the official duties assigned to them, but shall execute any criminal warrant or warrant of arrest that may be placed in their hands by the duly constituted authorities of the city. 
(c)  Such police officers shall be compensated by the salary paid them by the city, and entitled to receive only such other compensation and reimbursement in conjunction with the performance of their official duties as police officers as is provided for by the general state laws, and authorized by the chief of police with the approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0209-001, § 8.123.7, 2-9-2010)  
Secs. 38-74—38-104. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESERVE FORCE 
 
Sec. 38-105. - Establishment. 
The city has established a police reserve force. 
(Code 2004, § 8.124)  
Sec. 38-106. - Appointment of officers. 
Members of the police reserve force shall be appointed and/or relieved at the discretion of the chief of police and shall serve as police officers during the actual discharge of official duties. 
(Code 2004, § 8.124.1)  
Sec. 38-107. - Number of officers authorized. 
The number of reserve police officers shall not exceed 1½ times the regular police officers authorized. 
(Code 2004, § 8.124.2; Ord. No. 88-3, 1-12-1988)  
Sec. 38-108. - Service at discretion of chief of police. 
Members of the police reserve force shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police and may be called in to active service at any time the chief of police considers it necessary to have additional police officers to preserve the peace and enforce the law. 
(Code 2004, § 8.124.3)  
Sec. 38-109. - Compensation; uniforms; benefits; supplemental capacity. 
(a)  Members of the police reserve force may serve without compensation. Uniforms and uniform compensation may be provided to the reserve police officers at the discretion of the chief of police. The uniform compensation shall be based solely upon time served by the member of the police reserve while in training for, or in the performance of, official duties. 
(b)  The city may provide hospital and medical assistance to members of the police reserve force who sustain injury in the course of performing official duties, in the same manner as provided by the city for its fulltime police officers, and reserve officers shall be eligible for death benefits as permitted by state law; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize or permit a member of the police reserve force to become eligible for participation in any pension fund created pursuant to state statute and to which regular officers may become a member of through payroll deductions or otherwise. 
(c)  Reserve police officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force and shall in no case assume the fulltime duties of regular police officers. 
(Code 2004, § 8.124.4)  
Sec. 38-110. - Power of mayor to summons special police force. 
This action does not limit the power of the mayor to summons into service a special police force as provided by Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 995. 
(Code 2004, § 8.124.5)  
Sec. 38-111. - Compliance with standards. 
(a)  Reserve police officers must comply with the minimum training standards established by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education and minimum standards established for all reserve law enforcement officers identical to the standards so established which must be fulfilled before a person appointed as a reserve law enforcement officer may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer. 
(b)  The chief of police shall establish qualifications and standards of training for members of the police reserve force and rules and regulations governing reserve police officers. The chief of police may establish minimum physical, mental, education and moral standards as used by the regular police department, but in no case shall the standards be less than that established by the Texas Commission of Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education. 
(Code 2004, § 8.124.6; Ord. No. 80-5, 7-14-1980)  
Secs. 38-112—38-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 
 
Sec. 38-136. - Position created. 
There is created the position of code enforcement officer. The code enforcement officer shall be designated by and work under the direction of the city manager or, at the discretion of the city manager, under the supervision of the chief of police. The code enforcement officer shall receive such salary as may be from time to time established. 
(Ord. No. 2009-35, § 2, 11-10-2009)  
Sec. 38-137. - Qualifications. 
The code enforcement officer shall possess all qualifications necessary for registration with the state department of health as provided by state law and shall maintain such registration as a condition of continued employment. 
(Ord. No. 2009-35, § 3, 11-10-2009)  
Sec. 38-138. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The code enforcement officer shall enforce the provisions of state law, the Code of Ordinances, and such other city ordinances relating to building standards, fire safety, unsafe buildings, junked vehicles, signs, subdivisions and zoning (all of which ordinances are hereinafter referred to collectively as the "Code"). The code enforcement officer shall also perform such other duties as may from time to time be directed. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer shall be authorized to direct the abatement of any nuisance or other Code violation within the scope of the enforcement powers set forth in subsection (a) of this section, issue any required notices and initiate abatement proceedings in conformity with the applicable provisions of this Code and state law. In addition, the code enforcement officer shall be authorized, within the scope of the enforcement powers set forth in subsection (a) of this section, to issue any required citations and initiate proceedings in the municipal court against persons deemed to be in violation of the Code provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2009-35, § 4, 11-10-2009)  
Sec. 38-139. - Administrative warrants. 
The code enforcement officer is hereby authorized, pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.05, to obtain and execute administrative search warrants in connection with any inspection that may be necessary in the performance of the duties set out in section 38-138 and for which a warrant may be required. 
(Ord. No. 2009-35, § 5, 11-10-2009)  
Secs. 38-140—38-161. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 38-162. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm site means a single premises or location with one street address served by an alarm system which is under the control of one owner, the owner's agent or a person in control of the premises served by the alarm system. 
Alarm system means a device or system arranged to signal the presence of an intrusion or hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police, fire or other emergency service would normally respond if notified of the signal, and includes, but is not limited to, systems that signal intrusions or hazards as to vehicles or other private property as a part of a larger system that monitors the alarm site, provided that the vehicle or other private property is placed permanently at the alarm site. 
(1)  The term "alarm system" includes such systems which are commonly referred to as: 
a.  Burglar alarm systems; 
b.  Holdup alarms; 
c.  Robbery alarms; 
d.  Medical alarms; 
e.  Fire alarms; 
f.  Panic/alert systems; and 
g.  Similar systems. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the term "alarm system" does not include a system that: 
a.  Monitors a vehicle or any other item of private property that is not permanently located at an alarm site; or 
b.  Is designed to alert only the owner or inhabitants of a premises and having no audible exterior alarm, automatic dialing device, or other device that automatically sends an alert signal to an emergency service provider or to persons engaged in relaying an alert signal to an emergency service provider at a location other than the alarm site. 
Alarm user means the owner, agent or person in control of the premises where an alarm system is maintained within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
Automatic dialing device means the component of an alarm system that automatically sends over regular telephone lines or by other electronic means, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or signal of any kind indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
Burglar alarm system means an alarm system designed to signal an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
Commercial alarm site means a premises with an alarm system that is intended or used for the purpose of conducting a commercial business enterprise. 
Department means the police department or its designee. 
Direct connect means an alarm system that has the capability of transmitting system signals to and receiving them at an agency or site designated by the department. 
Direct line means a telephone line leading directly from a central station or modified central station to the dispatch center for the department, and which is for use only to report emergency signals on a person-to-person basis. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system which is not the result of an emergency or threat of emergency for which the alarm system was designed to give notice and, in the case of a burglar alarm system, for which the responding police officer finds no evidence of any criminal activity. 
(1)  The term "false alarm" also includes activation of an alarm system or burglar alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner/operator or lessee of an alarm system, or of their employees or agents. The department may not consider a false alarm to have occurred unless a response is made by an agency of the municipality within 30 minutes of the alarm notification and the agency determines from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises that the alarm was false. 
(2)  The term "false alarm" does not include activations triggered by: 
a.  An attempted illegal entry of which there is visible evidence, illegal entry, or other demonstrable criminal activity; 
b.  Hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, thunderstorms, electrical storms, utility power surges, or surges through telephone lines; 
c.  A person acting under a reasonable belief that an emergency exists; 
d.  Accident, mistake or testing if then followed by an immediate call to the department by the alarm monitoring company canceling the alarm, such call having been made prior to the dispatch of any officer; or 
e.  Alarms resulting from the servicing of the alarm system by an alarm business when, prior to such repair or service, the alarm user or his agent notified the department, in person or by call, that the alarm system will be repaired or serviced at the particular date and time coinciding with the alarm. 
Key holder means any person who has authority over and can respond to an alarm site, at police request, to disarm or reset the alarm, or both. 
Permitted site means an alarm site for which a valid and unexpired permit has been issued, provided that each permit holder has current information on file. 
(Ord. No. 2008-41, § 1, 10-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-163. - Penalties. 
A person commits an offense if the person violates any part of this article. An offense of this article is a class C misdemeanor. Any person convicted of violating this article shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00 for each incident of violation. Each day of the continuance of such violation shall be considered a separate offense and shall be punished separately. 
(Ord. No. 2008-41, § 12, 10-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-164. - Permit required; fines for nonpermitted operations; billing for police dispatch to nonpermitted site. 
A person commits an offense if the person installs, operates, or causes to be operated, an alarm system without first obtaining a permit from the department. A separate permit is required for each alarm site. Operation of a nonpermitted site is a citable offense, with a maximum fine of $500.00. In addition, the department may bill the owner or operator for each police dispatch to a nonpermitted alarm site. The schedule of penalties for such billing is set forth in section 38-169. 
(Ord. No. 2008-41, § 2, 10-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-165. - Permit—Application. 
Each permit application must contain the name, address, telephone number (home and business, if applicable) of the person responsible for operating and maintaining the alarm system and responding to an alarm signal. An application for a permit for a commercial alarm site must also contain the names and telephone numbers (home and business) of two people who will respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes of being requested by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2008-41, § 3, 10-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-166. - Same—Fee. 
(a)  A nonrefundable annual fee in the amount provided in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code is required for each permit or renewal of a permit. A permit is issued for one year and must be renewed each year thereafter by payment of the permit fee. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of the permit holder to pay the renewal fee no later than the tenth day of the month following the renewal month ("the renewal due date"). If the permit is not renewed on or before the renewal due date, it expires and is no longer valid. 
(c)  The department, at its discretion, may renew an expired permit upon payment of all fees due, plus late fees accumulating at the rate specified in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code, for every 30 days that have elapsed since the renewal due date. 
(d)  All permit fees collected will be placed into the department's budget and maintained at the discretion of the city manager, subject to budgeting decisions by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-41, § 4, 10-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-167. - Same—Transferability. 
An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person or to a new owner. Upon transfer of ownership of an alarm site, the permit automatically expires and the new owner must apply for a new permit. 
(Ord. No. 2008-41, § 5, 10-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-168. - Same—Modifications. 
It is the permit holder's sole responsibility to promptly provide the department with any information that changes the information provided in the permit application including, but not limited to, the name and contact information of the person designated to respond to an alarm. Failure to provide such information to the department within five business days of actual knowledge that information on the permit application is no longer current is a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2008-41, § 6, 10-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-169. - False alarm penalties. 
(a)  The penalties for false alarms depend on the number of false alarms occurring at a permitted site on an annual basis as follows: 
(1)  After three false alarms: $50.00 per false alarm. 
(2)  After five false alarms: $75.00 per false alarm. 
(3)  After eight or more false alarms: $100.00 per false alarm. 
(b)  A nonpermitted site is allowed one free false alarm call, at which time the department will endeavor to give notice of the requirements of this article to the owner or person in charge of the nonpermitted site. However, ignorance of the requirements of this article for any reason is not a defense to prosecution for violating this section and does not relieve a person from paying any applicable fees or late fees. 
(Ord. No. 2008-41, § 7, 10-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-170. - Restrictions on audible alarms. 
All alarm systems equipped with any exterior sound-producing device including, but not limited to, gongs, buzzers, sirens, bells or horns must be equipped with a time device that limits the operation of such sound-producing device to a continuous ten minutes, except that commercial alarm sites must be equipped with a time device that limits the operation of such sound-producing device to a continuous 15 minutes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-41, § 8, 10-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-171. - Requirements for automatic dialing devices. 
An alarm site that transmits automatic alarm notifications directly to the county communications center or other law enforcement authority must provide at least the following: 
(1)  Type of alarm event (burglary, robbery, fire, etc.); 
(2)  Address of the alarm site; 
(3)  Place on the premises, if possible, that the alarm was activated (window, door, garage, etc.); 
(4)  Telephone number of a contact person who will be able to respond if necessary; and 
(5)  Alarm permit number. 
(Ord. No. 2008-41, § 9, 10-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-172. - Notification required by alarm monitor. 
If the monitor of an alarm system lacks any information that corroborates that an alarm signal received by the monitor is not a false alarm, the monitor must make an attempt to contact the occupant of the alarm site before contacting the department. If the monitor is initially unable to contact the occupant, the monitor must continue attempts to contact the occupant after contacting the department and, if necessary, must continue such attempts during the department's response to the alarm signal. The monitor must promptly notify the department of the results of the attempts to contact the occupant of the alarm site. If it is a commercial alarm site, the monitor must first attempt to notify the department, then attempt to notify a person responsible for the alarm site, and then attempt to notify the department again to provide the status of a key holder response. 
(Ord. No. 2008-41, § 10, 10-14-2008)  
Chapter 41 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES 
(RESERVED)  
Chapter 44 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority for regulation of nuisances and disorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.001 et seq.; persons not to permit abandoned property to become public health nuisance, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.013; municipality authority to require the owner of a lot in the municipality to keep the lot free from weeds, rubbish, brush, and other environmental nuisances, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq.; abatement of junked vehicle declared to be a public nuisance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.001 et seq.; enhanced penalty for violation of ordinances governing fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001(b); abatement of common and public nuisances, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 125.001 et seq.; municipal authority regarding substandard buildings, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 44-1. - Penalties. 
Violations of the provisions under this chapter are hereby deemed violations of ordinances, rules, or police regulations that govern fire safety, zoning, and public health and sanitation, punishable as provided in section 1-3. 
State Law reference— Enhanced penalty for violation of ordinances governing fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001(b).  
Sec. 44-2. - Authority. 
Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.042, the city hereby exercises its authority to define and prohibit nuisances within the city limits and within 5,000 feet of the city limits and further to prevent and summarily abate and remove nuisances. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority for regulation of nuisances and disorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.001 et seq.  
Secs. 44-3—44-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NOISE REGULATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 44-23—44-48. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - NOISE DISTURBANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2012-0724-001, § 2, adopted July 24, 2012, amended the former Art. II, Div. 2, §§ 44-49—44-51, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to sound amplification systems and derived from Code 2004, §§ 7.111.2—7.111.4. 
 
Sec. 44-49. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Farmersville, employees or any authorized representative of the city. 
Construction means any site preparations, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action (excluding demolition) of public or private right-of-way surfaces, structures, utilities or similar property. 
Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of public or private right-of-way surfaces, structures, utilities or similar property. 
Device means any mechanism which is intended to produce, or which actually produces noise when operated or handled. 
Engine braking means the use of retarding forces within an engine to slow a vehicle down, as opposed to using an external braking mechanism, such as friction brakes or magnetic brakes. This term applies to petrol engines and other engines that throttle air intake. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle propelled by mechanical power such as, but not limited to, any passenger car, truck, truck-trailer, semi-trailer, camper, motorcycle, mini-bike, pocket bike, go-cart, dune buggy or racing vehicle. 
Muffler means any apparatus consisting of baffles, chambers, or acoustical absorbing material whose primary purpose is to transmit liquids or gases while causing a significant reduction in sound emission. 
Noise disturbance means any sound which annoys or disturbs, or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect upon, the sensibilities of a reasonable, prudent, adult person; and any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise which renders the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable or interferes with public peace and comfort. 
Noise disturbance per se means not requiring extraneous evidence or support to establish the existence of a noise disturbance. 
Nonresidential district means any district not classified by the zoning ordinance as containing residential homes, apartments or condominiums. 
Owner means any person having supervision or control of any property. 
Power equipment means any motorized electric- or fuel-powered equipment including but not limited to, tractors, lawnmowers, and other similar devices or equipment. 
Power model vehicle means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne, or land-borne plane, vessel, or vehicle, which is not designed to carry persons including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
Property means any lot, tract, parcel of land or a portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, public or private within the territorial limits of the city. 
Property boundary means an imaginary line exterior to any enclosed structure, at the ground surface and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person. 
Quiet zone means property on which a school, hospital, nursing home, assisted living facility, clinic, library or other noise sensitive facility is operated. 
Residential district means any district classified by the zoning ordinance as containing residential homes, apartments, condominiums or dwelling units. 
Roadway means any street, alley, parkway, sidewalk or gutter. 
Sound means a temporal or spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical quantity, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed to distant points. 
Vibration means a temporal and spatial oscillation of displacement, velocity or acceleration in a solid material. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0724-001, § 2, 7-24-2012)  
Sec. 44-50. - Specific noise disturbance prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall allow, make or cause to be made any unreasonable loud or disturbing noise which is offensive to the sensibilities of a reasonable, prudent adult person, renders the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable, interferes with public peace and comfort, or causes a noise disturbance as defined. 
(b)  The following includes, but is not limited to, activities which can create unreasonably loud or disturbing noises in violation of this article including activities which are noise disturbances per se, unless an exemption applies. 
(c)  Animals. Owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any animal or fowl which by frequent or habitual noise making, unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort or repose of citizens, or causes a noise disturbance as defined herein. The provision of this article shall apply to all private or public facilities including any animal shelter or commercial kennel, which holds or treats animals. 
(d)  Radios, television sets, musical instruments, loud speaking amplifiers and similar devices. 
(1)  The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production or reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound within a residential district, or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any such activity shall create a noise disturbance per se if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production or reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set, loudspeaker and sound amplifiers or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound within a nonresidential area in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(3)  The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production or reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device that produces or reproduces sound for the purpose of attracting attention to any cause or demonstration, or to any performance, show, sale or display of merchandise so as to attract attention to such cause, demonstration or premises when such use is done in a manner which causes a noise disturbance. 
(4)  The using, operating permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production or reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device on trucks or other moving vehicles for the purpose of attracting attention to any cause or demonstration, or for advertising any show, sale or display of merchandise when such use is done in a manner which causes a noise disturbance. 
(e)  Vehicular sound amplification systems. Operating or controlling a motor vehicle in either a public or private place within the city and operating any sound device which is part of, or connected to, any radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, cassette tape player, or other similar device in the motor vehicle in such a manner that, when operated, it is audible at a distance of 30 feet, or when operated, causes a person to be aware of the vibration accompanying the sound at a distance of 30 feet from the source when such operation is done in a manner which causes a noise disturbance. 
(f)  Yelling, shouting, etc. The yelling, shouting, crying, hooting, whistling or singing of peddlers, hawkers or any other person in such a manner to cause a noise disturbance. 
(g)  Loading operations. The loading or unloading of any vehicle in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(h)  Construction/maintenance work. 
(1)  Operating or permitting to be operated any equipment used in construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures, streets, alleys, lawns, golf courses or appurtenances thereto and/or the erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building within a residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any such activity shall create a noise disturbance per se if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  Operating or permitting to be operated any gravel pit, rock crusher, or other machinery for the separation, gathering, grading, loading or unloading of sand, rock or gravel within a residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any such activity shall create a noise disturbance per se if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(3)  Operating or permitting to be operated any gravel pit, rock crusher or other machinery for the separation, gathering, grading, loading or unloading of sand, rock or gravel within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(4)  Operating or permitting to be operated any equipment used in construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures, streets, alleys, lawns, golf course or appurtenances thereto within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (h)(1)—(4), construction and/or maintenance work may be performed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. only after receiving permission from the city manager or his designee upon applicant's showing that such work cannot reasonably or efficiently be performed otherwise. 
(6)  At locations where voluntary compliance with the recommended limitations regarding the performance of construction and maintenance work between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. is not being observed and the city receives one or more complaints from any resident of a residence or quiet zone within 500 feet of the work site, the city may issue written orders to stop work or further regulate site construction working hours if site work is being done outside the defined time guidelines or is interfering with the reasonable tranquility of a neighborhood. 
(i)  Power equipment. 
(1)  Operating or permitting to be operated any power equipment (as defined herein and excluding construction equipment which is specifically regulated above) within a residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any such activity shall create a noise disturbance per se if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  Operating or permitting to be operated any power equipment (as defined herein and excluding construction equipment which is specifically regulated above) within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(j)  Motor vehicles—Repairs or testing. 
(1)  The repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing of any motor vehicle (including off-road vehicles) or watercraft within a residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any such activity shall create a noise disturbance per se if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  The repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing of any motor vehicle (including off-road vehicles) or watercraft within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(k)  Motor vehicles—Running loud or out of repair. 
(1)  The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, so modified, or so loaded, which emits or creates loud or unnecessary grating, grinding or rasping noise, the excessive spinning of the tires, or the racing of a motor vehicle engine unnecessarily within a residential district or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, such activity shall create a noise disturbance per se if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so modified, or so loaded, which emits or creates loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, or rasping noise, the excessive spinning of the tires, or the racing of a motor vehicle engine unnecessarily within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(l)  Motor vehicles—Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance, except as discharged through a muffler or other device which effectively and efficiently prevents loud and unusual noises and annoying smoke. 
(m)  Motor vehicles—Engine braking. Engine braking occurs when the retarding forces within an engine are used to slow a vehicle down, as opposed to using an external braking mechanism such as friction brakes or magnetic brakes which causes a noise disturbance. 
(n)  Motor vehicles—Jake braking. Engine braking used mainly in large diesel trucks and works by opening the exhaust valves at the top of the compression stroke, resulting in adiabatic expansion of the compressed air, so the large amount of energy stored in that compressed air is not returned to the crankshaft, but is released into the atmosphere which causes a noise disturbance. 
(o)  Explosive devices. Explosive sound sources including, but not limited to, the use of fireworks, explosives, and the firing of guns or other explosive devices in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance; provided however, that no such noise disturbance shall be deemed to exist when the activity is allowed or sanctioned by ordinance or other authority and the activity is conducted in strict accordance with said ordinance or authority. 
(p)  Powered model mechanical devices. 
(1)  The flying of model aircraft powered by internal combustion engines, whether tethered or not, or the firing or operating of model rocket vehicles or other similar noise producing devices, within a residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any such activity shall create a noise disturbance per se if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  The flying of model aircraft powered by internal combustion engines, whether tethered or not, or the firing or operating of model rocket vehicles or other similar noise producing devices within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(q)  Quiet zone. Creating a noise disturbance on any street adjacent to any school, hospital, nursing home, assisted living facility, clinic, library or other noise sensitive facility. 
(r)  Vibration. Using or causing to use any device that creates any ground vibration, which is perceptible without instruments at any point on or beyond the property boundary of the source. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0724-001, § 2, 7-24-2012; Ord. No. O-2013-1008-003, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Sec. 44-51. - Exemptions. 
The following sources of potential noise disturbances shall be exempt from the regulations of this article: 
(1)  Safety signals, storm warning sirens or horns and the testing of such equipment, emergency vehicle sires or horns used when responding to an emergency, and emergency pressure relief valves. 
(2)  Sound caused in the performance of emergency or public service work, including police, fire and public utility operations, acting in the performance of lawful duties to protect the health, safety or welfare of the community. 
(3)  Sounds caused by natural phenomena. 
(4)  Activities conducted on public streets, squares, parks and playgrounds which are approved, sponsored or sanctioned by the city such as a parade, fireworks, sporting event, musical production, or other activity that has the approval of the city council or a city department authorized to grant such approval. 
(5)  Activities conducted on public or private school grounds including, but not limited to, school athletic and school entertainment events which are approved, sponsored or sanctioned by the school. 
(6)  Sounds created by locomotives as they travel through the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0724-001, § 2, 7-24-2012)  
Secs. 44-52—44-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED AND JUNK VEHICLES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.001 et seq.; abatement of junked vehicle declared to be a public nuisance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 44-76. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle which: 
(1)  Is inoperable, more than five years old and left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours; 
(2)  Has remained illegally on public property for a period of more than 48 hours; 
(3)  Has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours; or 
(4)  Is left unattended on any right-of-way of a designated county, state or federal highway for more than 48 hours. 
Antique motor vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old. 
Junked vehicle or junk motor vehicle means a vehicle as defined in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071, as amended, that is self-propelled and: 
(1)  Does not have lawfully attached to it: 
a.  An unexpired license plate; or 
b.  A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and 
(2)  Is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, or discarded, or is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
a.  72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
b.  30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
Motor vehicle collector means a person who owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles, who acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use or who restores and preserves an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
Outboard motor means an outboard motor subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 31. 
Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from the original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
Watercraft means a vessel subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 31. 
(Code 2004, § 7.115.1; Ord. No. 04-51, 12-14-2004)  
Sec. 44-77. - Authority to impound abandoned vehicles; notification; sale. 
(a)  Impoundment. The police department is authorized to take into custody any abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor found on public property in the manner provided by state law. The police department may use department personnel, equipment, and facilities and may contract, upon approval from the city council, for other personnel, equipment, and facilities to remove, preserve, and store an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor taken into custody under this section. 
(b)  Notice. Upon the impoundment of an abandoned motor vehicle under subsection (a) of this section, the police department shall notify not later than the tenth day after taking the motor vehicle into custody, by certified mail, the last known registered owner and all lien holders of record pursuant to the Certificate of Title Act (V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 501) or V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 31 that the vehicle has been taken into custody. Such notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle identification number of the abandoned vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the motor vehicle is being held, inform the owner and any lien holders of their right to reclaim the motor vehicle, not later than the 20th day after the date of the notice, upon payment of all towing, preservation and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody or the garagekeepers' charges if proper notice has been given thereof. The notice shall also state that the failure of the owner and lien holders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided shall constitute a waiver by the owner and all lien holders of all right, title, and interest in the vehicle and their consent to the sale of the abandoned vehicle at a public auction. If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, the registration contains no address for the owner, or it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of all lien holders, such notice shall be published one time in one newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice by publication shall be published within the time requirements prescribed for notice by certified mail, and shall have the same contents required for a notice by certified mail. Multiple listings of abandoned vehicles may be published in such notice. 
(c)  Sale. If an abandoned vehicle is not reclaimed as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the police department shall sell the motor vehicle at a public auction. The purchaser thereof shall take title to the motor vehicle free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership and receive a sales receipt from the police department, and is entitled to register the purchased vehicle and receive a certificate of title. The police department shall reimburse itself from the proceeds of the sale for the expenses of the auction, cost of towing, and preserving and storing the vehicle, together with all notice and publication costs incurred. Any excess remaining from the proceeds of such sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or the entitled lien holder for 90 days, and then shall be deposited in a special city fund which shall remain available for the payment of future auction, towing, preserving, storage and all notice and publication costs, whenever the proceeds from a sale of such other abandoned motor vehicles are insufficient to meet such expenses and costs. The police department may use an unclaimed abandoned motor vehicle taken into custody under this section for departmental purposes; provided, however, that the vehicle is not subject to a garagekeeper's lien and, upon discontinuance of use, the vehicle is auctioned in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Authority to move vehicle. This section and the procedures set forth herein do not affect or in any way impair the police department's authority or any law authorizing the police department to immediately remove a vehicle left on public property that is an obstruction to traffic. This section and the procedures set forth herein shall not be read or construed as conflicting with any other section of this article. 
(Code 2004, § 7.117.2)  
Sec. 44-78. - Disposal of junked vehicles; city's right of entry upon private premises. 
Junked vehicles may be disposed of by demolishers or removal to a scrap yard or any other suitable site. Vehicles so removed shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. Persons authorized under this division and as designated by the city manager may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this division to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of vehicles and remove or cause the removal of vehicles or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance by the municipal court judge. 
(Code 2004, § 7.117.4)  
Sec. 44-79. - Registration when impounded. 
All motor vehicles, watercraft, and outboard motors taken into custody by the police department under this division shall be registered in a record book provided for that purpose. The register must contain the following information: 
(1)  Description of the motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor; 
(2)  Time and place seized and by whom; 
(3)  Name of the owner, if known; and 
(4)  Storage and towing charges accrued against the motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor. 
(Code 2004, § 7.117.5)  
Sec. 44-80. - Lien for towing and storage charges. 
(a)  The city shall have a lien on all abandoned, stolen, wrecked or recovered motor vehicles, watercraft, and outboard motors for towing and storing charges, as may be established from time to time, in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  The operator of the city pound or any facility designated by the city to store motor vehicles, watercraft or outboard motors taken into custody under any law shall maintain duplicate itemized records for the amount charged for wrecker and pound fees for each vehicle impounded. Notice of such wrecker and pound fees shall be furnished to the owner of such vehicle at the last known address reflected by the license registration records of the vehicle within five days after such vehicle is impounded. 
(Code 2004, § 7.117.6; Ord. No. 2004-43, 11-9-2004)  
Sec. 44-81. - Right of immediate removal. 
Nothing contained within this division shall affect or in any way impair or diminish the lawful authority of the police department to cause an immediate removal, as an obstruction to traffic, of a vehicle left on public property or a public right-of-way. 
(Code 2004, § 7.117.7; Ord. No. 99-05, 6-8-1999)  
Secs. 44-82—44-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - JUNK VEHICLES AS PUBLIC NUISANCES 
 
Sec. 44-106. - Offenses considered nuisances; penalty; removal and abatement. 
(a)  A junked vehicle, including part of a junked vehicle, which is located in any place where it is visible from a public place or a public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city, and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if that person maintains a public nuisance as determined under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  A person who commits an offense under subsection (a) of this section is, upon conviction in the municipal court, subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense. Upon conviction, the court shall order removal and abatement of the nuisance. 
(Code 2004, § 7.117.3(A))  
Sec. 44-107. - Procedures for abating nuisance. 
In addition to the procedures set forth in section 44-106, upon complaint or upon his own initiative, the city manager or his delegate is authorized to abate such nuisances under the following procedures for the abatement and removal of junked vehicles, or parts of junked vehicles, as a public nuisance from private property, public property, or public rights-of-way: 
(1)  For a nuisance on private property, notice of not less than ten days shall be given, stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property, that it must be moved and abated within ten days and, if a hearing is desired, a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day period. The notice must be mailed by certified mail, with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked vehicle, any lien holder of record, and the owner or occupant of the private premises on which the public nuisance exists. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States Postal Service, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days after the date of the return. 
(2)  For a nuisance on public property, notice of not less than ten days shall be given, stating the nature of the public nuisance on public property or on a public right-of-way, that the nuisance must be removed and abated within ten days and, if a hearing is desired, a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day period. The notice must be mailed by certified mail, with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked vehicle, any lien holder of record, and the owner or occupant of the public premises, or to the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the public nuisance exists. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States Postal Service, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days after the date of the return. 
(3)  Upon a request for a hearing as provided for in subsection (1) or (2) of this section, a public hearing shall be held before the municipal court for determination of the existence of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance, and for the purpose of entering an order requiring the removal of the vehicle or vehicle part as a public nuisance. Where a request for a hearing has not been made, the judge of the municipal court, if shown that a public nuisance exists, may enter an order requiring the removal of the vehicle or vehicle part as a public nuisance. The order requiring the removal of the vehicle or vehicle part must include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle if the information is available at the site. 
(4)  Notice shall be given to the state department of transportation not later than the fifth day after the date of removal. The notice must identify the vehicle or vehicle part. 
(5)  Where the junked vehicle is declared a public nuisance by such official and is ordered to be removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. 
(6)  The person designated by the city manager to administer the procedures authorized by this section may enter upon private property in accordance with state law for the purposes specified in this section. The judge of the municipal court may issue orders necessary to enforce these procedures. 
(Code 2004, § 7.117.3(B))  
Sec. 44-108. - Exceptions. 
The procedures set forth in section 44-107 do not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part which is: 
(1)  Completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; 
(2)  Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or an antique or special-interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: 
a.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
b.  Not a health hazard; and 
c.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery. 
(Code 2004, § 7.117.3(C))  
Chapter 47 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Concurrent jurisdiction of municipal court concerning certain violations of state statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003(b); municipal authority for regulation of firearms and explosives, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 229.001; municipal regulation of discharge of firearms, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 229.002; municipal authority for regulation of nuisances and disorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.001 et seq.; juvenile curfews in general law municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.905; review of juvenile curfew orders or ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 370.002; municipal policy regarding enforcement of drug laws, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 370.003; municipality may not enact or enforce a law making conduct covered under state Penal Code an offense subject to criminal penalty, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.08. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 47-1. - Penalties. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, violations of the provisions under this chapter are hereby deemed violations of ordinances, rules, or police regulations that govern fire safety, zoning, and public health and sanitation, punishable as provided in section 1-3. 
State Law reference— Enhanced penalty for violation ordinances governing fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001(b).  
Secs. 47-2—47-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 47-21—47-43. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS 
 
Sec. 47-44. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ambient noise means noise from all sources other than the noise under specific consideration, including traffic operating on public streets, and is established by measuring the noise level over an eight-minute period of time. 
Bounding property line means the far side of any street, alley, stream or permanently dedicated open space from the noise source when such open space exists between the property line of the noise source and the adjacent property. Otherwise, the bounding property line is the property line of the noise source. For noise complaints, the bounding property line shall be the closest property line of the complainant's property to the noise source. 
Bow and arrow means the same as intended, defined or construed under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 229, as amended. 
Chief of police means either the chief of the city police department, or his designee. The chief of police may delegate such duties and responsibilities to any such person as the chief may, in his sole discretion, determine to be capable of exercising some or all of the authority, duties, and obligations of the chief of police acting pursuant to this division. 
City building means any building or portion of a building owned, occupied, leased, or controlled by the city, for city or public operations and activities. The term does not include any public or private driveway, street, sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, parking garage or other parking area. 
Enclosed means in a structure with four walls and a roof. 
Firearm or gun means a weapon capable of discharging a projectile by means of an explosive charge, including, without limitation, a rifle, pistol, shotgun or any other type of firearm; but not including an air pistol or air rifle incapable of discharging a projectile at a muzzle speed in excess of 300 feet per second. 
Firing line means a designated area within a firing station designed and intended for use as the site from which persons may discharge firearms in the direction of a target. 
Firing station means a partially enclosed structure, constructed of cinderblock, CMU, or other material, designed to be the enclosure for the firing line and insulated with sound absorption material. 
Gross revenues means the total amount of fund collected by the shooting facility from range fees, equipment rentals, and sales of goods. 
Handgun means any firearm that is designed, made or adapted to be fired with one hand, and the term "concealed handgun" means a handgun, the presence of which is not openly discernible to the ordinary observation of a reasonable person. 
Machine gun means any firearm that is capable of shooting more than two shots automatically, without manual reloading, by a single function of the trigger. 
Permit holder means the owner or designated agent of a permitted shooting facility in the city. 
Projectile weapon means firearms, fireworks, airguns, bows and arrows, slingshots or any device which would or could project any object which would or could create a fire hazard or any hazard or danger to the public. 
Shooting facility means an area, either enclosed or outdoor, at which firearms are discharged at targets and which is designed so that projectiles fired from firearms at targets are prevented, by means of backstops, berms, or other barriers, from going beyond the boundaries of the area.  
Sec. 47-45. - Discharging and carrying firearms and projectile weapons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a peace officer, to carry a firearm in any city building or other municipal property, unless the person is duly licensed by the state to carry a concealed handgun and pursuant to state law may carry a concealed handgun in a particular building or on said property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any projectile weapon, firearm, or bow and arrow of any kind within the city limits, except: 
(1)  Within a properly secured and permitted indoor or outdoor firearms range, constructed and maintained in accordance with applicable National Rifle Association specifications and standards and any standards prescribed by city ordinance; or 
(2)  Upon a shooting range owned and operated by a governmental entity. 
(c)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit any peace officer from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty, or to prohibit any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. 
(d)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 47-55.  
Sec. 47-46. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate, or to allow to be conducted or operated, on property under his ownership or control, a shooting facility unless such shooting facility is conducted and operated in accordance with a permit issued pursuant to this division. The fee for the permit shall be as determined from time to time by city council and set forth in the master fee schedule in appendix A of this Code.  
Sec. 47-47. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate or conduct a shooting facility, or desiring to continue operating or conducting a shooting facility, shall file a written application for a permit to do so with the chief of police. In reviewing the permit, the chief of police is authorized to engage any experienced, qualified person to assist in the review of the shooting facility should any technical issues be outside his formal training or experience. Application forms provided by the chief of police shall include the following: 
(1)  The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the applicant for the permit (including the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all partners if the applicant is organized as a partnership and the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all officers and directors of the corporation if the applicant is a corporation) and the business name, address, and telephone number of the proposed or existing shooting facility; 
(2)  Plans drawn to scale and showing the location and dimensions of all improvements existing or to be constructed, specifically showing the location and dimensions of firing stations, firing lines and target areas, enclosed or outdoors, and the location, design, and materials for the construction of backstops, baffles, berms, and all other surfaces downrange from a firing line; 
(3)  Applications for all building permits required to construct any structures to be used in connection with the shooting facility; 
(4)  For any shooting facility not located entirely inside a building, a site plan showing the existing and proposed topography of the land and all existing structures and uses of property located within 1,200 yards downrange and including a 20-degree outward angle from either end of a firing line for any firearms other than shotguns; or 300 yards downrange and including a 20-degree outward angle from either end of a firing line for firearms (other than shotguns) on a baffled range; 300 yards downrange and 180 degrees on either side of any skeet launching facility at a skeet range for the exclusive use of shotguns; and 300 yards downrange and 110 degrees on either side of any trap launching facility at a trap range for the exclusive use of shotguns; 
(5)  A complete and true copy of the proposed rules and regulations and operating procedures governing the use of such shooting facility; 
(6)  Evidence satisfactory to the chief of police of the applicant's ability to comply with the insurance requirement imposed by this division; 
(7)  The name and address of every property owner of land located within 200 feet of the boundaries of the tract of land on which the shooting facility will be operated; and 
(8)  Any other information reasonably required by the chief of police to determine the safety of the shooting facility. 
(b)  Upon the receipt of any application filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the chief of police shall mail a notice that such an application has been filed by the applicant to the owners of all real property located within 200 feet of the boundaries of the tract of land on which the shooting facility will be operated. For all proposed facilities, the applicant shall post notice in a form and at locations deemed by the chief of police to be reasonably sufficient, in the discretion of the chief of police, to advise the public that an application has been filed pursuant to this division.  
Sec. 47-48. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Conditional approval subject to completed improvements. If the chief of police determines from the information provided in the application that the shooting facility will satisfy the specific requirements of this division, the chief of police shall conditionally approve the permit for the shooting facility, subject to the completion of any improvements shown on the application in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. After inspecting the completed improvements and certifying that the criteria of this division have been satisfied, the chief of police shall issue the permit. Conditional approval of a permit under this section shall not be deemed or construed to constitute approval of any building permit or other permit required pursuant to other applicable provisions of this Code and any other ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Criteria. The application for a permit for a shooting facility shall demonstrate compliance with the following specific criteria: 
(1)  Safety standards. 
a.  Any shooting facility shall be designed and operated in a manner to prevent any bullet or other projectile from traveling beyond the boundaries of such shooting facility. In reviewing the design of a shooting facility, the chief of police may consider range development guidelines promulgated by the National Rifle Association or other national governing body of the specific shooting sport as appropriate. 
b.  Any outdoor shooting facility shall be designed to prevent any projectile fired from the firing line within the firing station from initially striking any surface not designed to completely stop the projectile or prevent the occurrence of potentially dangerous ricochets. 
c.  The possession or use of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited at the shooting facility, and no person under the influence of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted to discharge any firearm. 
d.  The operating procedures for the shooting facility shall prohibit the use of any firing line at the facility except when the permit holder, or a bona fide employee, is present and directly supervising the range operation to ensure compliance with the approved rules and regulations. 
e.  The applicant for a permit shall deposit one percent of the yearly gross revenues of the shooting facility into a specially designated account at a financial institution acceptable to both parties, to be used exclusively for expenses related to lead extraction and lead abatement. The amount shall be deposited quarterly, on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1. The permit holder shall provide an accounting or other reasonable proof that the amount deposited equals one percent of gross revenues. Lead abatement shall be performed at such time as: 
1.  The surrounding berms are determined to be structurally unsafe; 
2.  The property is sold; 
3.  The property ceases to be used as a shooting facility; or 
4.  The permit holder voluntarily chooses to conduct lead abatement activity. 
f.  The applicant for a permit issued pursuant to this division shall obtain and maintain in effect during the operation of the shooting facility insurance coverage in a minimum amount of $500,000.00 for bodily injuries or death and another policy in the amount of $500,000.00 for property damage resulting from firing any firearm while on the gun or shooting range. 
g.  The use of machine guns shall be prohibited. 
h.  The use of armor-piercing or steel-core ammunition shall be prohibited. 
i.  The use of .50 caliber or larger ammunition shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Noise standards. 
a.  If necessary, the applicant shall implement noise mitigation measures, which may include landscaping and insulation of firing stations and other measures as necessary to attain compliance with subsection (b)(2)d of this section. 
b.  An "A" scale sound level meter that meets the standards of the American Standards Association must be used to determine whether the level of noise violates this section. A calibration check shall be performed prior to and following any noise investigation. Measurements shall be taken by a certified safety specialist, an industrial hygienist, or other person trained and qualified in the operation of sound-measuring devices. 
c.  For permitting compliance, noise shall be measured every 200 feet along the bounding property line, for eight-minute intervals at each location. For noise complaints, measurements shall be taken first at the identical 200-foot intervals along the bounding property line, or at the bounding property line of the complaining party. Weapons shall be discharged from each firing line at the shooting facility for both permitting and complaint testing. 
d.  A person may not conduct an activity that creates a noise level which exceeds the levels established in subsections (b)(2)d.1 through (b)(2)d.4 of this section or which exceeds the ambient noise level by five decibels, whichever is greater. References to districts are as defined in chapter 77, zoning. 
1.  In any residential district, the sound pressure level on the bounding property line shall not exceed 61 decibels during operating hours. 
2.  In an O-Office, NS-Neighborhood Services, GR-General Retail, C-Commercial, or HC-Highway Commercial district, the sound pressure level on the bounding property line shall not exceed 68 decibels during operating hours. 
3.  In an A-Agricultural or CA-Central Area district, the sound pressure level on the bounding property line shall not exceed 70 decibels during operating hours. 
4.  In an I-1-Light Industrial or I-2-Heavy Industrial district the sound pressure level on the bounding property line shall not exceed 75 decibels during operating hours. 
e.  Weapons shall be discharged only from the designated firing line within an insulated firing station. 
f.  The hours of operation of an outdoor, unenclosed shooting facility are 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, 11:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Saturday, and closed on Sundays. Enclosed shooting facilities may operate at any time unless otherwise restricted by applicable statute or ordinance. 
g.  The permit holder shall give the chief of police notice of shooting competitions no less than seven days before the event. 
(3)  Lighting. Lighting regulations shall be in compliance with this Code. 
(c)  General standards. Permits which are issued under this division shall recite that the issuance thereof does not constitute any assurance by the city, its employees, officers, or agents that injury will not result from the operation or use of the approved shooting facility. Permits shall be valid for a one-year period and may also provide for: 
(1)  Maintenance of improvements and safety equipment; 
(2)  No more frequently than 12 times per year, and for not more than two consecutive days, waivers of hours of operation granted by the chief of police for specially designated events, such as competitions and governmental agency training; 
(3)  Minors (16 and under) must be under the supervision of a parent or adult legal guardian unless registered and participating in a gun safety class, in which case the minor must be under the supervision of the adult safety instructor; and 
(4)  Other reasonable terms and conditions relating to the use and operation of the shooting facility as the chief of police may deem reasonably necessary to ensure the safety and welfare of the public, neighboring property owners, and persons using the shooting facility.  
Sec. 47-49. - Permits for existing shooting facilities. 
Any shooting facility otherwise in compliance with applicable provisions of this Code and any other ordinances of the city as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, and any lawfully existing shooting facility annexed into the city may operate without the permit required by this division for a period of 45 days. If the application for the permit required by this division is filed within such 45-day period, the shooting facility may continue operating without a permit for an additional 45-day period pending processing and conditional approval of a permit. If a permit is conditionally approved within the additional 45-day period and the applicant for the permit commences and diligently proceeds with the construction of any improvements necessary to satisfy the criteria of section 47-48, the shooting facility may continue operating without the issuance of a permit for an additional 90 days. The chief of police may grant a single extension of up to 60 days only if the applicant is unable with diligent effort to complete the improvements within the initial 90-day period.  
Sec. 47-50. - Permits for government shooting facilities. 
Notwithstanding anything in this division to the contrary, a permit to operate a shooting facility shall be issued to any federal, state, or local governmental agency upon receipt of a certification from an authorized official of such agency that the shooting facility is under the control, ownership and management of the agency and is operated for the exclusive purpose of training and qualifying peace officers and persons in training to become peace officers, and shall include training on machine guns.  
Sec. 47-51. - Renewal or revocation of permit. 
(a)  A permit shall be renewed on an annual basis on the anniversary date of the permit issuance. The permit renewal fee shall be as determined from time to time by city council and set forth in the master fee schedule in appendix A of this Code. During permit renewal, an applicant shall demonstrate continuing compliance with the noise, safety and lighting provisions of this division, and such continuing compliance shall result in the renewal of the permit. It is expected that such compliance shall be maintained between official review periods. Should such compliance not be demonstrated, the chief of police shall deny the renewal of the permit. 
(b)  As necessary, the chief of police shall review all written complaints filed with the city regarding the operation of the shooting facility and shall notify the permit holder of said complaints. Complainants shall comply with the citizen complaint procedures of the city municipal court. Any issued permit shall be revoked and no permit shall be renewed for any shooting facility for which the chief of police has certified six or more instances in the preceding 12-month period where the terms and conditions of the permit have been violated in a manner that constitutes an unreasonable danger or unreasonable nuisance to the public, neighboring property owners, or persons using the shooting facility. Any revocation may also subject the facility owner to the penalty provisions of section 47-55.  
Sec. 47-52. - Right of appeal. 
(a)  Any party aggrieved by a decision of the chief of police pursuant to this division may appeal that decision to the city council, specifically alleging the error of the chief of police. The filing of an appeal shall not stay the action or determination that is being appealed. The city council shall schedule a hearing on the appeal at the council's next regularly scheduled meeting following the date such appeal is filed, and may uphold, reverse, or modify the decision of the chief of police at the conclusion of such public hearing. If the city council determines that such allegations are unfounded, it shall so state and shall take no action. 
(b)  A party may appeal the decision of the board of adjustment to the district court. In the alternative, a person seeking a permit may submit a new permit to the city council for expedited review.  
Sec. 47-53. - Enclosure. 
(a)  Any shooting facility that maintains compliance with the safety, noise and lighting provisions of this division shall be exempted from the enclosure requirement in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Any shooting facility which has had a permit renewal denied due to noncompliance or revoked due to six violations as set out in section 47-51(b) shall be subject to the enclosure requirements of this section in order to resume operations. The shooting facility shall cease operations in order to begin compliance measures. Should the shooting facility fail to attain compliance after compliance measures have been attempted, the shooting facility shall enclose those firing lines which have been demonstrated to be noncompliant with the safety, noise or lighting standards before a new permit to resume operations may be issued.  
Sec. 47-54. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Generally. The provisions of this division do not apply in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the municipality or in an area annexed by the municipality after September 1, 1981, if the firearm or other weapon is: 
(1)  A shotgun, air rifle or pistol, BB gun, or bow and arrow discharged: 
a.  On a tract of land of ten acres or more; and 
1.  More than 1,000 feet from: 
(i)  The property line of a public tract of land, generally accessible by the public, that is routinely used for organized sporting or recreational activities or that has permanent recreational facilities or equipment; and 
(ii)  The property line of a school, hospital, or commercial day care facility; 
2.  More than 600 feet from: 
(i)  The property line of a residential subdivision; and 
(ii)  The property line of a multifamily residential complex; and 
3.  More than 150 feet from a residence or occupied building located on another property; and 
b.  In a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of the tract; or 
(2)  A center fire or rim fire rifle or pistol of any caliber discharged: 
a.  On a tract of land of 50 acres; and 
b.  In a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of the tract; or 
1.  More than 1,000 feet from: 
(i)  The property line of a public tract of land, generally accessible by the public, that is routinely used for organized sporting or recreational activities or that has permanent recreational facilities or equipment; and 
(ii)  The property line of a school, hospital, or commercial day care facility; 
2.  More than 600 feet from: 
(i)  The property line of a residential subdivision; and 
(ii)  The property line of a multifamily residential complex; and 
3.  More than 300 feet from a residence or occupied building located on another property; and 
(3)  Discharged at a sport shooting range, as defined by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 250.001, in a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of a tract of land. 
(b)  Shooting facility compliance. A shooting facility within the city that is excepted from the permit requirements of this division, pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Safety standards. 
a.  Any shooting facility shall be designed and operated in a manner to prevent any bullet or other projectile from traveling beyond the boundaries of the tract of property where the facility is located. In reviewing the design of a shooting facility, the chief of police may consider range development guidelines promulgated by the National Rifle Association or other national governing body of the specific shooting sport as appropriate. 
b.  Any outdoor shooting facility shall be designed to prevent any projectile fired from the firing line within the firing station from initially striking any surface not designed to completely stop the projectile or prevent the occurrence of potentially dangerous ricochets to cross the boundary of the tract. 
c.  The use of machine guns shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Noise standards. 
a.  If necessary, the shooting facility shall implement noise mitigation measures, which may include landscaping and insulation of firing stations and other measures as necessary to attain compliance with subsection (b)(2)d of this section. 
b.  An "A" scale sound level meter that meets the standards of the American Standards Association must be used to determine whether the level of noise violates this section. A calibration check shall be performed prior to and following any noise investigation. Measurements shall be taken by a certified safety specialist, an industrial hygienist, or other person trained and qualified in the operation of sound measuring devices. 
c.  For noise complaints, measurements shall be taken first at 200-foot intervals along the bounding property line, or at the bounding property line of the complaining party. Weapons shall be discharged from each firing line at the shooting facility for complaint testing. 
d.  A person may not conduct an activity that creates a noise level which exceeds the levels established in subsections (b)(2)d.1 through (b)(2)d.4 or which exceeds the ambient noise level by five decibels, whichever is greater. References to districts are as defined in chapter 77, zoning. 
1.  In any residential district, the sound pressure level on the bounding property line shall not exceed 61 decibels during operating hours. 
2.  In an O-Office, NS-Neighborhood Services, GR-General Retail, C-Commercial, or HC-Highway Commercial district, the sound pressure level on the bounding property line shall not exceed 68 decibels during operating hours. 
3.  In an A-Agricultural or CA-Central Area district, the sound pressure level on the bounding property line shall not exceed 70 decibels during operating hours. 
4.  In an I-1-Light Industrial or I-2-Heavy Industrial district the sound pressure level on the bounding property line shall not exceed 75 decibels during operating hours. 
e.  Hours of operation of an outdoor, unenclosed shooting facility are 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, 11:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Saturday, and closed on Sundays. Enclosed shooting facilities may operate at any time unless otherwise restricted by applicable statute or ordinance. 
(3)  Lighting. Lighting regulations shall be in compliance with chapter 77, zoning.  
Sec. 47-55. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any section of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined any sum not in excess of $500.00 for each offense, and assessed court costs as provided by law, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.  
Secs. 47-56—47-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
 
Secs. 47-70—47-96. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 47-97. - Urinating or defecating in public prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in: 
(1)  Any public place or in immediate proximity thereto where such place has not been designated as a restroom; 
(2)  Any place to which the public, or a substantial group of the public, has access and includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Streets; 
b.  Highways; and 
c.  Common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person violates any portion of, or provision contained in, subsection (a) of this section. Any person found guilty of an offense under subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2009-33, §§ 1—3, 11-10-2009)  
Secs. 47-98—47-122. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SEX OFFENDERS 
 
Sec. 47-123. - Definitions; offenses; affirmative defenses. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Day care center means a facility providing care, training, education custody, treatment, or supervision for 13 or more children for less than 24 hours a day. 
Minor means a person younger than 17 years of age. 
Premises means all improved and unimproved areas on the lot where the public or private school, park or day care center is located. 
Residence, permanent, means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
Residence, temporary, means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where a person routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(b)  Offenses. 
(1)  It is unlawful for a person to establish a permanent or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any premises where children commonly gather if the person is required to register on the state department of public safety's sex offender database (the "database") because of a conviction involving a minor under one or more of the following: 
a.  The following sections of the state penal code, as amended: 
1.  V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 20.02 Unlawful Restraint; 
2.  V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 20.03 Kidnapping; 
3.  V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 20.04 Aggravated Kidnapping; 
4.  V.T.C.A, Penal Code § 21.11 Indecency with a Child; 
5.  V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 22.011 Sexual Assault; 
6.  V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 22.021 Aggravated Sexual Assault; 
7.  V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 25.02 Prohibited Sexual Conduct; 
8.  V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 30.02(d) Burglary of a Habitation; 
9.  V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 33.021 Online Solicitation of a Minor; 
10.  V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 43.05 Compelling Prostitution; 
11.  V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 43.25 Sexual Performance by Child; or 
b.  Laws of another state, federal law, laws of a foreign country or the Uniform Code of Military Justice, and the offenses for which the person is convicted, contain elements that are substantially similar to any of the offenses listed in subsection (b)(1)a of this section. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, premises where children commonly gather are deemed to be public parks (excluding planted street medians), private or public schools (excluding in-home schools), or day care centers. 
(c)  Evidentiary matters; measurements. 
(1)  It shall be prima facie evidence that this section applies to a person if that person's record appears on the database and the database indicates that the victim was less than 17 years of age. 
(2)  For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence (the property line closest to the protected premises) to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather as described in subsection (b)(2) of this section or, in the case of multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the premises to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described in this subsection. 
(d)  Culpable mental state not required. Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  Affirmative defenses. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that any of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  The person required to register on the database established the permanent or temporary residence, and has complied with all of the state sex offender registration laws, prior to the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(2)  The person required to register on the database was a minor when he committed the offense requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult. 
(3)  The person required to register on the database is a minor. 
(4)  The premises where children commonly gather, as specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section, within 1,000 feet of the permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register on the database, was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all state sex offender registration laws. 
(5)  The information on the database is incorrect and, if corrected, this section would not apply to the person who was erroneously listed on the database. 
(6)  The person was at the time of the violation subject to community services supervision pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 42.12(13B) and the court reduced or waived the 1,000-foot restriction for a child-free zone under Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 42.12(13B)(a)(1)(B) as it applies to the person's residence. 
(Code 2004, § 7.106.1; Ord. No. 2006-42, 9-12-2006)  
Sec. 47-124. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide regulations restricting offenders who are required to register with the state department of public safety's sex offender database from residing in certain areas of the city where there are high concentrations of children. 
(Code 2004, § 7.106)  
Secs. 47-125—47-146. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SMOKING PRODUCTS 
 
Sec. 47-147. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Illegal smoking product means any substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or any blend thereof, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked. 
(1)  Chemicals. An illegal smoking products includes any one or more of the following chemicals or their respective derivatives, variants, or isomers: 
a.  Salvia divinorum or Salvinorum A; all parts of the plants presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or extracts; 
b.  2—[(1R, 3S)—3—hydroxycyclohexyl]—5—(2—methylocatan—2—yl) phenol (also known as CP47, 497) and homologues; 
c.  (6aS,10aS0)—9—(hydroxymethyl)—6,6—dimethyl—3-(2—methyloctan—2—yl)—6a,7,10, 10a—tetrahydrobenxo[c]chromen—1—ol) (also known as HU—211 or Dexanabinol); 
d.  1-pentyl-2-methyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH—007); 
e.  (2-Methyl-1-propyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1-naphthalenylmethanone (also known as JWH—015); 
f.  1—pentyl—3—(1— naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH—018); 
g.  Naphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylpyrrol-3-yl)methanone (also known as JWH—30); 
h.  (6aR,10aR)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-9-yl)methanol (also known as JWH—051); 
i.  1—butyl—3—(1—naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH—073); 
j.  1—pentyl—3—(4—methoxynaphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH—081); 
k.  4-ethylnaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone (also known as JWH—210); 
l.  1— pentyl— 3— (methoxyphenylacetyl)indole (also known as JWH—250); 
m.  (5-(2-fluorophenyl)-1-pentylpyrrol-3-yl)-naphthalen-1-ylmethanone (also known as JWH—307); 
n.  (6aR,10aR)-1-methoxy-6,6,9-trimethyl-3-[(2R)-1, 1, 2-trimethylbutyl]-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromene (also known as JWH—359); 
o.  1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH—398); 
p.  (R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-morpholinylmethyl)pyrrolo(1,2,3-de)-1,4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-napthalenylmethanone (also known as WIN 55,212—2). 
(2)  Commercial names. Products containing some of the substances listed in subsection (1) of this definition are currently being marketed under the following commercial names: 
a.  Spice; 
b.  K-2; 
c.  K-2 Summit; 
d.  K-2 Sex; 
e.  Genie; 
f.  Dascents; 
g.  Zohai; 
h.  Sage; 
i.  Ko Knockout 2; 
j.  Spice Gold; 
k.  K2 4:20; 
l.  K2 8 Ball; 
m.  Spice Diamond; 
n.  Yucatan Fire; 
o.  Solar Flare; 
p.  Pep Spice; 
q.  Fire N' Ice; 
r.  Pandora Potpourri; 
s.  Salvanorin A; 
t.  Salvia; and 
u.  Salvia Divinorum. 
(3)  New products. It is anticipated by the city council that new products will be marketed under different names, but will be subject to this definition if they contain any of the chemical components set forth in subsection (1) of this definition. 
Ingestion device means any paraphernalia, equipment, utensil, product or material that is used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing an illegal smoking product into the human body, including a: 
(1)  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; 
(2)  Water pipe; 
(3)  Carburetion tube or device; 
(4)  Smoking or carburetion mask; 
(5)  Chamber pipe; 
(6)  Carburetor pipe; 
(7)  Electric pipe; 
(8)  Air-driven pipe; 
(9)  Chillum; 
(10)  Bong; 
(11)  Ice pipe or chiller; and/or 
(12)  Hookah. 
Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, sole proprietor, wholesaler, retailer, or any licensed or unlicensed business. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0914-001, § 2, 9-14-2010)  
Sec. 47-148. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this division shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0914-001, § 6, 9-14-2010)  
Sec. 47-149. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to prohibit the use, possession, sale, barter, ingestion or smoking of illegal or illicit smoking products and ingestion devices defined in section 47-147 within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0914-001, § 2, 9-14-2010)  
Sec. 47-150. - Use, possession, purchase, and sales. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, barter, give, publicly display, sell or offer for sale any illegal smoking product. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0914-001, § 2, 9-14-2010)  
Sec. 47-151. - Use or possession of ingestion device. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, or possess with intent to use, an ingestion device to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body an illegal smoking product. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0914-001, § 2, 9-14-2010)  
Sec. 47-152. - Defense. 
It shall be a defense to a violation of this division that any act described in this division is under and pursuant to the direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist lawfully authorized to direct or prescribe such act. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0914-001, § 2, 9-14-2010)  
Sec. 47-153. - Prior offenses. 
An offense committed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived is governed by prior law and the provisions of the Code, as amended, in effect when the offense was committed and the former law is continued in effect for this purpose. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0914-001, § 5, 9-14-2010)  
Secs. 47-154—47-169. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - E-CIGARETTE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 47-170. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the purchase, use, and possession by minors, and the sale to minors, of e-cigarettes, hereinafter defined, within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0812-001, § 2, 8-12-2014)  
Sec. 47-171. - Definitions. 
As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
"Electronic cigarette", "e-cigarette", or "e-cig" shall mean any device usually composed of a mouthpiece, a heating element or atomizer, a battery or other power source, and electronic circuits that provides a gas derived from liquid nicotine and/or other substances which is inhaled by a user simulating smoking but without the use of fire, smoke, ash or carbon monoxide. The term specifically includes "personal vaporizers" and "electronic nicotine delivery systems" and all other such devices, regardless of the details of the product appearance or marketed name, generally manufactured to resemble cigarettes, cigars, pipes, or other smoking devices. 
"Liquid nicotine" means any liquid product composed either in whole or part of nicotine, propylene glycol and/or other similar substances and manufactured for use with an e-cigarette to be converted into a gas for inhaling. 
"Minor" shall mean any individual younger than 18 years of age. 
"Person" shall mean an individual, corporation, limited liability company, unincorporated association, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture, joint stock association, wholesaler, retailer, or other entity or business of any kind, whether licensed or unlicensed. 
"Photographic identification" means state, district, national or other equivalent government driver's license, identification card or military card, in all cases bearing a photograph and a date of birth, or a valid passport. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0812-001, § 2, 8-12-2014)  
Sec. 47-172. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to give, distribute, transfer, sell, market, or offer e-cigarettes, liquid nicotine, or their components — or samples of any of the foregoing — to a minor within the city limits. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to use, purchase, obtain or possess an e-cigarette, liquid nicotine, or their components — or samples of any of the foregoing — within the city limits. This prohibition does not apply to activities or enforcement actions under the control of a city, state or federal law enforcement authority. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to state, in order to acquire an e-cigarette, liquid nicotine, or their components — or samples of any of the foregoing — to any person engaged in the business of selling e-cigarettes, liquid nicotine, or their components — or samples of any of the foregoing — that such minor is 18 years of age or older, or is not otherwise a minor. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to present, in order to acquire an e-cigarette, liquid nicotine, or their components — or samples of any of the foregoing — to any person engaged in the business of selling e-cigarettes, liquid nicotine, or their components — or samples of any of the foregoing — any document or writing that purports to establish that such minor is 18 years of age or older, or is not otherwise a minor. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or permit to be sold e-cigarettes, liquid nicotine, or their components — or samples of any of the foregoing — through any device that mechanically dispenses such products unless the device is located fully within premises from which such premises minors are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0812-001, § 2, 8-12-2014)  
Sec. 47-173. - Defenses. 
It shall be a defense to a violation of section 47-172, if the minor is: 
(1)  In the course and scope of the minor's employment by a person holding a permit issued by the state authorizing the person to engage in the business of being a distributor, wholesaler, bonded agent or retailer of e-cigarettes, liquid nicotine, or their components — or samples of any of the foregoing; or 
(2)  In the presence of a parent, guardian, spouse or other adult to whom the minor had been committed by a court. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0812-001, § 2, 8-12-2014)  
Secs. 47-174—47-179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MINORS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 47-180—47-203. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish a juvenile curfew, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.905; requirement that juvenile curfew ordinances be reviewed and readopted every three years, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 370.002. 
 
Sec. 47-204. - Definitions. 
All definitions contained within this section are for the purpose of this section only and shall have no impact on any other rule, law or ordinance unless referenced directly within said rule, law or ordinance. In this section: 
Adult shall mean any person 17 years of age or older, or who is not defined in "juvenile" in this division. 
Business operator shall mean any employee, individual, firm, associate, partnership or corporation engaged in or responsible for operating, conducting business or managing any business or establishment. 
Curfew or curfew hours shall mean those hours between 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. inclusive, every day of the week. 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment shall mean any privately owned place of business operated for profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Guardian shall mean: 
(1)  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
Minor shall mean any person under 17 years of age. 
Parent shall mean a person who is: 
(1)  A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person; or 
(2)  At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
Public place shall mean any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, parks, alleys, streets. roads, highways, lakes and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses or complexes, office buildings, transport facilities, restaurants, theaters, game rooms, stores, businesses, shops, shopping centers or any other place that offers for sale services or merchandise. 
Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay; or 
(2)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0810-001, § 2, 8-10-2010; Ord. No. O-2013-0723-003, § 2, 7-23-2013)  
Sec. 47-205. - Offenses. 
(a)  Violation by minor. It shall be unlawful for any minor to knowingly remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride in or about any public place or establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(b)  Violation by parent or guardian. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control allow, a minor to remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride in or about any public place or establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(c)  Violation by business operator of establishment. It shall be unlawful for any business operator of an establishment to knowingly allow any minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0810-001, § 2, 8-10-2010; Ord. No. O-2013-0723-003, § 2, 7-23-2013)  
Sec. 47-206. - Affirmative defenses. 
(a)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under section 47-205 that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by his/her parent or legal guardian. 
(2)  Accompanied by an adult approved by the minor's parent or legal guardian. 
(3)  Attending or going to or returning home from, without any stop or detour and using the most direct route, any official school, religious or other activity supervised by adults and sanctioned by a governmental entity, civic organization or church entity that takes responsibility for the minor. 
(4)  Out as a result of an emergency. 
(5)  Engaged in lawful employment activity or going to or returning home from such employment activity, without stop or detour and using the most direct route. 
(6)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code ch. 31. 
(7)  In a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate travel or transportation through which passage through the curfew area is the most direct route. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under section 47-205 that: 
(1)  The business operator notified the police department that the minor was present during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(2)  The business operator was unaware of the presence of the minor and assisted the police in identifying the minor. 
(3)  The minor is an employee of the establishment, is actually engaged in duties related to that employment and is receiving payment for the activity. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0810-001, § 2, 8-10-2010; Ord. No. O-2013-0723-003, § 2, 7-23-2013)  
Sec. 47-207. - Enforcement. 
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in section 47-206 is present. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0810-001, § 2, 8-10-2010; Ord. No. O-2013-0723-003, § 2, 7-23-2013)  
Sec. 47-208. - Penalties; custody; jurisdiction. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense and each and every day said violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Each minor upon the premises of any establishment constitutes a separate violation under section 47-205(c) and shall result in a separate fine. 
(c)  Any child taken into custody for a violation of this division shall be held in accordance with Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.059. 
(d)  When required by V.T.C.A., Family Code § 51.08, as amended, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates section 47-205(a) and shall refer the minor to juvenile court. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-0810-001, § 2, 8-10-2010; Ord. No. O-2013-0723-003, § 2, 7-23-2013)  
Chapter 50 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal parks and other recreational and cultural resources generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 306.001 et seq.; municipal authority to acquire and maintain parks, museums, and historic sites, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 331.001 et seq.; public use of municipal recreational facilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 331.007; municipal parks outside municipal limits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 315.001; municipal recreational programs and facilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 332.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 50-1—50-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARK REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 50-26. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00. Each transaction in violation of any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 2004, § 9.102.8; Ord. No. 88-6, 4-12-1988)  
Sec. 50-27. - Hours. 
(a)  The municipal parks shall be open to the general public 30 minutes before dawn and 30 minutes after dusk. Specific use permits for hours later than this can be obtained at city hall by bona fide groups or organizations. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except members of the police and fire departments or employees of the parks department engaged in the performance of their official duties, to be in any municipal park between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 2004, § 9.101.1)  
Sec. 50-28. - Parking restrictions. 
(a)  The parks and recreation board is authorized to designate areas in which parking of motor vehicles is prohibited and/or hours during which motor vehicle parking is prohibited in any municipal park. 
(b)  It is required that signs be erected marking the "No Parking" areas and giving restricted hours during which motor vehicles may not be left parked. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle within the designated "No Parking" areas in any municipal park or to have a motor vehicle parked in any municipal park other than during designated hours in which parking is allowed. 
(Code 2004, § 9.101.2)  
Sec. 50-29. - Vandalism. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate, deface, or destroy any property of any kind or nature whatsoever including, but not limited to, plants, trees and grass in the municipal parks. 
(Code 2004, § 9.101.3)  
Sec. 50-30. - Use of intoxicating beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away, or drink any beer or intoxicating liquor of any kind or nature whatsoever within the municipal parks. 
(Code 2004, § 9.101.4)  
Sec. 50-31. - Peddling and vending. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit for sale, vend, peddle, sell, or offer to sell any cold drinks, cigars, tobaccos, cigarettes, fruits, candies, goods, wares, or merchandise of any kind or nature whatsoever within the municipal parks; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any person or to the agents or employees of any person who, by written agreement with the city, has and holds a concession for the sale of such goods, wares, and merchandise within the municipal parks. 
(Code 2004, § 9.101.5)  
Sec. 50-32. - Speed limits. 
It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle in the city parks at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour, except in designated areas. 
(Code 2004, § 9.101.6; Ord. No. 90-10, 9-11-1990)  
Secs. 50-33—50-62. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SOUTH LAKE PARK 
 
Sec. 50-63. - Purpose. 
South Lake Park is being developed for the use and enjoyment of all citizens, and certain regulations are necessary for the protection of the environment. 
(Code 2004, § 9.103)  
Sec. 50-64. - Hours of operation. 
South Lake Park shall be open to the general public between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:01 a.m. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in South Lake Park at any hour except as provided in this section. 
(Code 2004, § 9.103.1)  
Sec. 50-65. - Boat motor size. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a boat in South Lake Park with a motor in excess of 15 horsepower. 
(Code 2004, § 9.103.2)  
Sec. 50-66. - Recreational vehicles. 
No recreational vehicles are allowed at South Lake Park including, but not limited to, four wheel vehicles, three wheel vehicles, jet skis or motorcycles. 
(Code 2004, § 9.103.3)  
Sec. 50-67. - Speed limits. 
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in excess of 20 miles per hour. 
(Code 2004, § 9.103.4)  
Sec. 50-68. - Consumption or sale of alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume, sell, or give away any alcoholic beverage on city owned property. 
(Code 2004, § 9.103.5)  
Sec. 50-69. - Hunting. 
It shall be unlawful to hunt in South Lake Park. 
(Code 2004, § 9.103.6)  
Sec. 50-70. - Fires. 
It shall be unlawful to have any fires at South Lake Park except in designated areas. 
(Code 2004, § 9.103.7)  
Sec. 50-71. - Fireworks. 
Fireworks are not allowed in South Lake Park. 
(Code 2004, § 9.103.8)  
Sec. 50-72. - Parking areas designated. 
Parking is allowed only in designated areas during the hours of operation of South Lake Park. Vehicles parked illegally will be cited and towed at the owner's expense. 
(Code 2004, § 9.103.9)  
Sec. 50-73. - Swimming. 
Swimming is prohibited at South Lake Park. 
(Code 2004, § 9.103.10)  
Sec. 50-74. - Vehicle travel. 
Vehicle travel is restricted to designated streets or parking areas. 
(Code 2004, § 9.103.11)  
Sec. 50-75. - Fishing limits. 
Special limits are established for channel catfish. The daily bag and possession limit for channel catfish is two and the minimum length is 12 inches. All other species shall be as defined by state law. 
(Code 2004, § 9.103.12)  
Secs. 50-76—50-98. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CHAPARRAL TRAIL 
 
Sec. 50-99. - Area defined. 
Chaparral Trail is described as being a strip 50 feet along either side of the centerline of the former Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe railroad right-of-way, beginning within the city at the structure known as the Onion Shed and extending generally northward to the county line. 
(Code 2004, § 9.104.1)  
Sec. 50-100. - Use. 
Chaparral Trail is to be used as a hiking, biking, walking and jogging trail, and to include nonmotorized uses such as roller skating and skate boarding. Equestrian activity is allowed on both the improved and unimproved surfaces of the Chaparral Trail. Use of any and all motorized vehicles on, along and about the Chaparral Trail is specifically prohibited. 
(Code 2004, § 9.104.2; Ord. No. 2008-07, § 1, 2-12-2008; Ord. No. O-2013-0212-001, § 2, 2-12-2013)  
Sec. 50-101. - Hunting. 
It shall be unlawful to hunt on, along and about the Chaparral Trail. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-0212-001, § 3, 2-12-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2013-0212-001, § 3, adopted February 12, 2013, repealed and replaced § 50-101 in its entirety. Former § 50-101, pertained to hours of use and was derived from Code 2004, § 9.104.3.  
Sec. 50-102. - Alcoholic beverages and illegal drugs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume, sell, or give away any alcoholic beverage or illegal drugs on city-owned property. 
(Code 2004, § 9.104.4)  
Sec. 50-103. - Fires and fireworks. 
It shall be unlawful to have fires or fireworks on the Chaparral Trail. 
(Code 2004, § 9.104.5)  
Sec. 50-104. - Camping and cooking. 
Camping and cooking is allowed on, along and about the Chaparral Trail provided a permit is first obtained from the city for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-0212-001, § 4, 2-12-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2013-0212-001, § 4, adopted February 12, 2013, repealed and replaced § 50-104 in its entirety. Former § 50-104, pertained to camping, cooking, and hunting and was derived from Code 2004, § 9.104.6.  
Sec. 50-105. - Vandalism and dumping. 
It shall be unlawful to mutilate, deface, or destroy any property of any kind or nature whatsoever on the Chaparral Trail or to dump any matter of any sort on the Chaparral Trail. 
(Code 2004, § 9.104.7)  
Sec. 50-106. - Parking designated. 
(a)  Parking is allowed only in those areas so designated. 
(b)  Vehicles that are parked illegally will be cited and towed at the owner's expense. 
(Code 2004, § 9.104.8; Ord. No. O-2013-0212-001, § 2, 2-12-2013)  
Sec. 50-107. - Peddling and vending. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit for sale, vend, peddle, sell, or offer to sell any merchandise of any kind or nature whatsoever, or to petition for money or food on the Chaparral Trail. 
(Code 2004, § 9.104.9; Ord. No. 2003-27, 6-10-2003)  
Secs. 50-108—50-132. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ROBBIN LAMKIN MEMORIAL PLAYGROUND AND SPLASH PAD 
 
Sec. 50-133. - Description and location. 
The Robbin Lamkin Memorial Playground and Splash Pad is described as a water splash pad area and a playground area located in the middle of the block, on the north side of Farmersville Parkway, between South Hamilton and Johnson Streets. 
(Code 2004, § 9.105; Ord. No. 2007-17, 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 50-134. - Regulations and restrictions—Playground. 
(a)  The Robbin Lamkin Memorial Playground shall be open to the general public between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:01 a.m. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume, sell, or give away any alcoholic beverage or illegal drugs on city-owned property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to have fires or fireworks in the playground area. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to mutilate, deface, or destroy any property of any kind or nature whatsoever in the playground or water splash pad area. 
(Code 2004, § 9.105.1)  
Sec. 50-135. - Same—Water splash pad. 
The water splash pad area shall be open to the general public beginning Memorial Day and ending Labor Day with the following restrictions and regulations, except when water restrictions are in effect: 
(1)  Open Sunday through Saturday from 10:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. 
(2)  Use of drugs, alcoholic beverages, tobacco products (smoking or smokeless) is prohibited. 
(3)  No glass containers. 
(4)  No abusive or inappropriate language is allowed. 
(5)  No pets except working animals are allowed. 
(6)  No food or drink is permitted on the splash pad area. 
(7)  No skateboards, roller blades, or bicycles are permitted on the splash pad area. 
(8)  No running or rough play on the splash pad area. 
(9)  Infants must wear swim diapers. 
(10)  Water shoes or nonslip shoes are recommended. 
(11)  Children under the age of 12 years of age shall always be accompanied and supervised by an adult. 
(Code 2004, § 9.105.2(A); Ord. No. 2007-17, 4-10-2007; Ord. No. O-2013-0723-001, § 1, 7-23-2013  
Sec. 50-136. - Nonliability for injury to persons or property. 
The city is not responsible for personal property or bodily injury. 
(Code 2004, § 9.105.2(B); Ord. No. 2007-17, 4-10-2007)  
Chapter 53 - PEDDLERS, VENDORS AND SOLICITORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to license, tax, suppress or otherwise regulate hawkers and peddlers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.031; cancellation of certain home solicited consumer transactions, V.T.C.A., Business and Commerce Code § 601.001 et seq.; certain peddlers regarded as retailers for purposes of sales and use taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 151.024. 
 
Sec. 53-1. - Purpose. 
This chapter is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the state and of the city for the public safety, comfort, convenience, and protection of the city and the citizens thereof, and all of the provisions of this chapter shall be construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. The primary purpose of the public streets, sidewalks, and other public ways is for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Reasonable regulation of solicitation on public ways and in public places is necessary to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare. The regulations contained in this chapter are not intended in any way to prohibit or hamper speech that is protected by the Constitution of the United States or the constitution of the state.  
Sec. 53-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Automated teller machine means a machine, other than a telephone: 
(1)  That is capable of being operated by a customer of a financial institution; 
(2)  By which the customer may communicate to the financial institution a request to withdraw a benefit for the customer or for another person directly from the customer's account or from the customer's account under a line of credit previously authorized by the financial institution for the customer; and 
(3)  The use of which may or may not involve personnel of a financial institution. 
Consumer means an individual who acquires real or personal property, services, money, or credit for personal, family or household purposes. 
Exterior public pay telephone means any coin or credit card reader telephone that is: 
(1)  Installed or located anywhere on a premises except exclusively in the interior of a building located on the premises; and 
(2)  Accessible and available for use by members of the general public. 
Itinerant vendor means a person engaged in a temporary business or who travels from city to city and is engaged in solicitation in a specific, non-moving location. 
Laundromat means a privately owned laundromat that is open to the public regardless of whether the laundromat owner has given permission for solicitation. 
Non-profit organization means any organization that does not seek to make a profit and that is not a public body. This definition includes, but is not limited to, entities such as the Multiple Sclerosis Association of America, the American Heart Association, the Muscular Dystrophy Association, the American Cancer Society, City of Farmersville public safety departments, the Boy Scouts of America, the Girl Scouts of the United States of America, etc. 
Parking lot means a public or private parking area, regardless of whether the owner of the property has given permission for solicitation. 
Parkway means the area between the edge of the designated street and the adjacent owner's property line. 
Peddler, solicitor, or vendor means any person with no fixed place of business who travels by foot, vehicle or any other conveyance from house to house, place to place, or street to street, or who may establish a stand at a temporary location not requiring a certificate of occupancy, carrying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, or services or who, without traveling from place to place, exhibits, displays, sells, or offers for sale such products from his person or from any conveyance or exposing the same for sale or making sales and deliveries to purchasers. The term "peddler" also includes any street vendor, hawker, huckster, itinerant merchant or transient or itinerant vendor. For the purposes of this chapter, all references to "solicitor" shall also pertain to peddlers. 
Person means any individual, firm, company, agency, partnership, corporation, association, trust, society, religious sect, organization, league, or other legal entity and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent, or similar representative. 
Public transportation stop means an area officially marked and designated as a place to wait for a bus, a light-rail vehicle, or any other public transportation vehicle that is operated on a scheduled route with passengers who pay fares on an individual basis. 
Religious organization means an organization that is dedicated to the support of a church, religious society, or any other religious sect, group, or order. 
Seasonal sales means temporary sales and/or display of, e.g., cut trees, typically during the winter season; pumpkins and fall decorations, typically during the fall season; or other items of goods or services reflecting seasonal or holiday-related activities or events. 
Self-service car wash means a structure: 
(1)  At which a vehicle may be manually washed by its owner or operator with equipment that is activated by the deposit of money in a coin-operated machine; and 
(2)  That is accessible and available for use by members of the general public. 
Self-service fuel pump means a fuel pump: 
(1)  From which a vehicle may be manually filled with gasoline or other fuel directly by its owner or operator, without the aid of an employee or attendant of the premises at which the fuel pump is located; and 
(2)  That is accessible and available for use by members of the general public. 
Sidewalk means any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians. 
Solicitation means conduct whereby a person or its agent, member, or representative: 
(1)  Either orally or in writing, asks for a ride, employment, property, financial aid, money, or any article representing monetary value, for any purpose; or 
(2)  Whether orally or in writing, sells or offers to sell food, goods, services, publications, or subscriptions. 
The term "solicitation" shall include the activities of persons engaged in the delivery of handbills or circulars door to door for the solicitation of money, products, services or other items of pecuniary value. An offer of membership in any organization is expressly excluded. 
Solicitor means person who goes from house to house, place to place or street to street soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for any goods, wares, or merchandise, including books, periodicals, magazines, hand bills, services, or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery. The term "solicitor" does not include any person taking or attempting to take orders to be filled by goods, wares, or merchandise delivered to the purchaser from other states. 
Street means the portion of the street that is paved, designated, or used for vehicular traffic, and all areas dedicated to public use for public street purposes, which includes parkways, alleys, and sidewalks. 
Traffic island means a barrier within a street or roadway to exclude vehicles, designated for the purpose of separating or directing streams of vehicular traffic. 
Vehicle means any wheeled vehicle, including bicycles, unicycles, push carts and any other wheeled vehicle of whatever kind or character.  
Sec. 53-3. - Permits required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without having first obtained a permit therefor from the city, to attempt to or to peddle, sell, solicit, canvass, or take orders for any services, wares, merchandise, or goods, or any article of value, including, but not limited to, plants, flowers, animals, paintings, novelties, the painting of house numbers on streets, firewood, books, magazines, photographs, or any articles for future delivery, while such person is on a sidewalk, parkway, parking lot or the required landscaped areas within the parking lot, is on city-owned, leased or controlled property within the city, or is attempting to or is making door-to-door contact. 
(b)  Each person engaged in peddling, selling or soliciting as defined or described in subsection (a) of this section must have a permit issued under the terms of this section, and such permit shall be personal to the applicant and shall not be reproduced, assigned or transferred to any other person. Any such attempted transfer or reproduction shall render the permit void. 
(c)  Each permit shall expire as of the date noted thereon, which date shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and such permit shall indicate the hours when peddling, selling and solicitation within the city is permitted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person who solicits in the city to represent in connection with such solicitation that the issuance of a permit or identification card by the city constitutes an endorsement thereof. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit funds for a purpose other than that set out in the registration statement or application upon which the permit was issued. 
(f)  A permit shall not be issued to any person under 16 years of age. 
(g)  Solicitation shall be deemed completed when made, regardless of whether the person making the solicitation receives any contribution or makes any sale. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for an itinerant vendor to sell or attempt to sell or to establish a location for business within the city without first obtaining a permit. For sales on private property, the itinerant vendor must provide a letter from the property owner sufficient to demonstrate permission for the itinerant vendor to conduct business on the property. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit on city property unless the person first has obtained a permit in connection with an authorized city-sponsored event.  
Sec. 53-4. - Permit application. 
(a)  Every person desiring to solicit in the city shall, unless otherwise exempted, apply for a permit from the appropriate city department as set forth in section 53-6. Each application for a permit required by this section shall be in writing, under oath, and notarized, and shall set forth the following: 
(1)  Name of the applicant, with his permanent residence; 
(2)  Whether the person represents a partnership, corporation or association, and: 
a.  The business address and telephone number of the applicant; 
b.  If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal business address and telephone number of each partner; 
c.  If a corporation, whether it is organized under the laws of the state or is a foreign corporation; the mailing address, business location, telephone number, and name of the individual in charge of the Texas office of such corporation; the names and addresses of all officers and directors or trustees of said corporation; and, if a foreign corporation, the place of incorporation; and 
d.  If an association, the association's principal business address and telephone number. If the association is part of a multi-state organization or association, the mailing address and business locations of its local office; 
(3)  The specific locations in which the applicant intends to solicit under the permit; 
(4)  The names, mailing addresses and telephone numbers of all individuals who will be in direct charge or control of the solicitation of funds; 
(5)  The kind, type and character of goods or services he proposes to offer for sale, including the name brand, manufacturer and distributor of food, goods and commodities and the name, publisher and distributor of all books, magazines or periodicals to be offered for sale; 
(6)  Full description of goods and/or services for solicitation; 
(7)  The time period within which the solicitation is to be made, giving the date of the beginning of solicitation and its projected conclusion, and/or, as may be applicable, how often or the frequency with which the applicant will solicit during such period; 
(8)  The projected hours of solicitation during the time period in which the solicitation is projected to occur; 
(9)  A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation of funds is to be accomplished; 
(10)  The names of any cities where applicant has obtained a permit within the previous five years; 
(11)  Whether the applicant, or any solicitor listed in the application, has ever been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(12)  State driver's license number or a state-approved identification card number of the applicant and each solicitor; 
(13)  If motor vehicles are to be used during the time when the applicant will be soliciting, a description of each such vehicle, together with the motor vehicle registration number, license number, and proof of current liability insurance for each vehicle; 
(14)  A copy of the applicant's current state sales tax permit together with written documentation from the state comptroller that all sales taxes that may be due and owing by the applicant have been fully paid; 
(15)  A sworn statement from the property owner, if applicable, consenting to the applicant's use of his/her property for the solicitation activities indicated in the permit application; 
(16)  If any portion of a parking lot will be used by a solicitor, a site plan must be submitted that indicates no required parking will be used or impacted and that all fire lanes will be unobstructed; 
(17)  If the solicitor intends to use property that has a permanent business located on-site, the on-site business must grant permission for the solicitor and/or his/her patrons to use the business's restroom; and 
(18)  If the solicitor intends to use property that has a permanent business on-site, a site plan must be submitted that shows that walkways and ingress and egress to the on-site business will not be impacted. 
(b)  In addition, there shall be attached to each application for a permit, the following: 
(1)  Two recent photographic likenesses of the applicant's face, and any solicitor soliciting under said permit, which photographs shall not exceed one inch square in size; 
(2)  A certificate or letter from the president, vice-president, general manager, sales manager, assistant sales manager or district or area manager of the company for which the applicant works, sells or solicits, stating that the applicant is an employee and/or agent of such company; 
(3)  A reference to a recognized financial rating publication, which reference shall show the page on which the company's or firm's financial standing can be found; or a letter or a certificate from an association or organization that has as its purpose the protection of citizens of the United States against illegal or unsavory business practices stating that the firm or company is a member in good standing of such association or organization; and 
(4)  A copy of a valid health permit for any applicant engaged in the sale or distribution of food or beverages. A solicitor shall be subject to inspections by the health department at the time of application and at periodic intervals thereafter.  
Sec. 53-5. - Application fee. 
(a)  The peddler/solicitor application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee, as established in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code, for the original applicant, plus a non-refundable fee, as established in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code, for each additional peddler/solicitor who works for or provides services for the original applicant, for the investigation and administration of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The itinerant vendor application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee, as established in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code, for each applicant, for the investigation and administration of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  All fees shall be paid to the city prior to acceptance of a permit application.  
Sec. 53-6. - Permits generally. 
(a)  Investigation of applicant. It shall be the duty of the police chief, or his/her authorized designee, to secure a background check through any lawful means on each applicant, and all other persons listed on the application before issuance of a permit, which investigation may include but is not limited to personal interviews with named individuals, public history checks, verification of references and information contained within the application. 
(b)  Issuance of permit. A permit applied for under this chapter shall be issued by the city within 30 days after the application is completed and filed, unless it is determined that the applicant has provided false or incomplete information on its application. 
(1)  A peddler/solicitor permit requested under this chapter shall be issued for the length of time requested, not to exceed one year. An expired permit may be renewed under the same terms and conditions as the original application and is subject to the same fees. Peddler/solicitor permits shall be applied for with the city police department and issued or denied by the police chief or his/her authorized designee. 
(2)  An itinerant vendor permit requested under this chapter shall be issued for the length of time requested, not to exceed one day. An applicant or business may be issued no more than four itinerant vendor permits per calendar year. Itinerant vendor permits shall be applied for with the city's police department and issued or denied by the police chief, or his/her authorized designee. 
(c)  Form of permit. Each permit shall be printed in black except that the following shall be printed prominently thereon: "The issuance of the permit is not an endorsement by the City of Farmersville or any of its officers or employees." Each permit shall bear a permit number that is the same as the file containing the application filed by the applicant. 
(d)  Permit to be displayed. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or solicit in the city without carrying the identification card and displaying the permit required by this section on his person, in plain view, while engaged in such soliciting or selling. 
(e)  Exhibiting permit. Each vendor, solicitor, peddler or seller shall identify himself as a salesman upon approaching a citizen in a public place or at a private dwelling and explain his purpose, whether it be direct sales, solicitation or orders of the demonstration of goods or merchandise, or any combination of purposes thereof, and shall produce for inspection, upon request by any person, the solicitor's valid and current permit issued by the city. 
(f)  Solicitor's identification cards. Each identification card issued by the city shall bear the name of the applicant, the application number, the name of the solicitor or agent, and the expiration date of the permit, and it shall have printed prominently thereon: "This identification card is not an endorsement of the solicitation by the City of Farmersville or any of its officers or employees. It is your duty to verify all information given to you by this solicitor." The applicant shall provide to the city with the peddler/solicitor application, by a separate list, the names and addresses of all agents or employees for whom identification cards are to be issued. 
(g)  Responsibility for acts of solicitors. The recipient of a permit or named applicant shall be responsible for the acts of his/her authorized representatives or solicitors listed in the permit application in connection with solicitation activities. In this regard, the recipient of the permit shall actively supervise all persons listed in the permit application, which supervision shall include but not be limited to remaining within the corporate city limits during all solicitation activity and responding promptly (within ten minutes) to calls by or communication with city representatives relative to the solicitation activity, which may include responding to an on-site complaint from a citizen. 
(h)  Itinerant vendor's permit. Each permit issued by the city shall bear the name of the applicant, the application number, the name of the itinerant vendor or agent, and the expiration date of the permit, and it shall have printed prominently thereon: "This permit is not an endorsement of the solicitation by the City of Farmersville or any of its officers or employees. It is your duty to verify all information given to you by this solicitor."  
Sec. 53-7. - Revocation or denial of permit. 
(a)  Revocation of permit. 
(1)  If, after the permit required by this section has been issued, it is determined that either the permit was obtained by false representation in the application, the permit holder has been convicted of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, at any time in the ten years prior to the date of the application, the permit has been reproduced or transferred or assigned to another person, or the applicant has led someone to believe the permit is an endorsement of the applicant's product or service by the city, or in the event the permit holder has committed or effectuated fraud or misrepresentation or has failed to furnish the items required by this chapter, such permit may be revoked. 
(2)  If the permit holder has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude subsequent to the date of the application, the permit will be revoked. If a permit holder has been charged with a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude and the charge is pending, the permit will be suspended until resolution of the charges. 
(3)  If there is probable cause to believe that a solicitor has engaged in prohibited conduct as defined by this chapter, the police chief, or his/her designee, may revoke the permit of the permit holder. 
(4)  If more than one complaint of misconduct concerning a solicitor or group of solicitors working for the same company is received, the city may immediately revoke the permit. 
(b)  Appeal from denial or revocation of permit. Should an applicant be denied a permit, or have a permit revoked, he may appeal that action to the city manager by submitting a letter to the city secretary or designee within ten days of the denial or revocation to complain of that action. A hearing of the denial then will be scheduled with the city manager, to be held within 15 days of the submission of the letter of appeal. The city manager shall render a decision on the appeal within one day of the date of the hearing. Such hearing shall be an administrative hearing, and adherence to formal rules of evidence shall not be required. The decision of the city manager shall be final and binding. No new application for a permit will be considered for six months after a final determination of denial or revocation has been issued, unless said denial or revocation is without prejudice or is conditional and the conditions have been satisfied as determined by the city staff handling the permit application.  
Sec. 53-8. - Surety bond required. 
In the event the application shows the applicant is to take orders for future delivery, he shall give bond signed as surety by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned for the final delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, food, photographs, publications or services in accordance with the terms of such order obtained, and also conditioned to indemnify any and all purchases or customers for any and all defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the articles sold by the principal in such bond at the time of delivery, that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within 30 days after delivery. Such bond shall be in the sum of not less than $10,000.00 and shall remain in full force and effect for the entire duration of the license permit. The bond required herein shall be in substantially the following form: 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF COLLIN 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
That the undersigned as Principal, and the as Surety, are held and firmly bound unto the Mayor of the City of Farmersville, Texas, and his successors in office in the penal sum of _______, lawful money of the United States of America, for the payment of which in Farmersville, Collin County, Texas, we bind ourselves, and our heirs, personal representatives, successors and assigns, jointly and severally, firmly by these presents. 
The condition of this obligation is that whereas the principal in this bond has applied to the proper authorities in and for the said city for a permit to solicit orders for and to sell goods, wares, merchandise, food, photographs, publications or services. 
Now if the said principal in this bond will make final delivery of all such goods, wares, merchandise, food, photographs, publications or services to the respective purchasers in accordance with the orders therefor, and will indemnify all of said purchasers and customers and save them harmless from any and all defects in material or workmanship that may exist in any articles sold by the principal in this bond at the time of sale, and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customers within 30 days after delivery, then in such event this obligation is to be null and void, otherwise it is to be and remain in full force and effect. 
This bond is for the use and benefit of any and all persons, firms and corporations that may make any purchase from the principal in this bond or gave any order to said principal, and the right of action hereunder shall not be exhausted by the first recovery, but successive suits may be brought hereon for all breaches that may occur so long as the total damages sued for shall not exceed the penalty of this bond. 
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF WITNESS the hands and seal of the aforesaid parties, this the day of _______, 20___. 
_____
Principal Date 	

_____
Surety Date 	
 
Aforementioned Bond Expires on _______, 20___.  
Sec. 53-9. - Permit exemptions. 
(a)  The following persons engaged in the activities set out in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(3) of this section in the city shall first register with the city by filling out a form to be promulgated by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and by furnishing proof that he/she is actually engaged in such activity in the city, and the city shall issue to such person a registration certificate exempting him from the terms and conditions of this chapter and from paying a fee therefor, namely: 
(1)  Public utility companies or others operating under a franchise granted by the city; 
(2)  Commercial agents dealing with local business establishments in the usual course of business; and 
(3)  Insurance salesmen, real estate salesmen and others licensed by the state. 
(b)  The following persons engaged in the activities set out in subsections (b)(1) through (b)(5) of this section in the city are exempt from any registration requirements, in addition to the exemption from the permit requirements: 
(1)  Solicitations related to non-profit activities, including, but not limited to, public and/or private school-related activities, Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, and Big Brothers and Sisters, which may involve children under the age of 16 years. Children under the age of 16 years may participate in such activities to the extent they are actively supervised by a parent, guardian or other adult person, at least 18 years of age, who is responsible for the well-being of the child; 
(2)  Religious, political or non-profit organizations and their representatives distributing handbills or pamphlets only for the purpose of communicating issues of general interest to the public. A donation received from the distribution of handbills or pamphlets does not affect this exemption; 
(3)  Ordinary commercial travelers who sell or exhibit for sale goods, wares or merchandise to persons selling and dealing in the same within the city; 
(4)  Citizens of the city conducting a survey; and 
(5)  Persons holding a concession agreement with the city.  
Sec. 53-10. - Prohibited location, activities and conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, solicit, hawk, sell or take orders for or offer to take orders for any item or service in the following places in the city: 
(1)  On any property owned or leased by the city, or on any public street, alley or traffic island; 
(2)  Any residence the address of which appears on the nonsolicitation list maintained by the city for residents who request in writing that their address be excluded from solicitation activities for that calendar year. Nonsolicitation lists are valid for January 1 through December 31 each calendar year. It is the responsibility of the resident, occupant, tenant, or homeowner to renew his request each year to keep it on the list; 
(3)  Any residence that exhibits or displays in a conspicuous place, upon or near the main entrance to the residence, a sign or posting that contains the words "NO SOLICITORS." The letters shall be not less than two-thirds of an inch in height and should be displayed on a weatherproof card not less than three inches by four inches in size; or 
(4)  Within 25 feet of the following facilities: 
a.  Automated teller machines; 
b.  Entrances or exits of banks, credit unions, or other similar financial institutions; 
c.  Exterior public pay telephones; 
d.  Self-service car washes; 
e.  Self-service fuel pumps; 
f.  Public transportation stops; and/or 
g.  Commercial/retail establishments. 
(b)  For purposes of subsection (a)(4) of this section, measurement will be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point at which a solicitation is being conducted to whichever is applicable of the following: 
(1)  The nearest entrance or exit of a facility in which an automated teller machine is enclosed or, if the machine is not enclosed in a facility, to the nearest part of the automated teller machine; 
(2)  The nearest entrance or exit of a bank, credit union, or other similar financial institution; 
(3)  The nearest part of an exterior public pay telephone; 
(4)  The nearest part of the structure of a self-service car wash; 
(5)  The nearest part of a self-service fuel pump; or 
(6)  The nearest point of any sign or marking designating an area as a public transportation stop. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to block, obstruct or hinder the free flow of vehicular traffic in the lawful use of the street or the free passage of pedestrians in the lawful use of the sidewalk. No solicitations, sales, or distribution of merchandise, products, or service shall be offered or made to occupants of motor vehicles moving or stopped in traffic on a public street or alley. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person engaged in solicitation to: 
(1)  Misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation or make a false or misleading statement for the purpose of promoting the sale of goods or services; 
(2)  Misrepresent the affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation; 
(3)  Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual informs the solicitor that he does not wish to give anything to or buy anything from that solicitor; 
(4)  Represent that the issuance of any permit or registration by the city under this chapter constitutes a recommendation or endorsement of the solicitation; 
(5)  Remove, deface, or render illegible a card placed by the occupant of a residence pursuant to subsection (a)(3) of this section; 
(6)  Enter onto property where the owner of or the person controlling the property has posted a sign or signs on such property prohibiting solicitation; or 
(7)  Remain on property after the owner of or the person controlling the property, or his designee, representative or agent, has instructed the solicitor to leave. 
(e)  No solicitor, or person working on his or her behalf, shall shout, make an outcry, or blow a horn or whistle, nor shall any such person use any sound device, including any sound amplification system, upon any street, avenue, alley, park or other public place of the city that is in violation of the city's noise regulations in section 44-23 et seq. 
(f)  No person shall engage in solicitation through the delivery of handbills or circulars by placing said handbills or circulars on motor vehicles, public utility posts, or other location such that the same constitutes littering under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 365. It shall be assumed for purposes of this section that the person or business whose address or telephone number is listed in the notice, poster, paper or device, or who is otherwise named, described or identified in the notice, poster, paper or device, is the person or business that committed the violation, either personally or through an agent or employee. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize a child 16 years of age or younger to engage in solicitation activities, unless otherwise expressly permitted herein, unless such child is actively supervised by a parent, guardian or other responsible adult person at least 18 years of age who is registered as provided herein. For purposes of this section, "actively supervised" means that the adult person shall be within 100 feet of any child 16 years of age or younger for whom the adult person is responsible at all times when the child is engaged in solicitation activities. 
(h)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this chapter if the person is occupying the public right-of-way for the purpose of selling newspapers, publications or other printed material that deal with the dissemination of information or opinion; however, this defense is not available if said act occurred upon the paved surface or shoulder of any public street, highway or road. 
(i)  Public safety personnel shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection (a)(1) of this section; however, such activities should not hinder the flow of traffic.  
Sec. 53-11. - Solicitation restrictions. 
(a)  Residential. No person shall peddle, solicit, hawk, sell or take orders for or offer to take orders for any item or service at a private residence in the city after sunset on any day until 9:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, unless the transaction is the result of a request made to such person by the occupant of such private residence. For purposes of this section the term "sunset" means the time of day identified by the National Weather Service as the time for sunset for that day for the city. There shall be no solicitations on Sunday, New Year's Day, Fourth of July, Memorial Day (observed), Labor Day (observed), Thanksgiving, or Christmas Day. 
(b)  Non-residential. Except for the vending of food or drinks from a motor vehicle or other non-stationary means within construction, manufacturing or similar areas in the manner specified in chapter 32, article II, pertaining to food service establishments, solicitation shall be allowed only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Vending stands shall not block existing fire lanes, and all stands and other vending operations must be removed during non-vending hours. 
(c)  Stands. A vendor stand shall not: 
(1)  Exceed 20 feet in length, ten feet in width or 13 feet in height; 
(2)  Impede access to the entrance or driveway of any adjacent building, impede traffic flow, or be located within 20 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(3)  Occupy more than half of the available sidewalk width or 20 feet of such sidewalk, whichever is less; or 
(4)  Occupy any portion of required on-site parking. 
(d)  Handicapped areas. No solicitor shall conduct business within 20 feet of any handicapped parking space or access ramp. 
(e)  Removal of trash. All trash or debris accumulating within 50 feet of any vendor stand shall be collected by the solicitor and deposited in an authorized trash container. All solicitors selling food or beverages must provide trash receptacles adjacent to or as a part of their stands. 
(f)  Prohibited areas. A solicitation permit issued pursuant to this chapter is valid only on specified public ways or in public places of the city. The city shall prohibit vendors from selling on specified public ways or in public places if it determines such prohibitions are necessary for the protection of public health and safety. Vendor stands and motor vehicles may not obstruct existing fire lanes and are prohibited within 20 feet of a fire hydrant, fire escape, loading zone, or the driveway of a fire station, police station or hospital. 
(g)  Monthly reports. Upon request from the city, all vendors shall provide a copy of their monthly report of sales tax receipts to the city. 
(h)  Motor vehicles. Solicitation from a motor vehicle shall be prohibited if the solicitor: 
(1)  Stops, stands or parks the vehicle within 20 feet of any intersection, within any other prohibited area, or during prohibited hours; or 
(2)  Conducts business in such a way as would increase traffic congestion or delay, constitute a hazard to life or property, interfere with an abutting property owner, or obstruct access to emergency vehicles. 
(i)  Fire inspection. If in the sole opinion of the fire marshal or his/her designee an unsafe condition is deemed to exist, the solicitation must be immediately discontinued.  
Sec. 53-12. - Consumers' right to cancel. 
(a)  The vendor, merchant, peddler, or seller shall provide to the consumer, in writing, the right to cancel a solicitation transaction made in person or by telephone in which the consideration exceeds $5.00), until midnight of the third business day after the day on which the consumer signs an agreement or offer to purchase in a solicitation transaction. For purposes of a telephone solicitation, the term "date of transaction" means the day that the consumer receives the goods, services, or realty purchased in a solicitation transaction. 
(b)  If the consumer chooses to cancel the solicitation transaction, notification by mail shall be considered given at the time mailed as evidenced by the postmark; notification by email shall be considered given at the time filed for transmission; and notification by any other writing shall be considered given at the time delivered to the merchant's designated place of business. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a merchant, peddler, or seller to refuse to allow the customer to cancel the solicitation transaction, consistent with this section. 
(d)  Cancellations authorized, and the procedure and notice requirements set forth in V.T.C.A., Business and Commerce Code ch. 39, as amended, are applicable to this section, for transactions applicable thereunder. The text of V.T.C.A., Business and Commerce Code ch. 39, is available in the city secretary's office or on the website at Texas Legislature On-Line.  
Sec. 53-13. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00, and for Health and Safety Code violations a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state are not required for proof of any offense defined by this chapter, except as otherwise provided by law.  
Sec. 53-14. - Public disclosure. 
All applications, whether or not a permit has been issued, shall be a public record and shall be available for inspection by members of the public during regular business hours, and copies may be obtained subject to applicable costs.  
Chapter 56 - SIGNS AND ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of signs by municipalities generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.001 et seq.; authority for municipal regulation of signs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.901; regulation of political signs by municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.903; municipal boards on sign control, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.004; regulation of outdoor advertising generally, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 391.031 et seq.; licenses and permits for outdoor advertising, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 391.061 et seq.; municipal authority to regulate sign placement, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 393.0025. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 56-1. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense, and each and every day any such offense shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, § 4, 10-9-2007  
Sec. 56-2. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to encourage aesthetically pleasing design, establish uniform standards for the placement of signs, and provide minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property and the public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, quality of materials, construction, location, electrification and maintenance of all sign structures not located within a building. 
(b)  The regulations of this chapter are not intended to authorize, nor shall they be deemed to permit, any violation of the provisions of any Code provision, statute, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, app. A, § 1-2, 10-9-2007  
Sec. 56-3. - Applicability. 
The terms and conditions of this chapter shall apply to signs located within the corporate city limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction to the full extent permitted by and not otherwise prohibited by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 216 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, app. A, § 1-1, 10-9-2007  
Sec. 56-4. - Sign permits. 
(a)  Permit required. No sign, other than those signs allowed without a permit by sections 56-31 and 56-54, shall be erected, placed, attached, secured, altered or displayed on the ground, or to any building, or any structure, until a permit for such sign has been issued by the building official. An application for a sign permit may be obtained from the city. 
(b)  Application. The city shall approve or deny an application for a sign permit within 30 days of the building inspection division's receipt of the application. A sign permit will be issued if a proposed sign conforms to all Code provisions. 
(c)  Diagram of sign location. Upon request by the city, a diagram shall be provided showing the location of all signs on the property or adjacent properties. Incorrect information on an application shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a sign permit. 
(d)  Not to issue for prohibited locations. No sign permit shall be issued under this section for any sign in a district where signs are prohibited by Chapter 77, Zoning, as it currently exists or may be amended by ordinance. 
(e)  Fees. The sign permit fee shall be a fee as established from time to time in the master fee schedule contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(f)  Interpretation and administration. The building official shall be responsible for interpreting and administering this section. The building official may revoke any permit for a sign issued in error. 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, app. A, § 2-1, 10-9-2007  
Sec. 56-5. - Responsibility of compliance. 
The permittee, owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of a sign, the owner of the land or structure on which the sign is located, and the person erecting the sign are all subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, app. A, § 2-2, 10-9-2007  
Sec. 56-6. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Authority. The building official or his designee or such other person as may be appointed by the city manager is hereby designated to be the city's sign inspector and is further authorized and directed to interpret and enforce all the provisions of this chapter. For such purposes the sign inspector shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer. 
(b)  Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or violation of this chapter which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the sign inspector may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed by this chapter, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused or the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises cannot be located, the sign inspector shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, app. A, § 2-3, 10-9-2007)  
Secs. 56-7—56-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 56-31. - Definitions; sign regulations and requirements. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A-frame sign means a temporary sign constructed of two pieces of wood, metal or other similar material connected at the top by hinges or similar devices and may collapse when the connecting devices are overextended or the two pieces of wood, metal or other similar material are against one another. 
(1)  The maximum width allowed is four feet. The maximum height allowed is four feet. The maximum copy area allowed is 16 square feet. 
(2)  A-frame signs are only allowed to be displayed during normal daytime business hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(3)  A-frame signs are prohibited in the city's Central Area (CA) Zoning District. See Sandwich board for the CA Zoning District. 
(4)  A sign permit is not required. 
(5)  A-frame signs must be located a minimum of four feet from any curb of any adjacent street. An A-frame sign shall not be closer than 20 feet to another A-frame sign. A maximum of one A-frame sign may be placed per business or tenant on the property where the A-frame sign is located. A-frame signs must provide an unobstructed pedestrian clearance of at least four feet in width. An A-frame sign shall not be placed in any manner that interferes with vehicular traffic or causes a potential hazard. 
(6)  An A-frame sign shall not be placed in any median. An A-frame sign shall not be placed within a utility or right-of-way easement. An A-frame sign shall not be illuminated or contain any moving parts other than the fasteners holding the faces of the A-frame sign together. 
Abandoned or neglected sign. 
(1)  The term "abandoned or neglected sign" means a: 
a.  Sign that is not maintained or has missing panels, letters, or characters, burned out lights, rust, loose or damaged parts, or has faded from its original color or advertises a product or service no longer available or a business no longer in operation; 
b.  Sign which is illegible, nonfunctional, in disrepair, or hazardous as a result of a lack of maintenance; or 
c.  Previously nonconforming sign structure that has lost its lawful nonconforming status as a result of abandonment or lack of use. 
(2)  Abandoned or neglected signs shall be considered a public nuisance and are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. SeePublic nuisance. 
Apartment sign means a temporary stake sign made of wood, metal or other similar material used to convey information that relates to the operations of an apartment community or complex. 
(1)  An apartment sign shall not exceed six square feet in total area. The maximum height of an apartment sign shall not exceed four feet. 
(2)  No sign permit is required. 
(3)  Apartment signs may be placed in the front yard of a property developed as an apartment complex no earlier than Friday at 12:00 noon and shall be removed from the property no later than Sunday at 6:00 p.m. 
(4)  Apartment signs may not be installed on any public property or right-of-way area. Apartment signs shall only be placed on the property for the apartment community to which it pertains. Apartment signs installed within the front of a property shall not be placed closer than 60 feet from another apartment sign. Apartment signs shall not be installed within 30 feet from a side property line. 
Audible sign means any sign that emits music, talking, words, or other sound or amplification. Audible signs are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
Awning. 
(1)  The term "awning" means a retractable or nonretractable projection, shelter or structure of rigid or nonrigid canvas, metal, wood, or other similar material, attached to the building, that extends above a window, door, patio, or deck used as a shading device for windows or entryways, used as protection from the weather, used as a decorative embellishment, or used for identity. For the purposes of this ordinance an awning is not a canopy. See Canopy andcanopy sign. 
(2)  Minimum height of the lowest part of an awning shall be seven feet above grade. 
Awning sign means a permanent sign that is directly applied, attached or painted onto an awning that extends above a window, door, patio, or deck used as a shading device for windows or entryways, intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, or used for identity. An awning sign is used to advertise the name of the business, hours of operation, business telephone number, business address, or website address. 
(1)  No building shall have both a wall sign and an awning sign on the same building face. 
(2)  A sign permit is required. 
(3)  The maximum height of an awning sign shall not exceed four feet. The width of an awning sign shall not exceed 75 percent in length of any side of an awning. 
(4)  An awning sign shall only be permitted in conjunction with a nonresidential use or in a nonresidential zoning district. 
(5)  An awning sign shall be secure and may not swing, sway, or move in any manner. An awning sign shall not contain any moving devices. See Canopy andcanopy sign. 
Balloons and other floating devices means a visible airtight, inflatable apparatus with a maximum size not to exceed three square feet in total area in various shapes or designs made of latex, Mylar, or other similar material that extends by, or is anchored to the ground by, a cord, rope, string, wire or other similar material. 
(1)  Balloons and all other floating devices are allowed for temporary events only. Temporary events include business grand openings, festivals, fairs, tournaments, or other similar happenings. 
(2)  No sign permit is required. 
(3)  No person shall erect, maintain, or allow the installation of any floating devices anchored to the ground, any vehicle, structure or any other fixed object for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention to a business, commodity, service, sale, or product, except as otherwise permitted in this section. See Special event, special event signs, grand opening, grand opening signs, andwind devices. 
Banner means a temporary single sign or a grouping of pennants having characters, letters, or illustrations applied to plastic, cloth, canvas, or other light fabric or similar material, with the only purpose of such nonrigid material being for background used to promote awareness of special events or as seasonal decoration. Banners will include all flags or pennants that contain no names, initials, logos, insignia or similar items and are not national, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of a public or private institution. A banner does not include a municipal banner. 
(1)  A sign permit is required for each display period lasting for up to a maximum of 30 calendar days. One banner sign may be placed on a building for a maximum of 30 days or less, two times in a 12-month period. Each suite within a retail development shall be considered a building and, therefore, shall be allowed to erect a banner accordingly. 
(2)  Exemption. Religious organizations that temporarily operate in a school or other nonreligious facility may erect a banner no earlier than two hours before a worship service and remove the banner no later than two hours after such worship service without the issuance of a sign permit. 
(3)  A banner shall be securely attached to the front, side or rear face of a building. A banner shall not face a residential neighborhood, unless the site of the banner is separated from the residential neighborhood by a major thoroughfare. However, banners are permitted only in conjunction with a nonresidential use or in a nonresidential zoning district. 
(4)  A banner may be erected during social or athletic events at a public park or other city-owned property attached to pavilions, fences, vehicles, stakes, rails, or poles up to two hours prior to the start of the event and shall be removed no later than one hour after the conclusion of the event. 
(5)  A banner shall not exceed 100 square feet in area. A banner shall be placed a minimum of nine feet above grade at any pedestrian traveled way. Where a building wall is nine feet in height or less, is adjacent to an approved parking surface, and is not a designated pedestrian walkway, one banner shall be placed a minimum of five feet above the grade above the parking surface. 
(6)  Banners shall not be draped over vehicles. 
Beacon, searchlight orskylight means a source of high-intensity light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or any other point, or any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. Beacons, searchlights or skylights are prohibited in the city except by written permission from the city council. 
Billboard means a sign erected in the outdoor environment for the purpose of the display of commercial or noncommercial messages not pertinent to the use of products sold or primarily manufactured on the premises, or the sale or lease of the property on which it is displayed. Billboards include any of its support, frame or other appurtenances. Billboards are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
Building marker/memorial plaque/cornerstone means a sign indicating the name, date and information about the building's historical significance, which is cut into or made an integral part of a wall surface, or a wall-mounted or freestanding plaque of bronze or other permanent material describing such information. 
(1)  No sign permit is required. 
(2)  This type of sign is not an address sign. 
Building official means the city manager or his designee. 
Canopy means a roof-like structure on a framework sheltering an area or forming a sheltered walkway to the entrance of a building. For the purposes of this article a canopy is not an awning. See Awning andawning sign. 
Canopy sign means a sign that is applied, attached, painted or affixed on a canopy or other roof-like cover over gasoline fuel pumps, vacuum areas at car detail facilities, or other areas where services are provided to a patron in a vehicle intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment. 
(1)  A canopy sign may contain only the business's name or logo on the canopy band. 
(2)  Canopy signs may only be erected on the sides of the canopy band that face a public street. 
(3)  A sign permit is required. 
(4)  Canopy signs may not exceed 15 square feet in size. Canopy signs must be attached directly to or painted on the exterior face of the canopy band and shall not project more than 18 inches from the canopy band. Only the canopy band may be illuminated, not the entire canopy. Canopy signs attached or applied to a canopy shall not extend above or below the canopy band. SeeAwning sign. 
Canopy sign attachments means accessory supplemental signs attached above or below a canopy, commonly used in conjunction with a wall sign. Canopy sign attachments provide the name of the business. 
(1)  A sign permit is required. Structural drawings, as required by the building official, sealed by a licensed engineer must be submitted with the permit application. 
(2)  Canopy sign attachments shall only suspend from or extend above the edge of a pedestrian canopy. Canopy sign attachments installed for pedestrian display located and attached on the underside of a pedestrian canopy shall be centered. 
(3)  Canopy sign attachments shall have a maximum height of 12 inches. Suspended or extended awning sign attachments shall not alternate up-and-down at a business's storefront. Suspended canopy sign attachments suspended over a pedestrian canopy shall maintain a minimum nine-foot clearance from pedestrian grade measured from the lowest hanging portion of the attachment. Canopy sign attachments, in the Central Area Zoning District, suspended over a pedestrian canopy shall maintain a minimum seven-foot clearance from pedestrian grade measured from the lowest hanging portion of the attachment. 
(4)  Canopy sign attachments shall not be used in conjunction with a canopy sign. Only one type of canopy sign attachment shall be used per storefront. 
Central Area (CA) Zoning District. 
(1)  The area consists of the historic downtown area as established by Chapter 77, Zoning, as it currently exists or may be amended by ordinance, and as indicated on the city zoning map. 
(2)  All signs for the Central Area (CA) Zoning District shall be regulated according to the provisions of this chapter. Refer to section 56-53 regarding signs in the Central Area Zoning District and see section 56-54. 
Changeable copy sign. 
(1)  The term "changeable copy sign" means a freestanding sign or wall-mounted sign, with manually interchangeable plastic letters and symbols, communicating information to the public, such as bulletin boards, marquees and the like. A changeable copy sign is usually secondary to and part of the sign area of a larger freestanding sign for which a sign permit is required. 
(2)  If the changeable copy sign is to be the primary sign, it must meet the sign requirements as outlined in this chapter. See Monument sign, pylon sign, wall sign, and electronic message center. 
Church and civic organizations sign means signs identifying groups, such as churches or civic organizations. These signs shall be regulated according to the provisions of this article. 
Cloud buster balloon and air devices means any visible airtight or air flow-through, inflatable apparatus that exceeds one square foot in total area made of latex, Mylar, or other similar material that extends higher than ten feet into the sky which extends by, or is anchored to the ground by, a cord, rope, string, wire, or other similar material. A cloud buster balloon or air device is commonly used to attract passersby/patrons to a location having a promotion, sale, or other function. Cloud buster balloons, blimps, and other air devices are allowed for temporary special events only. No sign permit is required. 
Code enforcement officer means the building official or other designated authority, appointed by the city manager, charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
Commercial real estate sign (CRES) means an on-site, temporary sign made of wood, metal or similar material approved by the building official that pertains to the sale or lease of the commercial property where the sign is located. A CRES is a vertical framework consisting of one or more uprights supported by the ground. A CRES generally advertises the name of a building or property for sale or lease, property owner name, realtor information, telephone number, zoning information, and other information relating to the sale or lease of nonresidential property. 
(1)  A CRES shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. A CRES shall not exceed eight feet in height. The maximum width of a CRES shall not exceed four feet. 
(2)  A V-shape sign is not a CRES. 
(3)  A sign permit is required. 
(4)  A CRES requires removal within ten days after the sale or lease of a property or business. 
(5)  A CRES shall be located no closer than 15 feet to any property line. A maximum of one CRES per property shall be placed on a lot. For a property with more than 500 feet of single street frontage, more than one CRES is allowed, provided that each CRES is spaced a minimum of 200 feet from other signs. 
Conforming sign means a sign that is lawfully in place on a tract of land which complies with all regulations of this chapter. 
Construction (project development) sign means any temporary sign identifying the property owner, architect, contractor and engineer, landscape architect, opening dates, decorator or financiers engaged in the construction or improvement of the premises on which the sign is located. A construction sign is generally constructed of wood, metal or other similar materials. A construction sign is a vertical framework consisting of one or more uprights supported by the ground. 
(1)  A construction sign may include zoning information and advertise residential builders selling homes within a subdivision. 
(2)  In no case shall a construction sign contain information that pertains to off-premises uses. 
(3)  A sign permit is required. 
(4)  A construction sign must be removed when 95 percent of the buildings/homes/units in the commercial project or subdivision have been issued a certificate of occupancy. 
(5)  The construction sign shall be installed no closer than 15 feet to any property line. The minimum distance between a construction sign on one site and a construction sign on another construction site is 200 feet. 
(6)  A construction sign installed on a lot where a contractor requests a final inspection must be removed prior to the final inspection and issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(7)  The maximum area of a construction sign is 96 square feet. The maximum height of a construction sign is 16 feet. 
(8)  A maximum of one construction sign is allowed along a major street frontage per subdivision. When a subdivision has more than one major thoroughfare, one construction sign may be placed on each major thoroughfare. SeeSubdivision entrance sign. 
Copy means letters, characters, illustrations, logos, graphics, symbols, writing or any combination thereof, designed to communicate information of any kind, or to advertise, announce or identify a person, entity, business, business product, or to advertise the sale, rental or lease of premises. 
Copy area means the area within the sign containing any copy, including the area between separate lines of text and the area between text and any symbol, sign, logo or graphic, as well as the area between any symbols, signs, logos or graphics. 
Decorative display means a flag or banner that contains no name, initials, logos, insignia or similar items and does not represent a government or private organization. 
(1)  Decorative displays are not signs. 
(2)  Decorative displays shall not protrude over property lines. 
Developed property means a nonresidential property for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building official to occupy a building on the property, or a residential property for which a certificate of final acceptance has been issued by the city. 
Dilapidated means any surface element, background, or support of any sign that has finished materials that are missing, broken, bent, cracked, decayed, dented, harmful, hazardous, illegible, leaning, splintered, ripped, torn, twisted, or unsightly. 
Directional sign means any sign relating solely to internal pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation within a complex or project without any form of advertising. 
Electronic message center means any sign composed of lights, LEDs, or other form of illumination that displays a message or picture. An electronic message center is usually secondary to and part of the sign area of a larger freestanding sign for which a sign permit is required. Electronic message center signs shall be permitted subject to the applicable provisions within the zoning districts in which the sign is located as well as the following additional requirements: 
(1)  An electronic message center sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area. If an electronic message center is secondary to, incorporated into, or a component part of another type of sign, the fact that an electronic message center sign is so included shall not act to permit the type of sign of which it is a part to be enlarged beyond the dimensions and sign area allowed for the other type of sign. For example, the incorporation of an electronic message center into a "projecting sign," defined herein-below, shall not act to increase the allowable maximum area of a projecting sign beyond 12 square feet. 
(2)  Electronic message center signs shall display static images for a period of at least eight seconds. Electronic message signs shall not be animated, flash, travel, blink or fade. Electronic message signs may scroll from one image to the next image provided that the scrolling process is completed within two seconds and provided further that the images scrolled from and to remain static for a period of at least eight seconds. Otherwise, electronic message signs shall transition instantaneously from one static image to another static image. Rotary beacon lights, flashing lights, strobe lights, or similar devices shall not be attached to, nor be incorporated in, any sign. 
(3)  An electronic message center sign shall not exceed a brightness level of 0.3 foot-candles above ambient light as measured by the guidelines below: 
a.  At least 30 minutes past sunset, use a foot-candle meter to record the ambient light reading for the area. This reading is performed while the electronic message center sign is off or displaying all black copy. 
b.  Take a reading using foot-candle meter at five feet above grade and 45 feet from the electronic message center sign. 
c.  The meter shall be aimed directly at the electronic message center sign. 
d.  Turn the electronic message center sign on and illuminate entirely in white or red. 
e.  Take a reading using a meter at five feet above grade and 45 feet from the electronic message center sign. 
f.  The meter shall be aimed directly at the electronic message center sign. 
g.  If the difference between the two readings taken above is 0.3 foot-candles or lower, then the electronic message center sign is in compliance. If the result is greater than 0.3 foot-candles, the electronic message center sign is out of compliance and must be adjusted to meet standards or turned off until compliance can be met. 
h.  All measurements shall be taken in foot-candles. 
(4)  Letters shall be no less than four inches in height. 
(5)  Exception: Temporary signs required by government agencies for road and street repairs, public notifications, traffic control and similar activities. 
(6)  In all zoning districts, electronic message center signs shall come equipped with automatic dimming technology, which automatically adjusts the sign's brightness based on ambient light. 
(7)  Electronic message center signs have previously been prohibited in the city. Notwithstanding that prohibition, a few electronic message signs have been installed with or without permits. Electronic message signs that have been in continuous use for at least six months prior to the adoption of this ordinance that comply with the requirements of subsection (2) will be considered a lawful nonconforming sign, and may continue to be used for their current purpose and in their current dimensions only. 
(8)  Any change, upgrade, or retrofit of the previously existing electronic message center sign and/or sign cabinet shall require full compliance with the requirements of this provision. 
Erect or install means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, affix, display, apply, assemble or place in any manner upon including, but not limited to, the exterior of a building or structure. 
Exempt means a sign permit is not a requirement; however, compliance with all other Code provisions is required. 
Flag orflagpole means a piece of fabric or other flexible material, attached to a ground-supported staff on one end, used as a symbol of a nation, state, political subdivision, or organization. 
(1)  No sign permit is required. 
(2)  A flag and its ground-supported staff shall be located on private property behind the property line. 
(3)  At a property that contains a building with less than four floors, the maximum height of a ground-supported flagpole shall be 40 feet measured from the ground, with the maximum area of the flag not to exceed 60 square feet in area. At a nonresidential property that contains a building with four floors or more above ground, the maximum height of a flagpole shall be 60 feet measured from the ground, with the maximum area of a flag not to exceed 96 square feet in area. 
(4)  A maximum of four flags or flagpoles may be located on a property. 
(5)  A flag not displayed on a ground-supported staff shall meet the permit and display requirements of a banner. See Banner. 
(6)  Temporary flags for special interest groups (e.g., schools, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, and the like) may be placed at public parks during social and athletic events. 
Flashing sign means any sign that incorporates the use of a pulsating, blinking, revolving or rotating light source, including a light source that changes or alternates the color of the light in sequence. Flashing signs are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. See Illuminated signs. 
For sale, for rent, for lease orrealtor open house signs means a sign that advertises the availability for sale, rent or lease of a tract of land, a structure, or portions of a structure. 
(1)  No permit is required. 
(2)  Such signs are allowed in the right-of-way, a minimum three feet from the back of the curb, but not allowed in the median. 
(3)  Maximum sign area is six square feet. Maximum height is three feet. Maximum number of signs is one builder sign, one realtor sign and one open house sign. 
Freestanding sign means any type of sign supported by structures that are placed on or anchored in the ground, structurally independent of any building or other structure, and intended to be permanent. A sign permit is required. See Monument, pole, orpylon signs. 
Garage sale sign means an on-site temporary stake sign used to advertise a garage sale, yard sale, or estate sale at an occupied residential property that has obtained a certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  No permit is required. 
(2)  Garage sale signs shall be located only on the private property of the residence having the garage sale. 
(3)  Garage sale signs shall not be placed on a vehicle, fence, pole, tree, median, or railing. Garage sale signs shall not be balloons, wind devices or other types of signs, except stake signs, unless they meet the definition and requirements for that type of sign. 
(4)  A garage sale sign shall not exceed six square feet in area. The maximum height of a garage sale sign shall not exceed four feet. 
Grade means the ground elevation located at the base of a sign. 
Graffiti means pictures, words or slogans, images, or other artwork painted, drawn, scratched, carved, cut or applied in any other manner to exterior walls, fences, structures, vehicles, stone, statues, buildings, or other items in public view. Graffiti includes the illegal or unauthorized defacing of a building, wall, or other edifice or object by painting or otherwise marking it with words, pictures, symbols, advertising, logos, relations with a group, indecent or vulgar images or offensive language. Graffiti is prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
Grand opening andgrand opening sign mean a commemoration that promotes the opening of a new business and the sign commemorating such grand opening, respectively. 
(1)  A grand opening sign shall be permitted within 180 days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy from the building official. Grand openings occurring more than 180 days after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy require approval from the building official. 
(2)  A grand opening sign may only be located at the business that received a certificate of occupancy from the building official. 
(3)  The period for which a grand opening sign may be permitted shall not exceed 14 consecutive days in length. 
Grand opening balloons or balloon arrangement means a visible airtight, inflatable apparatus with a maximum size not to exceed three square feet in total area, in various shapes or designs, made of latex, Mylar, or other similar material that extends by, or is anchored to the ground by, a cord, rope, string, wire or other similar material. Grand opening balloon arrangements are balloons tied, twisted, or connected in such a manner to design creative figures, shapes, crescents, or other displays. 
(1)  Grand opening balloons or balloon arrangements may not exceed 20 feet in height. 
(2)  No sign permit is required. 
(3)  Grand opening balloons or balloon arrangements shall only be displayed during a grand opening at a business. Grand opening balloons or balloon arrangements require removal within two hours after the conclusion of the grand opening event. 
(4)  Grand opening balloons or balloon arrangements shall only be displayed within 20 feet of the public entrance to the business. 
(5)  Grand opening balloons or balloon arrangements shall not be placed or displayed in front of or at other businesses. Grand opening balloons or balloon arrangements shall not be attached to parking signs, bicycle stands, benches, trees, fences, poles, railings, vehicles, existing signage, display items, or other structures, or placed in required parking spaces. Grand opening balloons or balloon arrangements shall not block pedestrian or vehicular visibility or cause a safety hazard. 
Highway Commercial (HC) Zoning District. 
(1)  The area as established by Chapter 77, Zoning, as it currently exists or may be amended by ordinance, and as indicated on the city zoning map. 
(2)  All signs for the Highway Commercial (HC) Zoning District shall be regulated according to the provisions of this chapter. See section 56-54. 
HOA-neighborhood sign (HOA-NS) means a temporary stake sign used to convey residential subdivision board meetings, announcements, or other subdivision-related events to residents within the subdivision. 
(1)  No sign permit is required. 
(2)  An HOA-NS shall be located on private property within the subdivision. 
(3)  An HOA-NS shall not be located along any major thoroughfare or street artery outside of the subdivision screening wall or perimeter barrier. An HOA-NS shall not exceed six square feet in area. The maximum height of an HOA-NS shall not exceed four feet. 
Home improvement sign means an onsite temporary stake sign that advertises the name, telephone number, website address, or type of construction being performed on the property, such as a roof, fence, pool, paint, landscape, or other home improvement contractor. 
(1)  No sign permit is required. 
(2)  A home improvement sign shall be removed within 15 days of being initially installed or when the home improvement work is completed, whichever occurs first. A home improvement sign shall be located only on the lot at which the home improvement is occurring. 
(3)  A home improvement sign shall not be erected on private property closer than ten feet from the edge of any street pavement or designated roadway. A home improvement sign shall not exceed six square feet in area. A home improvement sign shall not exceed four feet in height. A maximum of one home improvement sign shall be erected on a lot. 
Homebuilder directional signs means a temporary sign which directs pedestrian or vehicular traffic to a particular home development or residential subdivision. 
(1)  An annual permit is required. 
(2)  A homebuilder directional sign may not be closer than 100 feet or more than 150 feet back from major intersections. 
(3)  Homebuilder directional signs are allowed in the right-of-way a minimum of three feet from the back of the curb. 
(4)  Homebuilder directional signs are not allowed in the median. 
(5)  Individual builder signs shall be spaced at least 100 feet apart. Homebuilder directional signs are allowed to be displayed from 12:00 noon Friday until 12:00 noon on the following Monday, with the following exceptions: from 12:00 noon Thursday until 12:00 noon Tuesday when a Friday or Monday falls on New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July or Christmas. 
(6)  Maximum 25 signs per builder. Maximum sign area is six square feet. Maximum height is three feet. 
Human sign means a sign held by or attached to a human being who stands or walks on the ground, on private property, at a business location. 
(1)  No sign permit is required. 
(2)  A human sign includes a person dressed in costume, both for the purpose of advertising or otherwise drawing attention to an individual, business, commodity, service, activity or product on the premises where the human sign is located. 
(3)  Human signs may not be off-premises from where a promotion, sale, event or the like takes place. Podiums, risers, stilts, vehicles, roofs, or other structures or devices shall not support a human sign. 
(4)  Human signs may be displayed 24 hours each and every continuing day until the promotion, sale, special event, or the like has ended. 
Illuminated sign means a sign designed or made that consists of lights, LEDs, or other form of illumination that displays a message or picture that does not scroll, fade, blink, flash, travel, or use any other means that does not provide constant illumination. See Electronic message center signs. 
Impounded sign means a sign that is legally removed by a city-authorized official, inspector, officer, other city employees or city-authorized persons in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Impounded signs may be recovered by the owner within 15 days from the date of impoundment by paying a fee as established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(2)  Illegal signs removed from public property, including the city's right-of-way, park property or other city-maintained area, may be immediately disposed of by the city in any manner it shall elect. See Public nuisance. 
Inflatable device sign (IDS) means a sign manufactured of plastic, cloth, canvas or other flexible or light fabric, inflated with air. An IDS only brings attention to a business, advertises the opening dates, sale of items offered or sold, date of sale, name of business, telephone number, or website information of a business. 
(1)  An IDS shall be secured directly to, and not suspended or floating from, the ground. 
(2)  An IDS shall not be placed on a roof, canopy, parking garage, or awning, or suspended or floating from any building or garage. 
(3)  The maximum height of an IDS shall not exceed 30 feet. One banner may be applied to an IDS. A banner applied to an IDS shall not count toward the allotted number of banners during a calendar year. The maximum area of a banner applied to an IDS shall not exceed 48 square feet. 
(4)  An IDS shall not be installed within 200 feet from another IDS measured in a straight line in any direction. 
(5)  Cloud buster balloons, blimps, wind devices or any similar type of apparatuses are not an IDS. SeeWind device. 
(6)  A sign permit is required. 
(7)  One IDS may be erected on a lot for not more than three 14-day periods per calendar year. A business can only display one IDS at a time. In the case of multiple businesses or tenants located on a single lot, each business is allowed to erect an IDS on the lot for not more than three 14-day periods per calendar year, provided that not more than one IDS is installed along any street frontage at the same time. One IDS per street frontage may be installed each time. 
(8)  An IDS shall not be located in required parking places, or driveways that provide access to parking spaces or fire lanes, nor shall any IDS or its securing devices encroach into a right-of-way. 
(9)  IDSs are only permitted within a nonresidential zoning district. 
Instructional/informational sign means a sign whose sole purpose is to provide instruction, information, or direction to the general public that is essential to the health, safety, and public welfare of the community. 
(1)  An instructional/informational sign shall contain no other message, copy, announcement, or decoration other than the essential instruction, information or direction, and shall not advertise or otherwise draw attention to an individual, business, commodity, service, activity, or product. Such signs shall include, but are not limited to, a sign identifying a property address, street address, restrooms, public telephones, handicap parking spaces, reserved parking spaces, freeze warning, no trespassing, no dumping, no loitering, no soliciting, beware of warning, water resource information, neighborhood watch informational, lock/take and hide informational, construction entrance or exit signage. 
(2)  Instructional/informational signs erected by the city, local, federal or state governments for the purpose of public instruction, warnings or other similar hazards, street or highway designation, traffic control and similar purposes incidental to public interests shall be considered an instructional/informational sign. An instructional/informational sign will include a sign of a warning, directive or instruction erected by a public utility company that operates under a franchise agreement with the city or signs required by federal, state or other local authorities. 
(3)  A sign permit is not required. 
(4)  There are no restrictions. 
(5)  The maximum area of an instructional/informational sign is 16 square feet. 
Lights means any form of light sources or lumens, whether by electromagnetic radiation, flame, reflection, or any other form of lumens, that act upon the retina of the eye and optic nerve that makes sight possible. 
Logo means any design, insignia or other marking of a company or product which is used in advertising to identify the company, business or product. 
Lot means an individual parcel or tract of land recorded by a plat or deed in the county clerk's office. 
Lot line means a line dividing one lot from another, or from a street or place. 
Menu board sign means a sign erected in conjunction with a use that incorporates a drive-thru or drive-in and generally used to provide service or product options and pricing for patrons who remain in a vehicle. 
(1)  Sign permit. A sign permit is required. 
(2)  Restrictions. A menu board sign is permitted only in conjunction with a nonresidential use or in a nonresidential zoning district. The minimum front building setback is 25 feet from the property line. 
(3)  Drive-thru menu board sign. A menu board sign shall be supported from the grade to the bottom of the sign having or appearing to have a solid base. The design, materials, and finish of a menu board sign shall match those of the buildings on the same lot. One menu board sign is permitted per drive-thru use on a lot. The maximum sign area of a menu board sign is 60 square feet. The maximum height of a menu board sign is six feet. 
(4)  Drive-thru pre-order sign. A drive-thru pre-order sign shall be supported from the grade to the bottom of the sign having or appearing to have a solid base. The design, materials, and finish of a drive-thru pre-order sign shall match those of the buildings on the same lot. One drive-thru pre-order sign is permitted at the entrance of the drive-thru lane on a lot. The maximum sign area of a drive-thru pre-order sign is 24 square feet in area. The maximum height of a drive-thru pre-order sign is six feet. 
(5)  Drive-in menu board sign. A drive-in menu board sign shall be supported from the grade to the bottom of the sign having or appearing to have a solid base. If the drive-in stalls are covered by a canopy, the drive-in menu board signage may be attached directly to the canopy support columns. The design, materials, and finish of a drive-in menu board sign shall match those of the buildings on the same lot. One drive-in menu board sign is permitted per ordering station. The maximum sign area of a drive-in menu board sign is nine square feet. The maximum height of a drive-in menu board sign is six feet. 
Mobile advertisement sign means an operable or inoperable vehicle with illuminated or nonilluminated panels, other devices, or appendages used to advertise, promote or draw attention to products, services, events, or other similar purposes, designed or intended to be relocated from time to time. A mobile advertisement includes signs on wheels or mobile structures such as, among other things, trailers, skids, banners, tents or other mobile structures. The primary purpose of a mobile advertisement sign is advertising and it is not used in the daily function of the business it advertises. 
(1)  A mobile advertisement is prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction for longer than 20 minutes in a 24-hour day. 
(2)  A mobile advertisement sign shall only be driven on public streets in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. A mobile advertisement sign is not a vehicle sign. SeePortable sign andvehicle sign. 
Model home sign means a sign used to identify a builder or contractor model house that is open to the public for inspection by customers and located within a residential district. A model home sign provides a builder's name, corporate logo, hours of operation, website information, and telephone number. 
(1)  A sign permit is required. 
(2)  A model home sign is permitted on a lot that has been issued a building permit for construction of a residential dwelling or temporary sales trailer. A model home sign is a vertical framework consisting of one or more uprights supported by the ground. One model home sign is allowed per residential lot. 
(3)  The minimum front setback of a model home sign shall be 15 feet from the property line. The minimum side or rear setback of a model home sign shall be ten feet from the property line. The maximum area of a model home sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. The maximum height of a model home sign shall not exceed ten feet. The average finished grade of the lot shall not be altered to increase the height of a model home sign. 
(4)  Model home signs shall not contain neon or prohibited lights. Exterior lighting must meet the requirements of the light and glare standards as defined in Chapter 77, Zoning, as it currently exists or may be amended by ordinance. 
Monument sign means a freestanding sign having a low profile, supported from the grade to the bottom of the sign having, or appearing to have, a solid base made of stone, concrete, metal, brick, routed wood planks or beams, or similar materials equivalent to the architecture of the building or complex. 
(1)  A sign permit is required. 
(2)  Maximum height for lots five acres or less is eight feet including base, measured from grade. 
(3)  Maximum sign area for lots five acres or less is 64 square feet. 
(4)  Maximum height for lots five acres or more is ten feet including base, measured from grade. 
(5)  Maximum sign area for lots five acres or more is 150 square feet. 
(6)  Setback is 15 feet from the curbline. If no curbline exists, the setback shall be 15 feet from the property line. 
(7)  Number of signs allowed is no more than one monument sign per lot, with the following exceptions: 
a.  For lots over five acres abutting a state highway which is not classified as a business route: Minimum 200 feet separation between other allowed permanent freestanding signs on the same lot. 
b.  For lots over 20 acres: Minimum 300 feet separation between other allowed permanent freestanding signs on the same lot. SeePylon sign. 
Moving sign means any sign, sign appendages or apparatus designed or made to move freely in the wind or designed or made to move by an electrical or mechanical device. Moving signs or any sign appendage that moves are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
Municipal banner means a temporary sign having characters, letters, or illustrations applied to plastic, cloth, canvas, or other light fabric or similar material, with the only purpose of such nonrigid material being for background used by the city, either acting alone or in cooperation with another person or entity, to promote the city, aid in economic development or economic activity in the city, promote citizenry and good will, promote awareness of happenings in the city, promote municipal-related places, activities, or events, or promote municipal-related information or an event or similar happening determined by the city to directly relate to the city's objectives in speaking on its own property. A municipal banner includes ornamentations and seasonal decorations. 
(1)  Written permission from the building official is required. There is no time restriction. 
(2)  A municipal banner may be erected on any city-owned property including, but not limited to, pavilions, fences, walls, vehicles, poles and light poles, or any other structure or apparatus approved by the building official. 
(3)  Municipal banners shall not be faded, tattered or torn. 
Mural means noncommercial pictures or artwork painted, drawn or applied on the exterior walls that do not depict or contain advertising, logos, or images of a product or service offered or sold on premises or off premises. 
(1)  Murals shall not be used to advertise products or services of any kind offered or sold off premises or on premises. Any form of wording or logo shall be of secondary nature to a mural. 
(2)  A sign permit is required. 
(3)  A detailed drawing of the proposed mural shall be submitted to the city with the sign permit application for review to determine conformity with all applicable city, state and federal laws, statutes and ordinances. 
(4)  The mural shall be executed in conformity to the detailed drawing of the proposed mural that is submitted to the city with the sign permit application. 
(5)  A mural shall be located above grade and below a roof and only within a nonresidential zoning district. Murals shall not be applied to a roof or other similar cover of a building or structure. The maximum area of a mural shall not exceed the length or height of the exterior wall on which it is painted, drawn or applied. A mural shall not face a residential neighborhood unless separated by a major thoroughfare. 
(6)  Murals are permitted only in conjunction with a nonresidential use or in a nonresidential zoning district. 
(7)  Murals shall not contain any matter that is obscene, or which offends the public morals, or that is inappropriate viewing material for anyone under the age of 18 years including, but not limited to: 
a.  Nudity or a state of nudity, specified anatomical areas and specified sexual activities, as those terms are defined in this section; 
b.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; and 
c.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid stage whether covered or uncovered. 
Nameplate sign or address sign means a sign showing only the name and address of the owner or occupant of the premises with a maximum area of two square feet. No sign permit is required. 
Neon tubing means a discharge tube containing neon that ionizes and glows with various colors when electric current is sent through it. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign and its supporting structure that does not conform to all or any portion of this chapter and was in existence and lawfully erected prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and was in existence and lawfully located and used in accordance with the provision of any prior ordinances applicable thereto, or which was considered legally nonconforming thereunder, and has since been in continuous or regular use, or was used on the premises at the time it was annexed into the city and has since been in regular and continuous use. A nonconforming sign may be maintained. 
(1)  The right to continue all nonconforming signs shall cease and such sign shall be removed whenever: 
a.  An approved application for a certificate of occupancy has been submitted or a certificate of occupancy is issued as provided in Chapter 77, Zoning, and a sign is associated with such occupancy. This provision applies to on-premises advertising signs only. 
b.  A sign is altered, moved or relocated without a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
c.  A sign leans such that an angle between the sign and the ground is 45 degrees or less. 
(2)  If a structurally sound nonconforming sign is destroyed in part or in whole by fire, storm, wind, or any other uncontrollable event, the sign may be rebuilt to its original state unless the cost to repair exceeds 60 percent of the replacement cost on the date of damage. If a nonconforming sign is destroyed and removed by any other means, the sign must be repaired or replaced in compliance with this article. 
(3)  Signs designated by official action of the city as having special historic or architectural significance are exempt from subsection (1) of this definition. 
(4)  A nonconforming general business sign situated on property purchased by the city may be relocated provided the sign is removed or rebuilt to conform to this chapter within one year by the sign owner or responsible party. Relocation is limited to the same physical sign with no increase in height, area, or change in other physical attributes. For purposes of this provision, a property acquisition initiated by the city does not include a right-of-way dedicated in the subdivision plat process. SeePublic nuisances. 
Notice, as required by this chapter, shall be sufficient if it is effected by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, by the United States Postal Service or by posting notice at the premises. 
Official sign means a sign erected by a governmental agency within its territorial jurisdiction for the purpose of carrying out an official duty or responsibility and including, but not limited to, traffic signs and signals, zoning signs, and street signs. Special lighting or banners celebrating seasonal or civic events sponsored or endorsed by the city council may be official signs. 
Off-premises or off-location sign means a sign that advertises, promotes, or pertains to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service, product, etc., at a location other than where the business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service, product, etc., is located. The property on which the off-premises or off-location sign is located must be: 
(1)  At least one acre in area; and 
(2)  Owned by the same person or entity that owns the lot or tract of land on which the business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service, product, etc., so advertised, promoted or appertaining to is located. 
On-premises or on-location means the property or location on which a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service, product, etc., is located. 
Owner means the owner of the sign, land or structure, or person responsible for erecting, altering, replacing, relocating, or repairing the sign or structure. 
Permanent sign means any attached or detached sign placed in a fixed location or affixed to a permanent structure of a maximum height and area. 
Pole sign means a sign erected on a vertical framework consisting of one or more uprights supported by the ground. Pole signs are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. SeeMonument signs, pylon signs, orwall signs. 
Political sign means a sign that relates to the election of a person to a public office, a political party, or a matter to be voted upon at an election called by a public body or contains primarily a political message. 
(1)  No sign permit required. 
(2)  Political signs shall be located only on private property with the consent of the property owner. 
(3)  A political sign shall not be erected closer than ten feet from the edge of the street pavement, located on any public property, or within a designated easement or right-of-way. Political signs shall not exceed eight feet in height measured from the ground to the highest point of the sign. Political signs shall not exceed 36 square feet in area. Political signs shall not be illuminated. Political signs shall not contain any moving elements or parts. Political signs shall not be dilapidated or cause a hazard. 
Portable sign means any sign with illuminated or nonilluminated panels, other devices, or appendages used to advertise, promote or draw attention to products, services, events, or other similar purposes, designed or intended to be relocated from time to time, whether or not it is permanently attached to a building or structure. Portable signs include signs on wheels or portable or mobile structures such as, among other things, trailers, skids, banners, tents or other portable structures. 
(1)  Portable signs are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, except as specifically allowed by other sections and subsections of this chapter. 
(2)  A portable sign is not a vehicle sign. See Mobile advertisement sign andvehicle sign. 
Prohibited lights means lights that blink, strobe, flash, fade, scroll, or are anything other than stationary or static, that attract the attention of the general public or cause light pollution or light trespass. 
(1)  Prohibited lights placed in any manner where the light is visible from the exterior of a business or other nonresidential use facility are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(2)  Exception. Federal, state and municipal authorized emergency devices or apparatuses, emergency vehicles, utility repair vehicles, fire and building code light devices for emergency or security purposes, or other required lighting for public safety purposes are not prohibited and must comply with all applicable Code provisions. 
Projecting sign means a sign attached to and projecting out from a building face or wall, generally at a right angle to the building. A projecting sign advertises the name, telephone number, street address, or website information of a business. 
(1)  A sign permit is required. 
(2)  A projecting sign is permitted only in conjunction with a nonresidential use or in a nonresidential district. When a projecting sign is constructed over a pedestrian sidewalk, a minimum of a nine-foot clearance shall be provided between the grade of the sidewalk and the lowest portion of a projecting sign. 
(3)  A projecting sign shall not extend above a building wall. 
(4)  The maximum area of a projecting sign is 12 square feet. 
Property line means the line denoting the limits of legal ownership of property. 
Public nuisance means any sign or similar device erected, constructed or placed in a manner that constitutes a traffic hazard, causes annoyance either to a limited number of persons or the general public, or causes a hazard or dangerous condition, any sign erected or constructed in or over any public right-of-way, or any prohibited or noncompliant sign. 
(1)  The city shall immediately remove any sign deemed to present an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare. Within ten days after the removal of the sign, the owner of the property on which the sign was located shall be notified of the reasons for the removal of such sign. 
(2)  Upon written notification to the owner, agent, or person having beneficial use of the land, building or structure upon which a neglected sign or an abandoned sign is located, such neglected sign shall be repaired by the owner, agent or person having beneficial use thereof or such abandoned sign shall be removed. The notification shall state that the offending sign shall be repaired or removed within ten days after written notification to do so. The notification shall further state that if the sign is not removed or repaired, a citation may be issued and the city may pursue any remedy available to it to remove or repair the sign, up to and including impoundment. See Impounded signs. 
Public view means visible from any public right-of-way, city right-of-way, or access easement. 
Pylon sign means a freestanding sign supported from the grade to the bottom of the sign having, or appearing to have, a solid base made of stone, concrete, metal, brick, or similar materials designed to complement the architecture of the building or complex. 
(1)  A sign permit is required. 
(2)  Pylon signs are prohibited in the Central Area (CA) Zoning District. 
(3)  Minimum height is eight feet. Maximum height is 20 feet including base, measured from grade. 
(4)  Maximum sign area is 150 square feet. 
(5)  Setback is 15 feet from the back of the curb. If no curbline exists, the setback shall be 15 feet from the property line. 
(6)  Number of signs allowed is no more than one pylon sign per lot, with the following exceptions: 
a.  For lots over five acres abutting a state highway which is not classified as a business route: Minimum 200 feet of separation between other allowed permanent freestanding signs on the same lot. 
b.  For lots over 20 acres: Minimum 300 feet of separation between other allowed permanent freestanding signs on the same lot. See Monument sign and pole sign. 
Quilt barn square sign means a wall sign, subject to the additional limitations set forth herein, constructed of metal that is square and attached to a facade of a building and which wall sign has the appearance of a square from a quilt. 
(1)  A sign permit is required. 
(2)  Only one quilt barn square sign is allowed on the primary structure on a particular lot. 
(3)  A quilt barn square sign shall be used for decorative purposes only. 
(4)  A quilt barn square sign shall not advertise any business or product. 
(5)  A quilt barn square sign shall not contain the name or logo of any business or product. 
(6)  A quilt barn square sign shall be erected against an exterior wall or erected parallel directly onto an exterior wall and extending not more than ¾ inches from the facade of any building to which it is attached, supported throughout its entire length by the building face. 
(7)  A quilt barn square sign can be up to two feet × two feet in size in the CA - Central Area Zoning District as depicted on the Official Zoning District Map of the City of Farmersville, Texas, as amended. A quilt barn square sign can be up to four feet × four feet in size in all other zoning districts of the city where otherwise permitted. 
(8)  A quilt barn square sign shall count 
(9)  Against the percentage of area or number of wall signs allowed on a building facade. 
Rear wall sign means a sign erected onto a wall with no main entrances or store fronts, and which does not face the front or side of the lot. 
(1)  A sign permit is required. 
(2)  A building may have a maximum of one rear wall sign. 
(3)  Rear wall signs shall only be permitted in the CA Zoning District. 
Revolving sign means any sign that turns, spins, or partially revolves or completely revolves 360 degrees on an axis. Revolving signs are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
Right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest. 
Roof (secondary) sign means a sign that is mounted to or projects from a canopy or secondary roof over the entry to a building, but does not project above the highest point of the building. A roof (secondary) sign may be attached to a parapet wall. 
(1)  A sign permit is required. 
(2)  In lieu of a wall sign, a roof (secondary) sign may be installed on a parapet wall, provided the parapet wall extends around the entire perimeter of the building at the same elevation. A roof (secondary) sign may be erected on a secondary canopy or a secondary roof over an entry to a building. 
(3)  The structural or mechanical elements of a roof (secondary) sign shall not be visible from six feet above the grade of adjacent streets. 
Roof sign means a sign mounted on and supported by the roof portion of a building, or above the uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a building, and which is wholly or partially supported by such building or a sign that is painted directly to or applied on the roof or top of a building or structure. 
(1)  A sign that is mounted on mansard facades, pent eaves or architectural projections, such as canopies or the fascia (wall) of a building or structure, shall not be considered to be a roof sign. 
(2)  Roof signs are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
Sandwich board sign means a temporary sign constructed of two pieces of wood, metal, or other similar material connected at the top by hinges or similar devices and may collapse when the connecting devices are overextended or the two pieces are against one another. 
(1)  A sign permit is not required. 
(2)  Sandwich board signs are only allowed to be displayed during normal daytime business hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(3)  The maximum height is four feet. The maximum width is two feet. The maximum copy area is eight square feet per side. 
(4)  One sandwich board is allowed per primary entrance to a commercial structure. A sandwich board sign must provide an unobstructed pedestrian clearance of at least four feet in width. 
(5)  A sandwich board sign shall not be placed in any median. A sandwich board sign shall not be placed within a utility or right-of-way easement. A sandwich board sign shall not be illuminated or contain any moving parts other than the fasteners holding the faces of the sandwich board sign together. 
(6)  A sandwich board sign shall not be placed in any manner to interfere with vehicular traffic or cause a potential hazard. Sandwich board signs are allowed only in the CA Zoning District. SeeSigns in Central Area Zoning District and A-frame sign. 
School sign means an on-site temporary stake sign used to convey school registrations, enrollments, open houses, award ceremonies, PTA meetings, or other school-related events or functions for a city-based public or private educational facility to which the information pertains. 
(1)  A school sign excludes information pertaining to dates, times, and locations of scheduled athletic games. 
(2)  No sign permit is required. 
(3)  A school sign may be erected up to seven days prior to the event and shall be removed no more than 48 hours after the conclusion of the meeting or event. 
(4)  With permission of the owner, a school sign may be placed at a private or public school or at an improved property that has received a certificate of occupancy. A school sign erected on private property shall be no closer than ten feet from the edge of any street pavement. 
(5)  The maximum area of a school sign shall not exceed six square feet. The maximum height of a school sign shall not exceed four feet. 
(6)  A school sign shall not contain balloons, streamers, flags, pennants, or wind devices. 
Security sign. 
(1)  The term "security sign" means a sign which identifies emergency telephone numbers, hours, and security information. 
(2)  No sign permit is required. 
Sign means any medium, including its structure and component parts, including a name, number, identification, description and announcement, declaration, demonstration, device, display, flag, banner, pennant, illustration, beacon, light or insignia, and structure supporting any of the same, affixed directly or indirectly to or upon any building, structure, or vehicle, or erected or maintained upon a piece of land, which directs attention to any object, project, product, service, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business. The term "sign" shall also include any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, or symbol to communicate information of any kind to the public. 
Sign area means the gross surface area of the sign, including a single surface of a sign with messages on both sides, the sum of all surfaces where two or more signs share a single structure, the gross surface area of both faces of a V-shaped sign not to exceed a 45 degree angle, and the copy area of a monument sign. 
(1)  The square footage of a sign made up of letters, words or symbols within a frame shall be determined from the outside edge of the frame itself. 
(2)  The square footage of a sign composed of only letters, words or symbols shall be determined from imaginary straight lines drawn around the entire copy or grouping of such letters, words, or symbols. 
(3)  Double-faced signs shall be calculated as the area of one side only. 
(4)  Three-dimensional or multifaceted signs shall be calculated as the maximum area visible from any single direction at any point in time. 
(5)  In the case of an irregularly shaped sign, the sign area is calculated by enclosing the extreme limits of the sign by no more than four rectangles. The sum of the area of the rectangles shall be the gross surface area. The maximum allowable area is reduced by ten percent for the second and each subsequent rectangle used in the calculation. 
Sign height means the vertical height of a sign measured from the sign grade to the highest point of the sign or its structure. 
Sign setback means the horizontal distance between the closest portion of a sign, whether the support structure or edge of the sign area, and the front or side property line, as measured from that part of the sign, including its extremities and supports, nearest any point on an imaginary vertical plane projecting vertically from the front or side property line. 
Special event means a festival, fair, tournament, or other similar happening. 
(1)  Should city staff question a proposed activity or celebration as a valid special event, a description of the proposed activity or celebration will be prepared by the applicant and forwarded to the city council by city staff for the city council's consideration of the event as a special event. 
(2)  Business promotions, such as grand openings and sales events, shall not be classified as a special event. 
Special event signs means temporary signs, banners, pennants, or lights as may be authorized for a special event. 
(1)  No sign permit is required. 
(2)  Signage associated with a special event shall be erected no earlier than seven days prior to the event and removed no later than 24 hours after the conclusion of the event. 
Stake sign means a temporary directional sign with a maximum height of three feet and a maximum copy area of six square feet with an end for driving into the ground. A stake sign includes, but is not limited to, garage sale, realtor/open house, homebuilder directional, for rent, for sale, and similar signage. 
Subdivision identity/entrance sign means a sign mounted to a screening wall or engraved into a masonry block which identifies a residential development or a planned development, whether residential or noncommercial, and generally refers to the platted name of the subdivision or planned development. 
(1)  A sign permit is required. 
(2)  A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a subdivision identity/entrance sign on a property until a final plat is approved by the planning and zoning commission for development of the property. 
(3)  All subdivision identity/entrance signs shall be located within the platted limits of a residential subdivision to which it pertains. Subdivision identity/entrance signs may be in the form of a sign mounted to a screening wall that does not project from the fascia of the wall more than one inch. Subdivision identity/entrance signs are limited to two signs per entrance. 
Temporary religious sign means a temporary stake sign used to provide the name of and direction to a location occupied by a religious organization or religious group that temporarily operates in a school or other facility. A temporary religious sign identifies the meeting location and address, website information, hours of service, and telephone number of a religious organization or group. 
(1)  A sign permit is not required. 
(2)  A temporary religious sign may be erected during times of worship, provided that the sign is placed no earlier than two hours prior to worship and removed no later than two hours after worship. 
(3)  A temporary religious sign shall be placed on private property with consent of the property owner. Temporary religious signs shall be erected on private property not closer than ten feet from the edge of any street pavement or designated roadway or right-of-way. 
(4)  The maximum area of a temporary religious sign shall not exceed six square feet. The maximum height of a temporary religious sign shall not exceed four feet. 
(5)  A temporary religious sign shall not contain balloons, streamers, flags, pennants, or wind devices. SeeBanner signs. 
Temporary sign means any sign used to display information that relates to a land use, or a sign with a limited duration which is not rigidly and permanently installed into or on the ground, attached to a building, or as identified in this chapter. 
Traffic lights andsignage mean any traffic-related sign, light, apparatus, or device installed and which provides information to vehicular drivers and pedestrian traffic. 
(1)  No sign permit is required. 
(2)  Traffic-related signs, lights, apparatuses, or devices require approval from the engineering department, which includes the review and approval of design, size, placement, and any other specifications or requirements prior to installation from the traffic engineer. 
(3)  Exemption. Signs, lighting, apparatuses, or devices installed or required by federal or state laws are exempt from these provisions. 
V-shaped sign means a sign that fronts two street frontages with more than five degrees of parallel. V-shaped signs are prohibited in the city. 
Vacant building sign. 
(1)  No sign shall be permitted to remain on the lot of, or on, any vacant building, except a sign regarding the lease or sale of the building and property to which it pertains, or a sign which is under lease from an owner or his authorized agent when such sign is maintained by a person operating under his own bond. 
(2)  Vacant building signage is prohibited in the city. 
Variance request means an official written request to the planning and zoning commission to allow exceptions to the regulations or requirements of this chapter. 
(1)  Variance requests shall be in writing and authorized by the property owner. 
(2)  Variance requests shall be heard by the planning and zoning commission at a public hearing. 
(3)  An application for such a request may be obtained from the city. 
Vehicle means any operable or inoperable motorized machine on wheels, treads, or runners by which any persons, materials, commodity, or property is or may be transported. 
Vehicle sign means any sign attached to any vehicle, truck, car, bus, trailer, boat, recreational vehicle, motorcycle or any other vehicle. 
(1)  Any vehicle, whether operable or not, shall not be parked or decorated where the primary purpose is to use the vehicle as a sign. 
(2)  Vehicle signs shall exclude bumper stickers and state required registration or inspection stickers. 
(3)  No sign permit is required. 
(4)  Vehicle signs are allowed 24 hours each and every continuing day. Vehicles signs are permitted provided the vehicle is operable, currently registered, and licensed to operate on public streets and actively used in the daily function of the business to which such sign relates. 
Vending machine sign means a sign attached to or incorporated as part of a vending machine or gasoline pump, and generally advertises products dispensed, offered or sold from the vending machine or gasoline pump. 
(1)  No sign permit is required. 
(2)  Vending machine signs may be displayed 24 hours each and every day. 
(3)  Vending machines displaying vending machine signs shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(4)  Vending machine signs shall be directly attached to a vending machine or gasoline pump. Vending machine signs shall be flat and not project from the vending machine or gasoline pump. Unless otherwise required by federal, state or local laws, signs that promote products or other items shall not be attached to light poles, canopy supports, rails, trees, parking signs, vehicles, or other objects. 
Wall sign means any sign erected against an exterior wall or erected parallel directly onto a wall. A wall sign is a sign erected parallel to and extending not more than 12 inches from the facade of any building to which it is attached, supported throughout its entire length by the building face. A wall sign identifies the name or logo of a business. 
(1)  A sign permit is required. 
(2)  Wall signs are permitted only in conjunction with a nonresidential use or in a nonresidential zoning district. 
(3)  Maximum wall coverage for signs placed on the front or side of a building, which wall contains a main entrance into the building, above the highest opening (window or door), shall be limited to 25 percent of the area, measured vertically from the highest opening (window or door) up to the highest point of the wall, and horizontally from outside corner to outside corner of such wall, including openings. 
(4)  Maximum wall coverage for signs placed on the front or side of a building, which wall contains a main entrance into the building, below the top of the first floor opening (window or door), shall be limited to ten percent of the area, measured vertically from the top of the highest opening (window or door) down to the sidewalk, and horizontally from outside corner to outside corner of such wall, including openings. 
(5)  Maximum wall coverage for rear wall signs shall be limited to 15 percent of the rear wall surface, measured vertically from the bottom of the wall to the roof, and horizontally from outside corner to outside corner of the rear wall. 
Wind device means any pennant, streamer, spinner, balloon, cloud buster balloon, inflatable objects or similar devices made of cloth, canvas, plastic or any flexible material designed to float or move, or which moves freely in the wind, with or without a frame or other supporting structure, used for the purpose of advertising or drawing attention to a business, commodity, service, sale or product. 
(1)  No permit is required. 
(2)  Wind devices are allowed for temporary events only. Temporary events include business grand openings, festivals, fairs, tournaments, or other similar happenings. 
(3)  Wind devices shall be erected no earlier than seven days prior to an event and removed no later than 24 hours after the conclusion of the event. 
(4)  Wind devices are allowed for not more than three 14-day periods per calendar year. 
(5)  Flags and grand opening balloons or balloon arrangements shall not be considered a wind device. 
Window sign means any sign, poster, window slick, or other similar displayed item, excluding banners, located on the internal or external surface of a window, for the purpose of advertising a business's name, telephone number, website information, services, commodities, or products offered or sold that are available within the building, that is visible from a public street or sidewalk. 
(1)  No sign permit is required. 
(2)  The maximum area of a window sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the window where the sign is displayed. Illuminated window signs shall not exceed 25 percent of a window and shall not be closer than three feet from a public door. A window sign may be displayed 24 hours each and every continuing day. 
(3)  Window signs may be displayed and installed on the inside or exterior of a window. 
(4)  Illuminated and nonilluminated window signs or their appendages shall not blink, strobe, fade, flash, scroll, or move in any manner. Illuminated window signs shall remain static and stationary. 
Yard sign means a temporary stake sign used to publicize the arrival of a newborn, participation of a family member in a school activity or sport, the presence of a security system, animals, and seasonal decorations. 
(1)  No sign permit is required. 
(2)  Yard signs may be erected 24 hours each and every day. 
(3)  Yard signs shall be located only on lots containing an occupied single-family, two-family, or multifamily dwelling. Yard signs shall be erected no closer than ten feet from the street pavement. 
(4)  Signs advertising the presence of a home security system shall not exceed one square foot in area. 
(5)  Signs advertising the arrival of a newborn, the participation of a family member in a school activity or sport, or the presence of animals shall not exceed four square feet in area. 
(6)  Seasonal decorations are excluded from place and manner requirements. 
Zoning sign means a temporary sign erected to publicize a request to zone or rezone a property. 
(1)  No sign permit is required. 
(2)  The zoning sign shall be placed in a location visible from all streets adjacent to the property included in the zoning request. One zoning sign shall be erected adjacent to each street frontage of the property. The area of a zoning sign shall be 16 square feet. The width of a zoning sign shall be four feet. 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, app. A, § 3-1, 10-9-2007; Ord. No. O-2013-0611-001, § 2, 6-11-2013; Ord. No. O-2016-0126-002, § 2, 1-26-2016; Ord. No. O-2018-0911-001, § 2, 9-11-2018)  
Sec. 56-32. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  Certain signs are prohibited in the city, including any sign which: 
(1)  Uses any combination of forms, words, colors, or lights to imitate emergency or traffic signs or signals; 
(2)  Is obsolete or abandoned; 
(3)  Is not specifically permitted by this chapter; 
(4)  Exceeds the maximum height and area requirements established in this chapter and any temporary sign exceeding the time limits established in this chapter; 
(5)  Is not referenced in or governed by this chapter; 
(6)  Is erected or installed without the issuance of a permit (if a permit was required), either prior to or after the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; 
(7)  Emits odor or visible matter; 
(8)  Is erected or installed in or over a right-of-way or access easement, unless permitted within this chapter; 
(9)  Does not comply with this chapter or applicable municipal ordinances, or those which do not comply with federal or state laws; 
(10)  Is a pole sign; 
(11)  Is an off-premises sign; or 
(12)  Is a vehicular sign. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign any obscene, indecent or immoral matter, such as will offend public morals or decency. 
(c)  No person shall place or suspend from any building, light pole, utility pole, structure, sidewalk, parkway, and driveway or parking area, any goods, wares, merchandise or other advertising or display of such items other than a sign, as defined, regulated and permitted by this chapter. 
(d)  No cloth, paper, banner, flag, device or other similar advertising matter shall be permitted to be attached to, suspended from or be allowed to hang from, any sign, building or structure, when the same shall create a public nuisance or danger. 
(e)  No person shall attach any sign, paper or other material, or paint, stencil, or write any name, number (except address numbers) or otherwise mark on any sidewalk, curb, gutter, street, utility pole, public building, fence or structure, except as otherwise allowed by this chapter. 
(f)  No person shall paste, stick, tack, nail or otherwise place any advertisement, handbill, placard or printed, pictured or written matter or thing for any purpose upon any fence, railing, sidewalk or public property, including trees thereon. 
(g)  It shall also be unlawful for any person to scatter or throw any handbills, circulars, cards, tear sheets or any other advertising device of any description, along or upon the street or sidewalk in the city. 
(h)  No sign shall be illuminated to such intensity or in such a manner as to cause a glare of brightness to a degree that it constitutes a hazard or nuisance to traffic. Moving, flashing, intermittently lighted, color changing, beacons, undulating, swinging, rotating, revolving or similarly constructed signs shall not be allowed, except for time and temperature on an otherwise permitted sign, except as signs hung or displayed inside a window. 
(i)  No rear lighted, or internally lighted, plastic signs shall be allowed in the Central Area Zoning District. 
(j)  No portion of any sign shall be erected on or over public property, unless the same is erected by the city, or with the permission of the city. 
(k)  Any sign erected on a vertical framework supported by and located immediately and entirely over the roof of a building is prohibited. 
(l)  No portion of any sign shall be painted directly on to the exterior wall or facade of any building or structure other than on a window or door. 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, app. A, § 3-2, 10-9-2007)  
Secs. 56-33—56-52. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 56-53. - Signs for the Central Area (CA) Zoning District. 
(a)  Policy and purpose. 
(1)  The Central Area (CA) Zoning District is a unique historical and cultural environment that provides a certain charm and aura to the city which cannot be replaced and is worthy of preservation. 
(2)  In an age of uniform franchise signs and generic, plastic box signs, historic signs and even new historic styled signs (signs which emulate or imitate historic signage) often attract by their individuality. Historic signage typically allowed buyers and sellers to communicate quickly using images that were the medium of daily life. By communicating names, addresses, prices, products, images and other fragments of daily life, historic styled signs also bring the past to life. 
(b)  Design considerations. In order to preserve the benefits of the CA, all signs in the CA shall have a design appearance compatible with, reflective of, and incorporating materials and design elements utilized in, the original building design, time era, and historic downtown character of the CA. The following points should be considered when designing and constructing new signs for structures in the CA: 
(1)  New signs should emulate or imitate historic signage. The simple signs that were originally used on these buildings serve as the best example for new signs. 
(2)  Signs should be viewed as part of an overall graphics system for the historic building to which they are attached. Signs should work with the building, rather than against it. 
(3)  New signs should respect the size, scale and design of the historic building. 
(4)  Sign placement is an important decision and new signs should not obscure significant architectural features and building elements or design details of a historic building. 
(5)  New signs should also respect neighboring buildings and add to the tapestry and appeal of the CA. New signs should not overpower the historic building to which they are attached or adjacent structures. 
(6)  Sign materials should be compatible with the historic character of the building and the CA. Materials characteristic of the building's period and style, used in contemporary designs, can form effective new signs. 
(7)  New signs should be attached to the building carefully to prevent damage to historic fabric and to ensure the safety of pedestrians. Fittings should penetrate mortar joints rather than brick, for example, and sign loads should be properly calculated and distributed. 
(c)  Sign standards. 
(1)  Allowable signs in the CA include general business signs, incidental signs, menu boards, nameplates, wall signs and rear wall signs. 
(2)  Signs shall be designed for pedestrian and slow moving traffic. Big does not mean better. 
(3)  Signs shall be flat signs with an allowable thickness of no more than four inches, measured from the wall surface to that portion of the face of the sign which projects furthest away from the building wall. 
(4)  Signs should be placed under the lower cornice. No sign shall be allowed above the top of the second-story windows of a building. 
(5)  Signs may be placed on the building's fascia or on the sign frieze, which is the horizontal flat bank above the store windows. Such signs may be on a flat signboard or made of individual letters or symbols attached to the building's fascia or sign frieze. 
(6)  Signs may be placed on an awning. The following shall apply: 
a.  Only one awning sign is allowed per building. 
b.  Awnings shall be positioned to emphasize special shapes or details of the facade, draw attention to shop entrances, or to emphasize a display window. 
c.  Awning signs positioned along the first floor level of the facade shall be no less than eight feet from the sidewalk to the sign. 
d.  Awning signs shall not extend beyond the awning or canopy projection. 
e.  Awnings and awning signs shall not be made of metal, shiny plastic, barrel or square extension awning, or internally-illuminated vinyl awning. 
(7)  Sandwich boards are allowed provided they adhere to the following criteria: 
a.  One sign per primary entrance; 
b.  May extend out a maximum of two feet from the building, with the maximum of six square feet of sidewalk area used. 
(8)  Projecting signs that hang over the sidewalk are discouraged because they often obscure individual buildings and interrupt the visual harmony of the street. A projecting sign that is attached to a wall and extends out from a building may be used provided it meets the following criteria: 
a.  The projecting sign shall not extend more than 15 inches in whole or in part horizontally or diagonally beyond the surface of the building to which it is attached; 
b.  The projecting sign shall be placed along the first floor level of the facade; 
c.  Projecting signs must have a minimum clearance above the sidewalk of eight feet and shall not extend 12 feet or more above the sidewalk nor above the roof line of the building to which it is affixed; 
d.  The projecting sign shall be of a unique shape and design or symbolize the services offered within the business being advertised, such as a bowl and trestle advertising a drug store or pharmacy; and 
e.  The projecting sign shall be no more than four inches thick. 
(9)  Materials and colors shall be harmonious with the architecture of surrounding structures in the CA. 
(10)  Sign materials should be durable and easy to maintain. 
a.  Appropriate and acceptable sign materials include: 
1.  Painted or carved wood; 
2.  Carved wooden letters; 
3.  Galvanized sheet metal; 
4.  Porcelain enamel; 
5.  Slate, marble, or sandstone; 
6.  Gold leaf; 
7.  Gilt, painted, stained, or sandblasted glass; or 
8.  Stained glass. 
b.  Plastic shall not be allowed unless it is determined to have the appearance of one of the appropriate sign materials identified herein. 
(11)  A sign in the CA shall not visually dominate the structure to which it belongs or call undue attention to it. 
(12)  No Day-Glo, fluorescent, neon or brilliant bright colored signs shall be allowed in the CA. Standard or traditional colors shall be used. 
(13)  No rear lighted, or internally lighted, plastic signs shall be allowed in the CA. 
(14)  No sign shall contain any moving parts or be lit from behind or internally unless and except it is an historically accurate reproduction of a sign previously existing in the specific location proposed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, app. A, § 4-1, 10-9-2007  
Sec. 56-54. - Zoning districts. 
The zoning district in which the sign is located is established as indicated in Chapter 77, Zoning, and on the city zoning map. The zoning provisions, as contained in Chapter 77, Zoning, and the zoning map may be amended from time to time. 
(1)  Single-family residential district. Includes areas located in districts zoned SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, and PD-Planned Development. 
(2)  Multifamily residential district. Includes areas located in districts zoned 2-F Duplex, MF-1, MF-2 Multifamily, and PD-Planned Development. 
(3)  Office and office technology district. Includes areas located in districts zoned O-Office, CA-Central Area, HC-Highway Commercial, and PD-Planned Development. 
(4)  Commercial/retail district. Includes areas located in districts zoned GR-General Retail, NS-Neighborhood Services, HC-Highway Commercial, CA-Central Area, and PD-Planned Development. 
(5)  Industrial district. Includes areas located in districts zoned L1-Light Industrial, L2-Heavy Industrial, and PD-Planned Development. 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, app. A, § 4-2, 10-9-2007)  
Secs. 56-55—56-81. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INSPECTIONS AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 56-82. - Inspection; purpose and method. 
The building official is authorized to perform an inspection of all signs. The purpose of the inspection is to ensure that the sign has been constructed in accordance with this article, other applicable Code provisions, and the applicable permits. The method and time of such inspections shall be determined by the building official 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, app. A, § 5-1, 10-9-2007  
Sec. 56-83. - Sign specifications; design and other requirements. 
(a)  Compliance with comprehensive zoning ordinance, International Building Code, National Electrical Code, and other ordinances. All sign structures shall comply with Chapter 77, Zoning, as it currently exists or may be amended by ordinance, the International Building Code, the National Electrical Code, and other Code provisions, as they currently exist or may be amended by ordinance. If the standards as described in this subsection are more restrictive than another Code provision or code, the provisions of this article shall apply. 
(b)  Visibility. All signs shall observe all visibility requirements. Signs shall not be placed within visibility triangles, corner clips, or easements as defined in the Thoroughfare Plan or Design Manual, as they currently exist or may hereafter be amended. Signs shall not create a hazard. 
(c)  Signs posted in specified areas. Unless otherwise permitted within this article, no person shall post or cause to be posted, attach or maintain a sign upon any: 
(1)  City-owned property or right-of-way without written permission of the city manager or his designated representative; 
(2)  Utility easement. Should a property owner be able to demonstrate to the city engineer or franchise utility company that there is no other viable location for a sign other than a utility easement, a sign may be located within the utility easement subject to written approval from the city engineer or franchise utility company and subject to the providing of a letter to the city releasing the city of any liability for repair or replacement of a sign damaged by work occurring within the utility easement; 
(3)  Tree, utility pole or structure, street sign, rail, or any fence; 
(4)  Fence, railing or wall, except in accordance with section 56-31; or 
(5)  Sidewalk within the right-of-way or sidewalk easement, curb, gutter, or street, except for house numbers or fire lane designation. 
(d)  Signs attached to fire escapes. No sign shall be attached in any manner to any fire escape or to the supporting members of any fire escape, nor shall it be guyed to or supported by any part of a fire escape. 
(e)  Accumulation of rainwater. All signs shall be constructed to prevent the accumulation of rainwater in the sign. 
(f)  Location near telephone cable, power line, or street light. No sign shall be erected nearer than two feet from any telephone cable, power line or any street light standard. 
(g)  Signs not to block or interfere with exits or windows, or pedestrian and vehicular traffic. No sign shall be erected to block, partially block, or interfere, in any way, neither with a required means of exit from any building nor with any window. No sign shall block, interfere, or otherwise hinder pedestrian or vehicular traffic on a public sidewalk, a public thoroughfare, a fire lane easement, or a driveway required to access parking. 
(h)  Glass signs over public property or pedestrian area. Signs constructed of glass or other materials which may shatter upon impact are prohibited over a public right-of-way or pedestrian area. 
(i)  Assumed wind load for design purposes. For the purposes of design of structural members in signs, an assumed wind load of 20 pounds per square foot shall be used. 
(j)  Multiple signs on a property or building. The permitting of a sign on a property or building shall not preclude the permitting of other types of signs on a property or building, unless the signs are expressly prohibited herein. 
(k)  Exemptions. Signs located within a building, with the exception of window signs, shall not be regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, app. A, § 5-2, 10-9-2007)  
Secs. 56-84—56-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCES 
 
Sec. 56-110. - Variance procedures. 
The city council (a type A general law municipality) being authorized to act as, and acting as, the board of adjustment for the city pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 211 of the Local Government Code is hereby designated to perform the functions of the sign board of appeals (the board). Refer to section 7-1 for more information regarding the sign board of appeals. 
(1)  Requests for variances to sign regulations and allegations of errors in orders, decisions, or determinations by an administrative official in the administration of the sign regulations shall be made in writing by the applicant and heard by the board at a public hearing. An application for such appeal may be obtained from the city. The board shall hear, if possible, the request for a variance or the allegation of error within 30 days after receipt of a completed application and applicable application fees. The application will require written authorization from the property owner before being filed. 
(2)  Before the tenth day before the date of the public hearing conducted by the board, written notice of the public hearing shall be sent by its deposit in the United States mail to each owner, as indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax roll of property within 200 feet of the property on which the variance is proposed. The notice shall include a description of the time and place of such hearing, a description of the location of the subject property, and a description of the requested variance. In addition, the notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the city stating the time and place of such hearing, a minimum of ten days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
(3)  In order to approve a request for a variance, the board shall determine whether the request meets three of the following four criteria: 
a.  The proposed sign shall not adversely impact the adjacent property (visibility, size and the like); 
b.  The proposed sign shall be of a unique design or configuration; 
c.  The variance is needed due to restricted area, shape, topography, or physical features that are unique to the property or structure on which the proposed sign would be erected; 
d.  The variance will substantially improve the public convenience and welfare and does not violate the intent of this article. 
(4)  A variance shall not be approved for a sign that is prohibited by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, app. A, § 6-1, 10-9-2007; Ord. No. 2007-58, § 1, 12-11-2007)  
Secs. 56-111—56-133. - Reserved.  
Chapter 59 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal powers relating to public health, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 122.006; minimum standards of sanitation and health protection measures, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.001 et seq.; local regulation of sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq.; Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.001 et seq.; Solid Waste Resource Recovery Financing Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 362.001 et seq.; Comprehensive Municipal Solid Waste Management, Resource Recovery, and Conservation Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 363.001 et seq.; Texas Litter Abatement Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 59-1—59-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND RECYCLING 
 
Sec. 59-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
18-gallon recycling bin lid (hereinafter referred to as "bin lid") means the bin lid that is used for an 18-gallon recycling bin. 
Commingled items means all recycling items placed in a recycling bin, such as: 
(1)  Flattened plastic bottles or containers coded no. 1, no. 2, no. 3, no. 4, no. 5 and no. 7; 
(2)  Unbroken glass bottles of all colors; 
(3)  Flattened aluminum cans; and 
(4)  Crimped tin cans. 
Construction materials means waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations. 
Dumpster means a metal solid waste receptacle designed to be lifted and emptied mechanically for use primarily at commercial and industrial businesses and construction sites. The term dumpster means and includes a "roll-off" or "roll-off dumpster." 
Green 18-gallon recycling bin (hereinafter referred to as "recycling bin") means the one recycling bin which the contractor will provide and deliver to each residential unit. The recycling bin size will be 18 gallons and is to be used to contain commingled items. 
Infections or hazardous waste means any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article which is designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the appropriate state agency to be infectious or hazardous as those terms are defined by or pursuant to federal or state law. 
Junk mail means slick and nonslick advertisements and catalogs delivered to the residential unit by the United States Postal Service. 
Paper items means the paper items which are collected for recycling, such as: 
(1)  Dry, non-yellow newsprint (with slicks and ads); 
(2)  Junk mail; 
(3)  Telephone books, magazines and catalogs. 
Polycart means a rubber wheeled container, having a minimum capacity of 60 gallons, designed for automated or semiautomated solid waste collection systems. 
Roll-off or roll-off dumpster means a rectangular dumpster that usually has an open top, but not always, and utilizes wheels to facilitate rolling the dumpster into place. Roll-off dumpsters are designed to be transported by special roll-off trucks. Some roll-offs, which are not open top are used with large-scale trash compactors. 
(Code 2004, § 11.113.1; Ord. No. O-2014-1216-002, § 2, 12-16-2014)  
Sec. 59-20. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2004, § 11.113.11; Ord. No. 2001-19, 4-10-2001)  
Sec. 59-21. - Garbage collection franchise. 
Garbage and refuse shall be collected in the city by an independent contractor who shall operate under a franchise granted by the city. 
(Code 2004, § 11.113.2)  
Sec. 59-22. - Curbside recycling collection by independent contractor. 
Recyclable materials for curbside collection shall be collected in the city by an independent contractor who shall operate under an agreement with the city. 
(Code 2004, § 11.113.3)  
Sec. 59-23. - Collection service mandatory. 
(a)  Residential. All residents within the city shall be required to use the waste disposal services offered directly by the city under its authorized contractor. 
(b)  Commercial. 
(1)  Any commercial customer who has electric or water service is required to have garbage service through a city-authorized contractor and shall pay the required fee for this service. 
(2)  The size of the dumpster used shall be at the discretion of the customer, with the following exceptions: 
a.  Commercial customers may share dumpsters provided that a sharing agreement is filed in writing at city hall by the party responsible for payment of the dumpster bill. Such party shall be responsible for collection from any commercial customer sharing his dumpster. 
b.  Commercial customers who provide evidence that an eight-yard container is not adequate to handle their garbage collection needs may contract independently for roll-off (30-yard or 42-yard) container service. 
(Code 2004, § 11.113.4; Ord. No. 95-26, 9-26-1995; Ord. No. 97-17, 9-9-1997)  
Sec. 59-24. - Polycart and recycling container use regulations. 
(a)  Polycart use. To the maximum extent possible, all garbage and refuse shall be placed inside polycarts. Polycarts shall be kept closed to prevent littering and to render the contents inaccessible to insects, rodents, and other animals. The following apply: 
(1)  Construction materials shall not be placed in polycarts. 
(2)  Grass clippings and leaves may be commingled with garbage or trash. 
(3)  Cleanliness and integrity of the polycart shall be maintained by the user. 
(b)  Recycling bin use. All commingled items shall be placed in recycling bins for collection. 
(c)  Garbage bags with affixed stick-on tags purchased from the city. Excess garbage and waste and/or waste too bulky to fit into the polycart may be placed in bags and identified with appropriate stick-on tags purchased from the city. Only acceptable garbage or waste, according to this article, may be placed in bags. These identified bags shall be placed adjacent to the polycarts on the regular collection day. 
(Code 2004, § 11.113.5)  
Sec. 59-25. - Dumpster use regulations. 
(a)  The following regulations apply to dumpsters, whether such dumpsters are used for nonresidential uses, multi-family uses or residential uses: 
(1)  Dumpsters shall be maintained in safe, clean, painted and sound condition by the independent contractor granted the exclusive franchise for solid waste collection or such third-party as may own the dumpster being used. 
(2)  Dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad that is at least as large as the footprint of the dumpster and capable of holding the weight of such dumpster in a fully-loaded condition. Lifting aprons from which the dumpster may be lifted and replaced by front-end loading waste collection vehicles shall extend at least ten feet from the front of each dumpster location to accommodate the wheels and weight of the sanitation truck. In the case of two or more dumpsters located side-by-side, a minimum of four feet of maneuvering space shall be left between the dumpsters. 
(3)  Driveways to dumpsters shall be designed to accommodate the weight of a 56,000 pound gross vehicular weight (GVW) sanitation truck. 
(4)  Dumpster customers should not place liquid waste of any type in dumpsters. Notwithstanding the foregoing, dumpster customers shall ensure that no liquid waste of any type that is placed in a dumpster is permitted or allowed to seep, pour, escape, leak or otherwise fall from the dumpster into which liquid waste is placed and that no solid waste is placed outside the dumpster. 
(5)  Dumpsters placed into service on or after January 1, 2015, shall be enclosed within a minimum six-foot tall enclosure or be screened from public view, and be provided with an opening of at least 12 feet for collection access (collectively "dumpster enclosures"). A three-sided dumpster enclosure is preferred, and if gates are used, they must be kept closed and in good repair. 
(6)  Dumpster lids shall be kept closed at all times. Dumpsters and roll-off style containers that do not have lids affixed or attached shall at all times be covered or enclosed in a manner that will prevent solid waste from falling out of, escaping from, or otherwise resulting in litter around and about the location of the "dumpster improvements" (defined below). 
(7)  The maintenance and upkeep of concrete pads, lifting aprons, screening enclosures and gates shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(8)  Dumpsters and related concrete pads, lifting aprons, and screening enclosures and gates (collectively "dumpster improvements") should be located to the rear of the buildings with proper access. 
(9)  Dumpster improvements shall be placed behind the building lines on all sides of the property on which the dumpster improvements are situated. 
(10)  Dumpster improvements shall not encroach upon or be placed in, upon, over or across any sidewalks, curbs, bar ditches, streets, alleys or rights-of-way of the city. 
(11)  Dumpster enclosures shall not be placed in, upon, over or across any easement save and except to the extent only that the placement of such dumpster enclosures is approved in advance and in writing by the city manager. 
(12)  Dumpster improvements shall not be located beneath any overhead utility line. 
(b)  Dumpsters that were in place and in active and constant use prior to October 1, 2014, which do not comply with all of the provisions of this section, may remain in their October 1, 2014 location so long as said dumpsters do not violate subsections (a)(4), (a)(6), and (a)(8) through (a)(12), and provided further that such dumpsters are not removed from said location or increased in size and the location of such dumpsters while being used or emptied does not interfere with the passage of vehicular traffic or pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-1216-002, § 3, 12-16-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2014-1216-002, § 3, adopted December 16, 2014, repealed and replaced § 59-25, in its entirety. Former § 59-25 pertained to commercial dumpster use regulations, and was derived from Code 2004, § 11.113.6.  
Sec. 59-26. - Placement of polycarts and recycling bins. 
(a)  All polycarts and recycling bins shall be placed for collection not earlier than 6:00 p.m. prior to the day of scheduled collection. Polycarts and recycling bins that are placed for collection after 7:00 a.m. on the day of scheduled collection may be missed as collection begins at 7:00 a.m. No polycarts or recycling bins shall be allowed to remain at the street side collection point after 12:00 midnight on the scheduled pickup day. 
(b)  Polycarts or recycling bins shall be placed as close to the curbside of the roadway or alley as practical without interfering with or endangering the movements of vehicles or pedestrians. 
(Code 2004, § 11.113.7; Ord. No. O-2014-1216-002, § 4, 12-16-2014)  
Sec. 59-27. - Bulky waste and bundles. 
(a)  Bulky waste includes stoves, refrigerators which must have the CFCs removed by a certified technician, water tanks, washing machines, furniture, up to two cubic yards of loose brush greater than four inches in diameter which must be cut in four-foot lengths and with weights no more than 50 lbs., and other waste materials other than construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste or stable matter with weights or volumes greater than those allowed for bins or containers, as the case may be. 
(b)  Bundles include tree, shrub, and brush trimmings securely tied together forming an easily handled package not exceeding four feet in length, six inches in diameter, or 50 lbs. in total weight. The total amount of bundled material set out for collection per home shall not exceed two cubic yards (six feet by three feet by three feet). 
(Code 2004, § 11.113.8)  
Sec. 59-28. - Construction site waste. 
Each contractor and property owner shall be responsible for a construction site so that building materials and debris will be contained on the site of construction. Litter or other debris, including dirt and mud, deposited upon any public place or private premises as a result of normal construction, remodeling, or landscaping process shall be removed by the contractor and/or property owner. 
(Code 2004, § 11.113.9)  
Sec. 59-29. - Infectious or hazardous waste. 
No infectious waste or hazardous waste shall be deposited at any location within the city regardless of consent of the property owner. Infectious and hazardous household waste shall not be placed in polycarts or at a pickup point. The disposal of infectious or household hazardous waste will be in accordance with the regulations and policies stipulated by the state Department of Health and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
(Code 2004, § 11.113.10)  
Sec. 59-30. - Residential refuse and recycling fees. 
(a)  Residential refuse collection fees (within city). 
(1)  There shall be charged and collected each month by the city for residential refuse collection the fees and charges established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code, plus any additional taxes levied by the state. 
(2)  These fees shall provide for residential collection once per week. Any residential customer who has electric and water service, or who inhabits a residential unit, is required to have garbage service through a city authorized contractor and shall pay the required fee for this service. 
(3)  All residential customers are required to place their refuse in the polycart container and take it to the curbside for pickup service. Any refuse not in the polycart must be in a bag with a city-authorized tag attached. 
(b)  Residential refuse collection fees (outside city). 
(1)  There shall be charged and collected each month by the city for any residential utility customer receiving regular refuse collection service from the city at a location not within the city limits a rate equal to 200 percent of the current refuse collection rates (fees and charges) established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code, plus any additional taxes levied by the state for residential accounts. 
(2)  Brush collection service shall not be available to nonresident customers. 
(c)  Residential recycling fees (within city). Each garbage customer inside the city limits shall be charged a fee, as established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code, for curbside and dropoff recycling and additional curbside recycling bins and covers. 
(d)  Residential recycling fees (outside city). Each residential utility customer receiving regular refuse collection service from the city at a location not within the city limits, but within the extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall be included in the curbside recycling program. The customer's charge for such curbside recycling shall be the same as that for customers within the city limits. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.7; Ord. No. 2003-33, 8-12-2003; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004; Ord. No. 2005-29, 6-14-2005; O-2018-0724-001, § 2, 7-24-2018)  
Sec. 59-31. - Refuse/dumpster regulations; unauthorized use of polycarts, recycling bins and/or dumpsters prohibited. 
(a)  The placement of a polycart, recycling bin and/or dumpster, at any location on a particular lot or tract of land ("property"), by the owner or occupant of said property or such person's or entity's authorized agent, and the payment of monthly charges related thereto, shall constitute a contractual arrangement granting the owner or occupant of such property the exclusive right to dispose of refuse and/or recyclables through use of its polycart, recycling bin and/or designated dumpster. 
(b)  Pilfering, scattering contents or meddling with garbage, recyclables, rubbish, brush or collection containers or receptacles by any person other than the owner or occupant (or the authorized representative thereof) of the property on which the polycart, recycling bin and/or dumpster is situated is prohibited. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any burning match, charcoal, ember or other burning material in any collection container or receptacle used for the disposal of garbage, recyclable material, rubbish or brush. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any materials not included in the definitions of garbage, recyclable material, rubbish and brush in any collection container or receptacle used for the disposal of garbage, recyclable material, rubbish or brush. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person, other than the commercial customer or its employees or agents, to deposit any materials in a commercial collection container or receptacle. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to store or place in a screening enclosure that is provided for garbage and/or recycling containers and/or receptacles any debris, solid waste or any other item for storage that is not a solid waste and/or a recycling container and/or receptacle. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-1216-002, § 5, 12-16-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2014-1216-002, § 5, adopted December 16, 2014, repealed and replaced § 59-31, in its entirety. Former § 59-31 pertained to commercial refuse/dumpster regulations; unauthorized use of dumpsters prohibited, and was derived from Code 2004, § 11.122.8 and Ord. No. 95-26, adopted September 26, 1995.  
Sec. 59-32. - Commercial refuse and recycling fees. 
(a)  Commercial refuse collection fees. 
(1)  There shall be charged and collected each month by the city for commercial refuse collection the fees and charges established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code, plus any additional taxes levied by the state. 
(2)  These fees shall provide for commercial collection at least once per week or according to the schedule selected by the customer in coordination with the contractor. Any commercial customer that has electric and water service, or who operates a business from a fixed location, is required to have garbage service through a city authorized contractor and shall pay the required fee for this service. 
(3)  All commercial customers are required to place their refuse in the polycart container and take it to the curbside for pickup service or place such refuse in the commercial customer's dumpster or roll-off container. 
(b)  Commercial recycling fees (within city). Each commercial garbage customer inside the city limits shall be charged a fee, as established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code, for curbside and dropoff recycling and additional curbside recycling bins and covers. 
(c)  Commercial recycling fees (outside city). Each commercial utility customer receiving regular refuse collection service from the city at a location not within the city limits, but within the extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall be included in the curbside recycling program. The commercial customer's charge for such curbside recycling shall be the same as that for commercial customers within the city limits. 
(O-2018-0724-001, § 3, 7-24-2018) 
Editor's note— O-2018-0724-001, § 3, adopted July 24, 2018, set out provisions designated as § 59-305, however, to continue the numerical order of existing sections, said provisions have been redesignated as § 59-32 at the discretion of the editor.  
Chapter 60 - SPECIAL EVENTS  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 60-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to enhance the positive image of the city, to stimulate economic growth and promote tourism. To this end, it is the city's intent to encourage special events that provide an economic benefit to the city while attempting to minimize any secondary negative impacts that might arise out of any such special event. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Sec. 60-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a person, as defined herein, submitting an application for a special event permit. 
City means the City of Farmersville, Texas. 
City council means the city council of the City of Farmersville. 
City manager means the city manager of the City of Farmersville, or his/her designee. 
City-sponsored special event means a special event that the city council has: 
(1)  Determined to be directly related to a recognized function of city government; and 
(2)  Committed the city to significantly sharing in initiating, financing, supporting, and conducting the event. 
Code means the Code of Ordinances, City of Farmersville, Texas. 
Demonstration means a public display of the attitude of assembled persons toward a person, cause, issue, or other matter. 
Department means the City of Farmersville Police Department. 
Expressive activity means conduct, the sole or principal purpose of which is the expression, dissemination or communication by verbal, visual, literary or auditory means of opinions, views or ideas. 
Facilities means, without limitation, all equipment, materials and apparatus associated with the conduct of the special event, including, without limitation: barriers, cables (electrical or otherwise), safety equipment and devices, water, sound system and related equipment, fencing, fence covering material, signs, tents, vehicles, fire protection equipment and apparatus, medical equipment and apparatus, seals, wiring, banners, structures and components thereof, furniture, furnishings, special lighting fixtures, trade fixtures and equipment furnished and installed or used in the operation of the event. The quality level, design and appearance of all facilities shall be of high quality appropriate to the circumstances. 
Force majeure means and includes fire, casualty, strikes, lockouts, labor trouble, inability to procure materials or supplies, failure of power, governmental authority, inclement weather, acts of God, war or terrorism or the potential or actual threat thereof, public safety or public welfare considerations, riots, or local, national or international emergencies, or other reason of like nature. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization, or other legal entity. 
Property owner means the person(s) who own the property on which the special event is proposed to be held and/or on which the special event is held 
Special event means an event or gathering open to the public in areas or venues not specifically designated for that purpose and which requires a temporary exception to otherwise applicable rules or requirements specifically including, but not limited to: 
(1)  A carnival; 
(2)  A festival; 
(3)  A circus; 
(4)  A race or rally; 
(5)  A parade; 
(6)  Seasonal sales; 
(7)  A concert; and 
(8)  Any event or gathering that requires: 
a.  The temporary complete or partial closure of a public street; 
b.  The temporary closure or restriction of access to public property; 
c.  The temporary offer of merchandise, food, or beverages on public property or on private property where not otherwise permitted by this Code or the applicable certificate of occupancy; 
d.  The temporary erection of a tent on public property or on private property where not otherwise permitted by this Code or the applicable certificate of occupancy; 
e.  The temporary erection of a stage, band shell, portable building, grandstand, or bleachers on public property or on private property where not otherwise permitted by this Code or the applicable certificate of occupancy; 
f.  The temporary use, for other than storage, of a trailer or van on public property or on private property where not otherwise permitted by this Code or the applicable certificate of occupancy; 
g.  The temporary use of equipment to amplify and transmit sound, which exceeds ambient (background) sound pressure levels at the property lines; or 
h.  The placement of portable toilets on public property or on private property where not otherwise permitted by this Code or the applicable certificate of occupancy. 
Special event operator means and includes the applicant, the permittee, and any person, firm or entity operating all or any portion of the special event or otherwise selling or providing any goods and/or services to the public by and through the special event. 
Special event permit or permit means the city's written authorization to hold a special event. The permit may impose terms and conditions, and is subject to the guidelines of the permit. 
Traditional special event means and refers to those special events that have been traditionally celebrated by the residents of the city including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Audie Murphy Day; 
(2)  Christmas Parade; 
(3)  Fire Department Fish Fry; 
(4)  Farmers and Fleas Market; 
(5)  Old Time Saturday; 
(6)  Scare on the Square; 
(7)  Bug Tussel Antique Car Trek; 
(8)  Jazz on Main; 
(9)  Sparks of Freedom; and, 
(10)  Trick it up Bike Ride. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Sec. 60-3. - Chapter cumulative. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter are cumulative of all city ordinances. Nothing contained in this chapter including, but not limited to, the issuance of a special event permit shall relieve any person or entity from complying with all other provisions of this Code save and except only to the extent specifically provided herein to the contrary. All other permits and licenses required by [this] Code or other law for specific activities conducted in conjunction with or as a part of the special event must be applied for separately in a form satisfactory to the city. Failure to obtain a permit required by another provision of this Code shall result in the denial of a requested special event permit. 
(b)  A special event permit issued under this chapter authorizes the temporary use of property and structures for activities that would otherwise be prohibited by this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Sec. 60-4. - Exemptions. 
The following are exempt from the operation, rules, and regulations of this chapter: 
(1)  A private party held entirely on private property and to which the public is not invited, provided such party does not impact public rights-of-way or involve activities or facilities not permitted by applicable zoning regulations; 
(2)  An event wholly contained on property specifically designed or suited for the event and that holds a certificate of occupancy for such use including adequate parking (e.g., a hotel ballroom); 
(3)  Funeral processions; 
(4)  Activities under the control of the city that are conducted on city property and which do not affect public rights-of-way; 
(5)  Unorganized gatherings; 
(6)  A demonstration, parade or assembly related to the expression of feelings and beliefs on current political, religious, or social issues at a fixed location other than a public right-of-way (sidewalk or street); 
(7)  Traditional special events as defined above; and/or 
(8)  A sidewalk sale or a religious or educational program, presentation or fund-raising event that is contained entirely upon and entirely within the confines of private property and does not require the temporary use of or closing off of public streets, fire lanes or public property; that lasts or runs for no more than eight hours on any one day and is limited to a total of four consecutive days in any calendar month; and, which is planned, presented, performed, offered or sponsored by and for the sole benefit of a nonprofit entity ("exempt event") shall not be required to obtain a special event permit. The fact that an event or gathering is held on Farmersville Independent School District ("FISD") property does not, in and of itself, make the event or gathering an exempt event. However, any event or gathering that is a component of, and which is specifically related to, the educational mission, programming and curriculum of FISD including FISD sponsored extracurricular activities in an exempt event. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Secs. 60-5—60-9. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS 
 
Sec. 60-10. - Permit required. 
(a)  No special event may be held within the city without first obtaining a special event permit. 
(b)  A special event permit grants permission to use public property proposed to be used in connection with the special event and/or authorizes the use of private property in a manner not otherwise permitted by the code in connection with the special event (the "licensed premises"). The use of such licensed premises shall be solely for the purpose of constructing, installing, operating and maintaining the special event; and for such other purposes consistent with promoting and conducting the special event as the city manager authorizes in writing. 
(c)  Issuance of a special event permit does not authorize removal or alteration of public property and any such removal or alteration is strictly prohibited except as expressly allowed in writing by the city manager, or other authorizing official. 
(d)  A special event operator may not and shall have no authority to assign, sell, transfer, pledge, encumber or otherwise convey a permit or any rights, duties, responsibilities or obligations thereunder, and any such conveyance shall be null and void and may, in the discretion of the city, result in the immediate revocation of the permit. 
(e)  The applicant for a special event permit shall, as a condition precedent to issuance of a permit, pay the fee for a special event permit in the amount determined by city council from time to time and set forth in appendix A, "master fee schedule," to the Farmersville Code together with the full amount of any late submittal fee, any applicable resubmittal fee and all "city special event costs" (hereinafter defined). 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Sec. 60-11. - Application process. 
(a)  A special event permit may be issued by the city manager, or his or her duly appointed representative subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A legible and complete application for a special event permit shall be made at least 15 business days prior to the date such temporary carnival, circus, or special event shall commence operation. 
a.  If a legible and complete application for a special event permit under this section is submitted less than 15 business days prior to the commencement date of any such special event the applicant, specifically including nonprofit organizations, shall pay a late submittal fee in the amount of $100.00 per day for each day or part of a day less than 15 business days before the event that the submittal is made. The city manager may, in his sole discretion, reduce or waive the amount of the late submittal fee. 
b.  A legible and complete application for a special event permit under this section that is submitted less than five business days prior to the commencement date of any such event shall be subject to the foregoing late submittal fee. In addition the city makes no assurances that the review of the permit application and the issuance of the special event permit will be complete for any such application prior to the planned date of the event. Further, it shall be a violation of this section to commence operation of a special event without first receiving a special event permit. 
c.  A special event permit pursuant to this section shall be granted or denied by the city manager or his or her duly appointed representative within five business days after submission to the city of a legible and complete permit application. 
d.  A maximum of six special event permits may be issued per calendar year to the same address, property owner, and/or business owner. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city manager, and shall contain the following information in order to be considered complete: 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of person, organization, or company conducting the event. 
b.  Date or dates of the special event. 
c.  Name of any and all food vendors participating in the special event including, but not limited to, the types of foods and beverages to be offered to the public and the manner in which said foods and beverages are packaged, prepared and served. 
d.  A legible diagram drawn to scale and/or with dimensional detail showing the location, size, number and configuration in detail of the different component parts of the special event including, but not limited to, the following: 
e.  All shows; 
f.  Concessions; 
g.  Amusements (specifically including, but not limited to, inflatable slides and jump houses) or rides; 
h.  Businesses; 
i.  Signs, including balloons or inflatable devices, that are visible from the public right-of way; 
j.  Entrances and exits; 
k.  Parking area; 
l.  Sanitary facilities; 
m.  Loudspeakers or sound-amplification devices (together with an indication regarding their directional orientation); 
n.  Any other pertinent information. 
o.  A written lease or agreement from the owner of such property granting the special event operator permission to operate a special event on said property during the dates of the proposed application. The written lease or agreement must be signed by the owner of such property and be properly notarized. 
p.  The approximate number of persons who are anticipated to attend and, if applicable, the number and types of animals and vehicles that will constitute such special event. 
q.  Proof of insurance as required herein-below. 
r.  The special event shall be set up and operated in accordance with and pursuant to the approved detailed diagram and any conditions imposed by the permit. Before any modifications, revisions or deletions are made that conflict with the approved detailed diagram including, but not limited to, the addition or removal of signs, concessions vendors, amusements and rides an amended detailed diagram shall be submitted for review and approval three business days prior to commencement or continuation of the special event in accordance with and pursuant to the amended detailed diagram. Resubmittals or revised detailed diagrams shall be limited to one change per event. Notwithstanding the timely submittal of the amended detailed diagram the special event shall not be authorized to operate in accordance with and pursuant to said amended detailed diagram until such time as the amended detailed diagram is approved. The amended detailed diagram shall be approved or disapproved no later than three business days after submittal. 
s.  Payment of the special event permit fee in the amount set forth in appendix A, "master fee schedule," to the Farmersville Code together with the full amount of any late submittal fee and city special event costs. An additional review fee shall be paid, as provided in the fee schedule found in appendix A, for the one allowed amended revised detailed diagram at the time of submittal for review. 
(3)  A submittal, including a submittal for an amended detailed diagram, shall not be reviewed until it is complete. An amended detailed diagram shall be submitted together with all information, detail and supporting documentation as is required for the initial submission to obtain a permit. In addition, the submission of an amended detailed diagram shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee. Failure to pay the fee or the omission of any component required for an original submittal may result in the delay, denial or revocation of the requested permit and/or amended detailed diagram. 
(4)  Safe and orderly movement of normal traffic shall not be substantially interrupted. The city may require the permit holder to provide additional signage for traffic control and safety-related issues, as deemed necessary by staff. If any special event is located adjacent to or abutting State Highway 78, United States Highway 380, or Farm-to-Market Road 2194, a TXDOT sign permit must be obtained and signs must be in place before the event starts. (The specific requirement for TXDOT signs may be waived if staff determines that sufficient traffic control measures are already in place.) 
(5)  The special event shall not impede the movement of fire-fighting equipment, ambulances or any other emergency vehicle. 
(6)  All animal waste shall be removed daily from the premises which are the subject of the detailed diagram. 
(7)  The application shall be reviewed and approved or disapproved by the police department, fire department and other appropriate city departments identified by the city manager as well as the city manager, or his or her duly appointed representative for traffic control, security, fire and other health and safety related issues. 
(8)  Any person or entity that seeks a special event permit shall be required to pay all costs and expenses including, but not limited to, labor and overtime costs as well as materials, gasoline and equipment rental or usage incurred by the city to provide onsite police protection, fire protection and/or any emergency medical protection for any special event and its participants as well as any costs and expenses incurred by the city to pick up and remove litter and debris, and/or erect and take down warning signs, cones and barricades along and about the area used by and/or for the special event ("city special event costs"). The city manager may require that the person or entity seeking a special event permit, or to whom a special event permit is issued, post a cash bond or deposit with the city against which the city may recover all such city special event costs. Failure to post such a cash deposit or bond may result in the denial of the special event permit application or revocation of a previously issued special event permit. Special events that are sponsored entirely, or in part, by the city may, in the sole discretion of the city, be excepted from the requirement to post a cash deposit or bond for such city-sponsored event. In the event that security precautions for the event are materially different than those contained in the special event permit application or in the event public safety is or may be compromised, then such concerns shall first be communicated by a city representative to the special event permit holder or designee of the special event permit holder in an effort to expeditiously to resolve any such public safety concerns. In the event such public safety concerns are not adequately addressed, the city manager or his or her duly appointed representative may revoke the permit. 
(9)  Only one special event upon and across the roads, streets and thoroughfares of the city shall be allowed per day unless otherwise approved by the city. Dates for such special events shall be assigned by the police department and maintained in the city manager's office. If two or more such special events are planned for the same date, the special event permit will be awarded first to a special event that is sponsored entirely by the city and/or secondarily to a traditional special event. In all other circumstances, the special event permit shall be awarded to the special event that first submits a fully completed permit application for the date in question. 
(10)  The special event permit will be valid for a maximum period of five days. If the permit is issued in conjunction with a seasonal sales permit, this permit will expire the same day as the seasonal sales permit expires. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Sec. 60-12. - Insurance required for special events. 
The special event operator shall, at its own expense, procure, pay for and maintain the following insurance written by companies approved by the state and acceptable to the city. The special event operator shall furnish to the city certificates of insurance executed by the insurer or its authorized agent stating coverages, limits, expiration dates and compliance with all applicable required provisions. Certificates shall reference the special event and be addressed as follows: 
City of Farmersville 
Attn: City Manager 
205 S. Main Street 
Farmersville, Texas 75442 
(1)  Public liability insurance, with minimum combined single limits of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, 
(2)  Liquor liability insurance, either endorsed onto the above policy or written on a "stand alone" basis, if any of the following applies: 
a.  The special event operator is in the business of manufacturing, selling, or distributing alcoholic beverages; 
b.  The special event operator serves or furnishes alcoholic beverages for a charge, whether or not such activity requires a license or is for the purpose of financial gain or livelihood; or 
c.  The special event operator serves or furnishes alcoholic beverages without a charge, if a license is required for such activity. 
(3)  Business automobile liability insurance covering owned, hired and non-owned vehicles, with a minimum combined bodily injury and property damage limit of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. 
The applicable insurance policies shall also be endorsed as follows: 
(1)  The city, its officials, employees and officers shall be named as additional insureds on the commercial general liability policy, by using endorsement CG2026 or broader. 
(2)  The city, its officials, employees and officers shall be named as additional insureds on any required liquor liability policy. 
(3)  All insurance policies shall be endorsed to the effect that the city will receive at least 30 days' notice prior to cancellation, non-renewal, termination, or material change of the policies. 
All insurance shall be purchased from an insurance company that meets a financial rating of B+VI or better as assigned by A.M. Best Company or equivalent. 
An applicant may request an exception from this insurance requirement, if the applicant: 
(1)  Executes a written agreement to indemnify the city and its officers and employees against all claims of injury or damage to persons or property, whether public or private, arising out of the special event; or 
(2)  Agrees to redesign or reschedule the proposed event to respond to specific risks, hazards and dangers to the public health and safety identified by the committee as being reasonably foreseeable consequences of the proposed event. 
The insurance requirements for special events involving traditional special events or expressive activity which enjoy protection under the United States or Texas constitutions may be waived by the city manager if, in the sole discretion of the city manager, the special event involving expressive activity poses no substantial risk of public liability or property damage. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Sec. 60-13. - Denial and revocation. 
(a)  A special event permit may be denied if: 
(1)  A special event permit has been granted for another special event at the same place and time; 
(2)  A traditional special event is customarily held at the same place and time as the proposed special event; 
(3)  The proposed special event will unreasonably disrupt the orderly flow of traffic, and no reasonable means of rerouting traffic or otherwise meeting traffic needs is available; 
(4)  The application is incomplete; 
(5)  The special event operator fails to comply with, or the proposed special event will violate, a city ordinance or other applicable law, unless the prohibited conduct or activity would be allowed under this chapter; 
(6)  The special event operator makes a false statement of material fact on an application for a special event permit or fails to properly complete an application for a special event permit; 
(7)  The special event operator fails to provide proof that the special event operator possesses or is able to obtain a license or permit required by another city ordinance or other applicable law for the conduct of all activities included as part of the special event; 
(8)  The special event operator or the property owner has had a special event permit revoked within the preceding 14 months; 
(9)  The special event operator or property owner have individually or collectively entered a plea of guilty and/or been convicted of two or more violations of a condition or a provision of a special event permit or of this chapter within the preceding 14 months; 
(10)  The proposed special event would unduly burden city services and/or pose a risk to the public health, safety, or welfare; 
(b)  The city may revoke a special event permit if: 
(1)  the special event operator fails to comply with, or the special event is in violation of, any provision of the special event permit or the detailed diagram and any amended detailed diagram of the special event, a city ordinance, or any other applicable law; 
(2)  The special event operator made a false statement of material fact on an application for a special event permit; or 
(3)  The special event unduly burdens city services and/or poses a risk to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(c)  The special event operator and/or the property owner shall immediately, upon receiving notice that the city has revoked the special event permit, cause the special event to cease operations and close and shut down all component parts of the special event. At or about the same time, the special event operator and/or the property owner shall ask or direct all customers, visitors and patrons to leave the premises on which the special event is being held. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Sec. 60-14. - Appeal from denial or revocation of a special event permit. 
(a)  If the city manager denies the issuance of a permit or revokes a permit, the city manager shall issue written notice of the denial or revocation and of the right to an appeal. The special event operator may appeal the decision of the city manager by filing a written request for appeal of said denial or revocation with the city manager's office within five days after the date of such denial or revocation. If such appeal is not made within this five-day period, the decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(b)  The written request for appeal shall identify the contact person for the special event and provide the contact person's telephone number, e-mail address and fax number to assist in scheduling a hearing on said appeal. The written request for appeal shall also state in detail what actions have been or will be taken to guarantee that the conditions which gave rise to the revocation will not recur. 
(c)  An appeal of the denial or revocation shall not stay the determination and action of the city manager, or authorize the continued or renewed operation of the special event. 
(d)  The revocation appeal hearing shall, to the extent reasonably practicable, be scheduled to occur within three business days after receipt of the written request for appeal. The appeal shall be heard by the city manager or the city manager's duly authorized representative (referred to collectively as the "city manager"). The special event operator or property owner may present information regarding the revocation and the actions that have been taken or will be enacted to prevent a recurrence of the conditions that led to the permit revocation. City staff shall also be allowed to present information regarding the revocation and opine regarding the continued or renewed operation of the special event with the additional conditions proposed by the special event operator or property owner. 
(e)  The city manager shall uphold the revocation or overrule the revocation. The city manager may also overrule the revocation and impose such additional conditions on the continued or renewed operation of the special event as the city manager deems prudent to avoid a recurrence of the conditions that led to the permit revocation. If the city manager overrules the permit revocation, the operation of the special event may be renewed or continued provided that any and all additional conditions for operation are enacted and observed. 
(f)  Any aggrieved party may appeal the city manager's determination to the board of adjustment in the manner provided for appeals of an administrative official's decision. The special event may be renewed or continued during the pendency of an appeal to the board of adjustment if and only if the city manager overrules the permit revocation and provided that any and all additional conditions for operation imposed by the city manager are enacted and observed. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Secs. 60-15—60-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 60-20. - Right of entry. 
The city through its officials, employees, agents, and representatives shall have the right at all reasonable times to enter upon all permitted premises for the purpose of inspecting the permitted premises, for observing the performance of obligations under this chapter, and for the doing of any act or thing which the city may be obligated to or have the right to do under the permit, this chapter, or other applicable city, county, state or federal ordinances, rules, regulations, or statutes. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Sec. 60-21. - Outdoor activities. 
(a)  All outdoor activities and entertainment must be confined to the area within the licensed premises (and if fencing is required by section 60-22(b), then such activities and entertainment must be confined to the area within the fencing). 
(b)  All fire lanes throughout the property on which the event takes place must be kept completely unobstructed by vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Sec. 60-22. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Sales or service of alcoholic beverages must be in compliance with chapter 5, as amended. 
(b)  If alcoholic beverages are proposed to be served or allowed to be consumed in conjunction with the special event permit, any outside area within which alcoholic beverages are proposed to be served or consumed must be completely enclosed by a temporary (during the term of the event only) interlocking fence of such height as may be required to satisfy the requirements of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission ("TABC") regarding the designation of "licensed premises" for such purpose. If required fencing crosses a fire lane, a 20-foot wide emergency gate must be utilized and kept closed. The gate must be kept closed, but unlocked, at all times to accommodate public safety vehicles and provide an emergency exit. The fencing set-up must ensure that customers are not forced to re-enter an adjacent structure, if any, in order to vacate the licensed premises in case of an emergency. 
(c)  Access points into the licensed premises must be constantly manned to prevent patrons from entering or exiting with alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  A copy of the permit to use public property must be provided to the TABC or its successor agency. 
(e)  Any required permit or letter of approval from the TABC and the city must be posted on the premises where the event takes place. 
(f)  An alcoholic beverages permit must be applied for with the city manager at least 15 days in advance of any special event where alcohol will be sold or served, in accordance with the requirements of chapter 5. 
(g)  A copy of a current permit from TABC authorizing the special event operator to sell, dispense or otherwise serve alcohol at the location must be submitted with the application for the special event. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Sec. 60-23. - Tents and canopies. 
A flame-spread certificate must be obtained from the tent or canopy supplier for each tent and/or canopy used at the event. Such certificate(s) must be readily accessible for inspection by city fire department personnel. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Sec. 60-24. - Food handling and concessions. 
(a)  Food handling, and the provision and/or sale of alcoholic beverages shall be in accordance with all federal, state, county and city statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations and guidelines. 
(b)  When required by law, concessionaires and caterers must obtain a health permit from the city a minimum of 72 hours prior to the event and pay any required fees for temporary food service licenses. 
(c)  It shall be the special event operator's obligation to ensure that participants, spectators, and patrons do not carry alcoholic beverages into or out of any licensed premises, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Sec. 60-25. - Noise. 
No loud, excessive or unusual noise is allowed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. during setup, operation or teardown of an event. Failure to comply with a request from the department concerning noise may result in the immediate revocation of the special event permit. Outdoor music must be provided at a volume level that is not distracting to drivers on adjacent or nearby streets and that is not disturbing to residents or adjacent businesses. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Sec. 60-26. - Signs. 
(a)  All signs used in connection with a special event shall be professionally executed and must comply with all applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city, and be approved in writing by the city manager. 
(b)  Written permission from the city must be obtained prior to placing signs on public property. The design and content of signs placed on public property must be approved by the city. Signs placed on public property must be designed and constructed such that they do not leave adhesive residue on property when removed. Inflated signs that are anchored to the ground, a building, or other structure are prohibited. 
(c)  Permanent, existing signs on public property may not be removed or covered. 
(d)  The city public works department shall supervise the placement of all directional or promotional signs placed on public streets. The rental cost of directional signs is the responsibility of the special event operator and payment is required in advance of the event. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Sec. 60-27. - Conduct of participants during special event. 
(a)  Special event participants shall not throw any articles, such as candy, toys, beads, etc., to spectators during the conduct of the special event. 
(b)  Special event participants shall not engage in any conduct that may endanger other participants or spectators. 
(c)  The special event operator and/or the property owner shall require special event participants to register for the special event, and will present a list of participants and related information to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Sec. 60-28. - Public conduct during special event. 
(a)  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any special event or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a special event. 
(b)  No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a special event when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a component of or participant in a special event, unless as directed by uniformed law enforcement personnel. 
(c)  The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along any street or highway or part thereof constituting a part of the special event. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Secs. 60-29—60-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 60-40. - Offenses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person: 
(1)  Commences or conducts a special event without the appropriate permits or fails to comply with any requirement or condition of a special event permit or this chapter; or 
(2)  Participates in a special event for which a permit has not been granted, or for which a permit has been suspended or revoked; or 
(3)  Sets up or operates a special event in a manner inconsistent with the approved detailed diagram or any subsequently approved amended detailed diagram for such special event. 
(4)  violates any provision of a special event permit, this chapter, or any other city ordinance or applicable law, rule, standard, or regulation. 
(b)  A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Sec. 60-41. - Penalty. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this chapter or a requirement of a special event permit is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed or continues. 
(b)  Each offense is punishable by a fine not to exceed: 
(1)  $2,000.00 for a violation of a provision of this chapter or a requirement of a special event permit governing fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping or refuse; or 
(2)  $500.00 for all other violations of this chapter or any requirements imposed on a special event permit. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0923-002, § 3, 9-23-2014)  
Chapter 62 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General authority of home rule municipalities concerning highways, streets and alleys, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.001; general authority of home rule municipality regarding sidewalks, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.004; use of municipal streets and sidewalks for public convenience and amenities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 316.001 et seq.; municipal streets generally, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 312.001 et seq.; drainage on public roads, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 254.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 62-1. - Culvert installation. 
Property owners who desire a new entrance onto a public street shall provide their culvert and materials and shall be responsible for having the culvert installed. The culvert, materials, and installation shall be in accordance with city specifications. If improvement of streets or drainage facilities by the city requires that an existing entrance be replaced with a new culvert, then the city will provide and install the culvert. 
(Ord. No. 2006-69(B), 12-12-2006)  
Secs. 62-2—62-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 
 
Sec. 62-21. - Cutting of street surfaces prohibited. 
The city council establishes a policy against the cutting of the surface of any public street for any reason, including such excavation for the purpose of laying utilities thereunder and to require all such crossings to be accomplished wherever possible by tunneling under the street surface. 
(Code 2004, § 4.102.1)  
Sec. 62-22. - Permit required for excavations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, dig, make any excavation in, tunnel under or place any embankment in or on, any public street, alley or public easement within the city's corporate limits without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(Code 2004, § 4.102.2)  
Sec. 62-23. - Tunneling rather than cutting across. 
The building inspector, or such other officer as designated by the city council to issue such permit, shall, whenever possible, require the crossing of any public street to be done by tunneling rather than cutting through the surface of the street; provided, however, where such a permit is issued in such a way as to allow the cutting of the surface of the street, alley or public easement, such permit shall require that the person making such cut across the surface of said way to compact the backfill material to a firm and solid bearing and in such a manner as will entirely prevent the settling of such backfill material, and to relay the paving, macadamizing, gravel or other surface in a skillful and permanent manner, and in every case in accordance with the standard pavement repair details as may be revised from time to time by the city engineer, and further, to the satisfaction of the building inspector or other persons so designated by the city council. Failure to comply with the requirements of such a condition shall constitute an offense and a violation of this section, and each and every day failure continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2004, § 4.102.3)  
Sec. 62-24. - Permit fee. 
Whenever any person desires to make such an excavation or embankment in any public street, alley or public easement within the city, he shall make application to the city for such permit, which permit shall be issued upon the payment of a fee as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code; provided, however, that any public utility company holding a valid franchise agreement from the city shall not be required to pay such fee, nor will such valid franchise holders be required to obtain a permit under the provisions of section 62-22 in connection with the erecting of utility poles, towers and fixtures. 
(Code 2004, § 4.102.4; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004)  
Sec. 62-25. - Warnings required for excavations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation of whatever kind within, along or near any public street, sidewalk, alley or highway within the city without placing proper guardrails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the same, sufficient to warn the public of such excavation and to protect all persons using reasonable care from accident. 
(Code 2004, § 4.102.5)  
Sec. 62-26. - Parties involved in excavations. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons making or supervising such excavations whether they are contractors, supervisors, managers, agents, employees, or otherwise. 
(Code 2004, § 4.102.6)  
Sec. 62-27. - Public utility company emergencies. 
Public utility companies may perform emergency work during the nighttime or at times during which the city hall is closed, but it shall be necessary for such public utility company to obtain the necessary permit as required by section 62-22 on the first day thereafter that the city hall is open for business. 
(Code 2004, § 4.102.7; Ord. No. 86-32)  
Secs. 62-28—62-57. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY ADDRESS STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 62-58. - Establishment. 
There is established the following addressing standards for numbering property and naming public streets/roads within the incorporated areas of the city for use with addressing procedures: 
(1)  Property needing street naming or number assignment on public roads will be identified. 
(2)  Duplicate names or similar sounding names will be repealed and renamed upon the recommendation of staff and approval of city council. 
(Code 2004, § 4.105.1)  
Sec. 62-59. - Street naming and property numbering procedures. 
(a)  Street naming and property numbering shall conform to the requirements set forth in this article, the city's subdivision ordinance and the requirements of state law. 
(b)  New address notification of any newly approved street name, change in street name or change in street addressing assignment must be presented to the owner(s) and tenant(s) of property affected by such change(s) in writing when the final determination of the street name and/or assignment of street address(es) occurs. Notification should also be provided to the U.S. Postal Service. The street name, street name change and/or assignment of street address becomes effective as provided in the ordinance approving such action. 
(c)  The property owner and tenant are responsible for posting proper address number signage within 30 days after the effective date of such change as described in the new address notification. 
(d)  Maintenance of the city's addressing procedure and the inventory of public streets will be the responsibility of the city manager or his designee. 
(Code 2004, § 4.105.7; Ord. No. O-2011-0927-002, § 2, 9-27-2011)  
Sec. 62-60. - Inventory of public streets. 
A survey and inventory of all public street names within the city boundaries shall be prepared by the city for use with addressing procedures. 
(Code 2004, § 4.105.2)  
Sec. 62-61. - New street name criteria. 
New street names must be nonduplicative of existing names and limited to 20 characters, and there must be no similar sounding names. Dead-end roads may not be designated streets, but identified as cul-de-sacs, coves, or courts. A boulevard must include a median or be a minimum 90 feet in width. Other road types may be classified by the city. 
(Code 2004, § 4.105.3)  
Sec. 62-62. - Street name changes. 
Name changes are considered for historical or clarification purposes and are limited to reconsideration one year hence. Name changes must meet the same criteria established for new street names in section 62-61. A petition for change must be presented with signatures from three-quarters of the property owners abutting the street. Development along the street and traffic volume may be considered as additional criteria. 
(Code 2004, § 4.105.4)  
Sec. 62-63. - Property numbering criteria. 
(a)  Number assignment is based upon a grid system comprised of a center point within the community with an axis forming base lines and the north-south line being North Main Street and South Main Street and the east-west line being College Street and McKinney Street from South Main to S. Hwy 78, then Old McKinney Road from S. Hwy 78 west. Block assignments will consist of 500 feet per block. The number assignment progresses from the center point outward in each direction, with the interval distance of 50 feet allowed for each number. Traveling from the center point, odd numbers are assigned to the left and even numbers to the right. 
(b)  Addressing standards shall include property owners and inhabitants being required to post assigned property numbers on the structures. Numbers must be visible from the street and unobscured. Posted numbers may be no less than three inches high. Grace periods for incorporating this requirement are within one month of a new address notification. 
(Code 2004, § 4.105.5)  
Sec. 62-64. - Street names approved by council. 
Final approval of new street names and name change requests resides with the city council. Street name adoption or changes must comply with criteria established under these standards. 
(Code 2004, § 4.105.6)  
Sec. 62-65. - Street signs for new development. 
Street signs should be erected at all intersections of public roads regardless of current route markings from state, federal, or local designation. For new property development, the signage will be required at the expense of the developer. Signs must conform to guidelines established by the city public works department. Block number ranges should be included on signs. 
(Code 2004, § 4.105.8; Ord. No. 91-14, 5-14-1991)  
Sec. 62-66. - Street names adopted. 
Street names adopted in this section are as follows: 
Existing Names 	Add Or Change To 
Abbey Rd. 	
Austin St. 	
Audie Murphy Parkway 	
Audie Murphy Parkway 	
Austin, 100 block 	North Honaker 
Avenue R 	Raymond St. 
Baker Ln. 	
Beach St. 	Beech St., Mulberry St. 
Beene St., Bois d'arc Ave. 	Bois d'arc St. 
Buckskin St. 	N. and S. Buckskin St. 
Candy St. 	
Central Ave. 	Central St. 
College St. 	
	Elm St. 
Collin, 100 block 	Yeary 
	Collin Parkway 
Farr Hill Ln. 	
	Floyd St. 
Gaddy St. 	
Haislip St. 	
Hale St. 	
Hamilton St. 	N. and S. Hamilton St. 
Haughton St. 	
	Herron St. 
Hill St. 	
Houston St. 	
N. Hwy 78 	
S. Hwy 78 	
Jackson St. 	
Johnson St. 	N. and S. Johnson St. 
Josephine St. 	Old Josephine Rd. 
Jouette St. 	
King St. 	
Lee St. 	
Lincoln St. 	N. and S. Lincoln St. 
Live Oak St. 	
	Locust St. 
N. Main St. 	
S. Main St. 	
Maple St. 	
McKinney St. 	
Merit Ave. 	Merit St. 
Old McKinney St. 	Old McKinney Rd. 
Mill St. 	
Murchison St. 	
Neathery St. 	Gotcher St., Mimosa St. 
	Onion Alley 
Orange St. 	
Park St. 	
Pecan Creek Dr. 	
Pecan Creek Ct. 	
Pendleton St. 	
Prospect 	Davis 
Red Oak Cr. 	
Rike Alley, Rike Ave. 	N. and S. Rike St. 
S. Rike St, 100 block 	South Honaker 
Rolling Hills Ln. 	
Santa Fe St. 	E. and W. Santa Fe St. 
Second St. 	Collin St. 
Sherry Ln. 	
Sid Nelson St. 	
	Short St. 
Summit St. 	
Sycamore St. 	
Walnut St. 	
N. Washington St. 	
S. Washington St. 	
Welch Dr. 	
Westgate Dr. 	
Wilcoxson St. 	
Willow Bend Ln. 	Hill St. 
Willow Ln. 	
Windom St. 	Wright St. (E-W) 
Woodard Ave. 	Woodard St. 
Yucca Ln. 	
 
(Code 2004, § 4.105.9; Ord. No. O-2010-0309-001, § 1, 3-9-2010; Ord. No. O-2011-0927-002, § 3, 9-27-2011; Ord. No. O-2012-0814-001, § 3, 8-14-2012)  
Secs. 62-67—62-90. - Reserved.  
Chapter 65 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 2, adopted May 8, 2018, repealed ch. 65, arts. I—XIV, §§ 65-1—65-13, 65-45—65-50, 65-74—65-76, 65-96—65-106, 65-126—65-132, 65-163—65-169, 65-192—65-199, 65-222—65-227, 65-248—65-257, 65-278—65-284, 65-302—65-305, 65-329—65-332, 65-353, 65-380—65-388, 65-420—65-434, 65-452—65-458, 65-485—65-497, 65-518, 65-519, 65-547, 65-548, 65-575—65-578, 65-605—65-615, 65-634, 65-635, 65-659, 65-677—65-682, 65-708—65-710, 65-734—65-738, 65-760—65-763, 65-795—65-799, 65-822—65-824, 65-842, 65-843, 65-865—65-872, 65-893, 65-920—65-925, 65-954—65-957, 65-988—65-990, 65-1009, in its entirety; and § 3 enacted a new ch. 65 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 65 pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 2007-08, §§ II(I.1.1(B)), (I.1.2(A)—(S)), (I.1.3(A), (B)(1), (2), (C)(1)—(5)), (I.1.4(A), (B)(1), (2), (C), (D)(1)(a)—(c), (2)(a)—(c), (3), (4)), (I.1.5(A)—(E), (F)(1)—(4)), (I.1.6), (I.1.7), (I.1.10(A)(1)—(5) (B)—(F)), (I.1.11(A), (B)(1), (2)), (I.1.12)—(I.1.14), (II.2.1), (II.2.2(A)—(J)), (II.2.3(A)—(G)), (II.2.4(A)—(I)), (II.2.5(A)—(H)), (II.2.7(A)—(H)), (II.2.8(A)—(J)), (II.2.9(A)—(G)), (II.2.10(A)—(D)), (II.2.11(A)—(D)), (III.3.1(A)—(P)), (III.3.2(A)), (III.3.3(A)—(E)), (III.3.4(A)(1)—(3), (B)), (III.3.5(A)—(D)), (III.3.6(A)—(E)), (III.3.7(A)), (III.3.8(A)—(K)), (III.3.9(A)(1)—(3), (B)(1), (2), (C)(1)—(9), (D), (E)), (III.3.10(A)—(G)), (IV.4.1(A)), (IV.4.2(A), (C)—(F)), (IV.4.3(A)—(H)) (IV.4.4(A)—(C)), (V.5.1(A)—(E)), (V.5.2(A), (B)), (V.5.3), (V.5.5(A)—(D)), (V.5.6(A)—(D)), (V.5.7(A)—(E)), (V.5.8(A)—(C)), (V.5.9(A)—(C)), (VI.6.1(A)), (VI.6.2(A)—(D), (E)(1)—(4), (F)(1)—(4), (G), (H)), (VI.6.3), (VI.6.4(1)—(5)), (VI.6.5), (VI.6.6), (VI.6.7(A)—(D)), (VI.6.8(A), (B)), (VI.6.9(A), (B)), (VI.6.10), (VII.7.1(A)—(D)), III, VI, adopted February 13, 2007; Ord. No. O-2016-0726-001, § 4, adopted July 21, 2016; Ord. No. 2016-1129-001, § 4, adopted November 29, 2016; Ord. No. 2016-1129-002, § 4, adopted November 29, 2016 and Ord. No. 2017-1010-004, § 4, adopted October 24, 2017. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulations of subdivisions and property development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq.; municipal and county authority to regulate subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 242.001 et seq.; municipal zoning authority generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq.; municipal planning and development generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 371.001 et seq.; municipal zoning boards of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008; issuance of local permits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 245.001 et seq.; municipal comprehensive plans, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.001 et seq.; authority for municipal regulation of signs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 65-1. - Authority. 
(a)  This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the state, including V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 212. 
(b)  The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted as the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Farmersville, Texas, also referred to herein as "this chapter." The city council hereby extends the application of this chapter to the full extent of the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. This chapter shall be applicable to the filing of plats and the subdivision of land, as those terms are defined herein and in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 212, within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction as those boundaries may be from time to time adjusted by annexation, disannexation, or otherwise. The city shall have all remedies and rights provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 212 with regard to the control and approval of subdivisions and plats both within the city and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-2. - Purpose. 
(a)  Interpretation and applications. In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter, it is the intention of the city council that the principles, standards and requirements provided for herein shall be minimum requirements for the platting and developing of subdivisions within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(b)  Valid governmental function. The subdivision of land is the first step in the development process. The distribution and relationship of residential, nonresidential and agricultural uses throughout the community, along with the system of improvements for thoroughfares, utilities, public facilities and community amenities determine, in large measure, the quality of life enjoyed by the residents of the community. Health, safety, economy, amenities, environmental sensitivity, and convenience are all factors that influence and determine a community's quality of life and overall character. A community's quality of life is a matter of public interest. Consequently, the subdivision of land, as it affects a community's quality of life, is an activity where regulation is a valid function of municipal government. The regulations contained herein are intended to encourage the development of a quality municipal environment by establishing standards for the provision of adequate light, air, open space, storm water drainage, transportation, public utilities and facilities, and other needs necessary for ensuring the creation and continuance of a healthy, attractive, safe and efficient community that provides for the conservation, enhancement and protection of its human and natural resources. 
(c)  Intent of standards. The procedure and standards for the development, layout and design of subdivisions of land within the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city are intended to: 
(1)  Promote the development and the utilization of land in a sustainable manner that assures an attractive and high-quality community environment in accordance with the comprehensive plan and the zoning ordinance of the city; 
(2)  Guide and assist property owners and applicants in the correct procedures to be followed, and to inform them of the standards which shall be required; 
(3)  Protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community by imposing standards for the location, design, class and type of streets, walkways (sidewalks), alleys, utilities and essential public services; 
(4)  Assist orderly, efficient and coordinated development within the city's corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction; 
(5)  Provide neighborhood conservation and prevent the development of slums and blight; 
(6)  Integrate the development of various tracts of land into the existing community, and coordinate the future development of adjoining tracts; 
(7)  Provide that the cost of improvements to minimum standards which primarily benefit the tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the tract, and that the cost of improvements to minimum standards which primarily benefit the whole community be borne by the whole community as contained in this chapter thereby assuring that the cost of such required improvements is roughly proportionate to the impact of the development on the city's infrastructure; 
(8)  Ensure the most efficient and beneficial provision of public facilities and services for each tract being subdivided; 
(9)  Provide for compatible relationships between land uses and buildings; provide for the circulation of traffic throughout the municipality, having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways; provide for pedestrian circulation that is appropriate for the various uses of land and buildings; and provide the proper location and width of streets; 
(10)  Prevent pollution of the air, streams and bodies of water; assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; safeguard both surface and groundwater supplies, as well as natural resources and endangered or threatened plant and animal life; and encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the municipality in order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the community and the value of the land; 
(11)  Promote sustainability of development through the preservation of the natural beauty and topography of the municipality, and ensure development that is appropriate with regard to these natural features; 
(12)  Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision; 
(13)  Ensure that public or private facilities are available and will have sufficient capacity to serve proposed and future developments and citizens within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction; 
(14)  Protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the community; 
(15)  Provide for adequate light, air and privacy; secure safety from fire, flood and other danger; and prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population; 
(16)  Protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the community, and encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of the community; 
(17)  Protect and conserve the value of land throughout the community and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and minimize conflicts among the uses of land and buildings; 
(18)  Guide public and private policy and action in providing adequate and efficient transportation systems, public utilities, and other public amenities and facilities; and 
(19)  Encourage the development of a stable, prospering economic environment. 
(d)  Minimum standards. Minimum standards for development are contained in the city's design manuals and standard construction details, the zoning ordinance, the building code, applicable articles of this Code, and in this chapter. However, the comprehensive plan and future land use plan express policies designed to achieve an optimum quality of development in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Subdivision design shall be of a quality that will carry out the purpose and spirit of the policies expressed within the comprehensive plan and within this chapter, and shall be encouraged to exceed the minimum standards required herein. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-3. - Application of regulations. 
(a)  Final plat approval required. If land is required to be platted, no conveyance or sale of any portion or lot of the property may occur until a final plat is approved by the city council and recorded in the land records of Collin or Hunt County. 
(b)  Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy. No subdivision plat shall be recorded until a final plat, accurately describing the property to be conveyed, has been approved in accordance with this chapter and with other applicable city regulations (described in subsection (c)). No building permit, certificate of occupancy, plumbing permit, electrical permit, flood plain permit, utility tap, or certificate of acceptance for required public improvements shall be issued by the city for any parcel of land or plat until: 
(1)  A final plat has been approved in accordance with this chapter; and 
(2)  All improvements required by this chapter have been constructed and accepted by the city, or assurances for the completion of required improvements have been provided in accordance with article VI. 
(c)  Compliance with plans and regulations. Compliance with all city ordinances pertaining to the subdivision of land, and the comprehensive plan, shall be required prior to approval of any development application governed by this chapter. It is the property owners' responsibility to be familiar with, and to comply with city ordinances. Applicable ordinances and requirements include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Comprehensive plan, which includes the future land use plan, thoroughfare plan, and associated maps and plans; 
(2)  Zoning ordinance (Ordinance No. O-2018-0508-001, as amended); 
(3)  Applicable chapters of this Code; 
(4)  Design manuals for storm drainage systems, water and sanitary sewer-lines and thoroughfares adopted by the city; and 
(5)  Standard construction details adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-4. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision and development activity within the city's limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction: 
(1)  The division of land into two or more tracts, lots, sites or parcels; or 
(2)  All subdivisions of land whether by metes and bounds division or by plat, which were outside the jurisdiction of the city's subdivision regulations in Collin or Hunt County, Texas and which subsequently came within the jurisdiction of the city's subdivision regulations through: 
a.  Annexation; or 
b.  Extension of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction; or 
(3)  The combining of two or more contiguous tracts, lots, sites or parcels for the purpose of creating one or more legal lots in order to achieve a more developable site, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
(4)  When a building permit is required for un-platted or improperly platted parcels for one of the following uses: 
a.  Residential single-family: 
1.  Construction of a new single-family dwelling unit; or 
2.  Moving of a primary structure or a main building onto a piece of property; or 
3.  Renovation or expansion of an existing main building in excess of 50 percent of the square footage of the current structure; or 
b.  Nonresidential and multi-family: 
1.  Construction of a new nonresidential or multi-family structure; or 
2.  Additions to, or modification of an existing building in excess of 50 percent of its current size; or 
3.  Moving a primary structure onto a parcel of property; or 
c.  For tracts where any public improvements are proposed; or 
d.  Whenever a property owner proposes to divide land lying within the City or its extraterritorial jurisdiction into two or more tracts, and claims exemption from V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 212, Subch. A for purposes of development, that results in parcels or lots each of which parcels or lots are greater than five acres in size, where each part has access and where no public improvement is being dedicated, he shall first obtain approval of a development plat that meets the requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 212, Subch. B, Regulation of property development, §§ 212.041—212.050. (See section 65-11 for requirements for development plats.) 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-5. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Development of land platted and approved prior to the effective date of this chapter, except as otherwise provided for herein and for which no re-subdivision or replat is sought; or 
(2)  Development of land constituting a single tract, lot, site or parcel for which a legal deed of record describing the boundary of said tract, lot, site or parcel was filed of record in the Deed Records of Collin or Hunt County, Texas on or before the effective date of the ordinance, from which this chapter is derived, or 
(3)  Sale, inheritance, or gift of land by metes and bounds of tracts greater than five acres in size, where each part has access and upon which no improvement is being dedicated, and no subdivision or alteration is occurring; or 
(4)  Existing cemeteries complying with all state and local laws and regulations; or 
(5)  Divisions of land created by order of a court of competent jurisdiction; or 
(6)  When a building permit is requested for un-platted or improperly platted parcels for one or more of the following activities: 
a.  Remodeling or repair of an existing primary structure which involves no expansion of square footage beyond the original structure; or 
b.  Construction of subordinate facilities such as fences and accessory buildings (as defined in the zoning ordinance); or 
c.  Moving a structure off a lot or parcel, or for demolition permits. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-6. - Pending applications. 
(a)  Regulatory review. All applications for plat approval, including final plats, that are pending on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and which have not lapsed shall be reviewed under the regulations in effect immediately preceding the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Not withstanding the foregoing, a property owner may opt, at the owner's sole discretion, that such a plat be reviewed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-7. - Interpretation; conflict; severability. 
(a)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions contained in this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. These regulations shall be construed broadly to promote the purposes for which they are adopted. 
(b)  Conflict with other laws. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law except as provided in this chapter. To the extent that this chapter promulgates standards or imposes restrictions or duties which differ from those imposed by other city ordinances, rules or regulations, the regulations contained within this chapter the provision that is more stringent or imposes a higher standard shall control. 
(c)  Severability. If any part or provision of this chapter, or the application of this chapter to any person or circumstance, is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision, or application directly involved in the controversy in which the judgment shall be rendered, and it shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application of them to other persons or circumstances. The city council hereby declares that it would have enacted the remainder of these regulations even without the incorporation in this chapter of any such part, provision, or application which may be judged invalid. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-8. - Saving provision. 
This chapter shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm or corporation, by lawful action of the city except as shall be expressly provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-9. - Variances. 
(a)  Variances. Where the city council, after a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission (commission) or, in some circumstances described below, the planning and zoning commission upon a good and sufficient showing by the owner, finds that undue hardship will result from strict compliance with a certain provision(s) of this chapter, or where the purposes of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, the city council may approve a variance from any portion of these regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest is secured, provided that the variance shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations, and further provided that the city council shall not approve a variance unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that: 
(1)  Granting the variance will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare, and will not be injurious to other property or to the owners of other property, and the variance will not prevent the orderly subdivision of other property in the vicinity; 
(2)  The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought, and are not applicable generally to other property; 
(3)  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the property owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations is carried out; 
(4)  The variance will not in any manner vary the provisions of the zoning ordinance or comprehensive plan or any other adopted plan(s) of the city; and 
(5)  An alternate design will generally achieve the same result or intent as the standards and regulations prescribed herein. 
Such findings of the city council, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the city council meeting at which a variance is considered. A variance from any provision of this chapter may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Economic hardship to the property owner or developer alone shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship or otherwise justify a variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
If the suspension of any of the rules and regulations of this chapter is sought, said variance request will usually and primarily be considered by the city council. In the event, however, that a city council meeting will not occur within the timelines required pursuant to Texas Local Government Code chapter 212, the city manager or designee shall have the authority to send the variance request to the planning and zoning commission for its approval or disapproval. 
(b)  Conditions. In approving a variance, the city council may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the purposes described in section 65-2. 
(c)  Procedures. A petition for a variance shall be submitted in writing by the property owner to the commission before or contemporaneously with the plat or replat submitted for the commission's consideration. The application shall state fully the grounds for the variance, and all of the facts relied upon by the applicant. The commission shall hold a hearing on the requested variance from this chapter and after having heard from the applicant and all other interested persons the commission shall forward a recommendation regarding the requested variance to the city council, together with the commission's recommendation regarding the plat or replat. The city council shall similarly hold a hearing on the requested variance from this chapter, and after public testimony and giving due consideration to the recommendation of the commission, the city council shall approve or disapprove the requested variance. The city council shall also approve or disapprove the subject plat or replat in accordance with this chapter and the laws of the state. 
(d)  The property owner or applicant of the tract of land under consideration who is aggrieved by the planning and zoning commission's final disapproval of a plat under Texas Local Government Code § 212.0095 for which plat the planning and zoning commission is the final decision maker may appeal such disapproval to the city council within 21 days of the date that the decision to disapprove was made by the planning and zoning commission. All requests for appeals must be made in writing, identify the specific basis for the appeal, and be submitted to the city manager or designee. Any appeal to city council under this provision shall not be considered a filing under Texas Local Government Code chapter 212, and thus shall not require council action within 30 days or 15 days, respectively. The city manager or designee shall prepare a report and place the plat on the agenda for consideration by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2019-1126-001, § 2, 11-26-2019)  
Sec. 65-10. - Waivers from development exactions. 
(a)  Waivers from development exactions. It is the city's intent that any required development exactions shall be roughly proportional to the impact that any proposed development or redevelopment creates on the city's infrastructure and resources. The property owner or applicant for plat approval may file a petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement that is applied or imposed as a condition of approval of a preliminary plat or final plat in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Petition for relief. The property owner or applicant must submit a written petition for relief to the city manager at least ten days prior to the planning and zoning commission's consideration of a preliminary plat or final plat. The petition shall state the reasons for the waiver request and must indicate the dedication or construction requirements from which relief is being requested. An applicant may also submit a petition for relief from conditions of plat approval added by the commission through its consideration of a preliminary plat or final plat. This petition must be submitted no later than ten days following the commission's action. 
(2)  Consideration of plat. Upon filing an appeal, the city will re-evaluate the applicant's submittal to determine whether the subject plat application remains administratively complete. If the plat application has lost its status of being administratively complete, the city will postpone consideration of the plat application by the planning and zoning commission pending preparation of the study required by subsection (a)(3). 
(3)  Study requirements. The city shall provide a study in support of the dedication or construction requirements. The petitioner may provide a study in support of the waiver request. The city's study shall include the following information: 
a.  Total capacity of the city's public infrastructure system or improvements to be dedicated to the city to be utilized by the proposed subdivision, employing standard measures of capacity and equivalency tables that relate the type of development proposed to the quantity of system capacity. If the proposed subdivision is to be developed in phases, such information shall be provided for the entire development. 
b.  Total capacity to be supplied to the city's infrastructure system by the proposed dedication of an interest in land or construction of capital improvements. 
c.  Comparison of the capacity of the city's public facilities system to be consumed by the proposed subdivision with the capacity to be supplied by the proposed dedication of an interest in land or construction of capital improvements. In making this comparison, the impacts on the city's public facilities system from the entire development shall be considered. 
d.  The effect of any city participation in the costs of oversizing the capital improvements to be constructed. 
(b)  City engineer's recommendations. The city engineer shall evaluate the petition and any supporting study provided by the petitioner and make a recommendation to the planning and zoning commission based upon the city's study, any submitted petitioner's study and his/her own analysis. The city engineer may utilize any reasonable methodology and information in evaluating the petition. 
(c)  Consideration of petition. Based upon the petition, any study submitted by the petitioner and the city engineer's recommendation, the planning and zoning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council as to whether the application of the regulations for dedication or public improvements is roughly proportional to the nature and impact created by the development. The commission, and subsequently the city council in making its final decision, shall consider one of the following recommendations regarding the petition for relief: 
(1)  Denial of the petition and imposition of the standard or condition requiring dedication or construction of capital improvements in accordance with the regulations contained within this chapter. 
(2)  Granting of the petition and waiver in whole or in part regarding any dedication or construction requirement necessary to meet the criteria for approval. 
(3)  Accepting alternative designs for the public infrastructure system or improvements to be dedicated to the city. 
(4)  Delaying the imposition of the requirement until a future phase of development. If a delay is recommended, the future phase of development must be clearly defined. 
(5)  Reduction in the applicant's cost of the dedication or construction requirement. 
(d)  Criteria for approval. The city council shall will usually and primarily determine whether the application of the regulations requiring dedication of an interest in land for public improvements or construction of capital improvements is roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed development on such water, wastewater, roadway or drainage system, and reasonably benefits the development. In the event, however, that a city council meeting will not occur within the timelines required pursuant to Texas Local Government Code chapter 212, the city manager shall have the authority to send the waiver request to the planning and zoning commission for its approval or disapproval. 
(e)  Lapse of plat approval. If relief is granted to the petitioner, it shall remain in effect for the time period specified in section 65-27 for each type of plat, and shall end upon expiration of the plat. Plat approvals may be extended as provided in section 65-27. 
(f)  Plat modification. If a plat for which relief was granted is modified to increase the number of residential units or the intensity of non-residential uses, the city engineer may prepare a new study to validate the relief. The petitioner may file for relief, and the new application and study shall be submitted and processed in accordance with this section. 
(g)  Effect on other ordinances. No waiver granted pursuant to this section shall waive any dimensional requirement of the city's zoning ordinance including but not limited to lot depth, lot width, lot area, lot coverage, setbacks, landscaping and buffers. Any waiver from the literal interpretation and application of the city's zoning ordinance shall be strictly governed by the city's zoning ordinance and state law. Additionally, a waiver granted pursuant to this chapter shall not relieve the property owner from compliance with any other statute, ordinance, rule or regulation imposed by the city, county, state or federal government upon the development of the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2019-1126-001, § 3, 11-26-2019)  
Sec. 65-11. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the plural number shall include the singular number (and vice versa); and words in the masculine gender shall include the feminine gender (and vice versa). Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be determined in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. The word "shall" is always mandatory, while the word "may" is merely directory. 
Addition means a lot, tract or parcel of land lying within the city's corporate boundaries or extraterritorial jurisdiction which is intended for the purpose of subdivision or development. 
Administrative officers means any officer of the city referred to in this chapter by title, including but not limited to the city manager, city attorney, city secretary, city planner, building official and city engineer shall be the person so retained in that position by the city, or his or her duly authorized representative. This definition shall also include engineering, planning, legal and other consultants retained by the city to supplement or support existing city staff, as deemed appropriate by the city. 
Alley means a minor public right-of-way not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street. The length of an alley segment is to be measured from the right-of-way lines of the streets from which the alley is provided access, including any alley turnouts onto a street. 
Amended or amending plat means a revised plat correcting errors or making minor changes to the original recorded final plat, as authorized by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.016. 
Amenity means an improvement to be dedicated to the public or to the common ownership of the lot owners of the subdivision and providing an aesthetic, recreational or other benefit, other than those prescribed by this chapter. 
Applicant means a person who submits an application for an approval required by this chapter. 
Application means a written request for an approval required by this chapter. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Block length or street length means for a residential subdivision, that distance measured along the centerline of the street from the intersection centerpoint of one through street to the intersecting centerpoint of another street, or to the midpoint of a cul-de-sac. The through street referred to above shall not be a cul-de-sac, a dead-end street, or a looped street, but shall be a street which clearly has two points of ingress from two different directions. 
Bond means any form of a surety bond in an amount and form satisfactory to the city. 
Building setback line means the line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building or other structure and the adjacent street right-of-way line, property line, a creek, or some other specific environmental feature. 
Capital improvements program (CIP) means the official proposed schedule, if any, of all future public projects listed together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project, as adopted by city council. 
City means the City of Farmersville, Texas. 
City attorney means the term city attorney shall apply only to such attorney, or firm of attorneys, that has been specifically employed by the city to assist in legal matters. 
City council or council means the duly elected governing body of the City of Farmersville, Texas. 
City engineer means the term "city engineer" shall apply only to such licensed professional engineer, or firm of licensed professional consulting engineers, that has been specifically employed by the city to assist in engineering-related matters. 
City manager means the person holding the position of city manager, as appointed by the city council, or their duly authorized representative. 
City planner means the term "city planner" shall apply only to such practicing, professional land planner, or firm of professional land planners, that has been specifically employed by the city to assist in planning- and zoning- related matters. 
Commission means the planning and zoning commission of the city. 
Comprehensive plan means the phrase "comprehensive plan" shall mean the comprehensive plan of the city and adjoining areas as adopted by the city council, including all its revisions. This plan indicates the general locations recommended for various land uses, transportation routes, public and private buildings, streets, parks, water and wastewater facilities, and other public and private developments and improvements. 
Concept plan means a map generally showing all topography, trees, drainage patterns, existing utilities, existing infrastructure, etc. on which is superimposed a drawing of the overall conceptual layout of a proposed development, which shows the anticipated plan of development, and which serves as a working base for noting and incorporating suggestions of the city's administrative officers, the commission, the city council, and others who are consulted prior to preparation of the preliminary plat. A concept plan is also sometimes referred to as a "site plan" or a "land study." 
Contiguous means lots are contiguous when at least one boundary line or point of one lot touches a boundary line, or lines, or point of another lot. 
Cul-de-sac means a street having only one outlet to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turnaround or "bulb." The length of a cul-de-sac is to be measured from the intersection centerpoint of the adjoining through street to the midpoint of the cul-de-sac bulb. 
Dead-end street means a street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet to another street. 
Design standards means the city's technical construction standards and specifications for the construction of subdivision improvement, as published in the then current manuals for the design of storm drainage systems, water and sanitation sewer lines and thoroughfare standards, as maintained and available for inspection at the city hall. 
Easement means the word "easement" shall mean an area of joint use on private property. 
(1)  Drainage or utility easements are areas upon which the city or a public utility shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs and other improvements or growths which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance or efficiency of its respective systems within said easements. The city and public utilities shall, at all times, have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon easements for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining and adding to or removing all or part of their respective systems without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone. 
(2)  Access easements are areas, which are open to the general public at large that shall remain at all times open to the public for access. 
Engineer means a person duly authorized and licensed under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Practice Act to practice the profession of engineering. 
Engineering plans or drawings means the maps or drawings accompanying a plat and showing the specific location and design of all changes and improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the city as a condition of approval of the plat. 
Escrow means a deposit of cash with the city in accordance with this chapter. 
Extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) means all land situated, as classified by the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code chs. 42, 43 and 212, in all directions from the corporate boundary of the city and its extensions, and which is not in conflict with the ETJ of another municipality, or with any duly executed boundary agreement with another incorporated municipality. 
Filing date means the date on which the submittal is deemed administratively complete. 
Final plat (also record plat) means the one official and authentic map of an as built subdivision of land prepared from actual field measurement and staking of all identifiable points by a surveyor or engineer, with the subdivision location referenced to a GPS control point, and with all boundaries, corners and curves of the land division sufficiently described so that they can be reproduced without additional references and showing all streets and lots, easements, dedications and other pertinent features as constructed on the ground and as accepted by the city. The final plat of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be recorded in the land records of Collin or Hunt County, Texas following acceptance and approval by the city. An amended plat is also a final plat. 
Governing body means the city council of the City of Farmersville, Texas. 
Improvement or development agreement means a contract entered into by the applicant and the city, by which the applicant promises to complete the required public improvements within the subdivision or addition within a specified time period following final plat approval. 
Land study means a land study is also known as a "concept plan." 
Land planner means persons, including surveyors or engineers, who possess and can demonstrate a valid proficiency in the planning of residential, nonresidential and other related developments, such proficiency often having been acquired by education in the field of landscape architecture or other specialized planning curriculum, or by actual experience and practice in the field of land planning. 
Lot (also lot of record) means a divided or undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street, and which is, or which may in the future be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement; which is designated as a distinct and separate tract; and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed of record. 
Major plat means all plats not classified as minor plats, including but not limited to subdivisions of more than four lots, or any plat that requires the construction of a new street (or portion thereof) or the extension of a municipal facility as required by this or any other city ordinance. 
Major subdivision means this is the same as a "major plat." 
Minor plat means a subdivision of land resulting in four or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extensions of municipal facilities. 
Minor subdivision means this is the same as a minor plat. 
On-site facilities or improvements means these are the existing or proposed facilities or improvements constructed within the property boundaries of the plat, and the existing or proposed facilities required to be constructed or improved immediately adjacent to the property that are needed to serve the development. Facilities and improvements include, but are not limited to, streets, alleys, water lines, sewer lines, storm drainage facilities, and curbs and gutters. 
Off-site facilities or improvements means off-site facilities shall mean those facilities or improvements that are required to serve the site but that are not located within the boundaries of the plat, and are not required to be constructed or improved immediately adjacent to the property to serve the development. These include oversizing for streets, sewer lines, water lines and storm drainage facilities, as well as the excess capacity of facilities such as water storage tanks and wastewater treatment plants available for new development. 
Overlength street means a street segment, or a cul-de-sac or alley segment, which exceeds the maximum length allowed by this chapter, as measured along the centerline of the street from the intersection centerpoint of one through street, which shall not be a cul-de-sac or dead-end or looped street, to the intersecting centerpoint of another through street or, in the case of a cul-de-sac, to the midpoint of the cul-de-sac. For an alley segment, the measurement shall be to the right-of-way lines of the streets from which the alley is provided access, including any alley turnouts, or from the centerpoint of an intersection with another alley, which connects to a street. 
Pavement width means the portion of a street that is available for vehicular traffic. Where curbs are used, it is the portion from the back of one curb to the back of the opposite curb. 
Perimeter street means any existing or planned street which abuts the subdivision or addition to be platted. 
Person means any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency, political subdivision, or legal entity of any kind. 
Planning and zoning commission means the duly appointed planning and zoning commission of the city, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.007. 
Plat means this means a preliminary plat, final plat, development plat, amended plat or replat, as determined by the context. 
Preliminary plat means the graphic expression of the proposed overall plan for subdividing, improving and developing a tract, showing in plan view the proposed street and lot layout, easements, dedications and other pertinent features, with such notations as are sufficient to substantially identify the general scope and detail of the proposed development, as well as its compliance with all requirements of the development codes of the city. Engineering plans for all public improvements shall be submitted along with the preliminary plat. The preliminary plat is subject to approval by the planning and zoning commission and city council. This type of plat is required when property is being subdivided into more than four lots, a new public street is being created or when municipal infrastructure must be extended to serve any proposed lot. 
Private street means a private vehicular access way, including an alley, that is shared by and that serves two or more lots, which is not dedicated to the public, and which is not publicly maintained. 
Property owner (also known as "applicant" or "subdivider" or "developer"). Any person or firm, association, syndicate, general or limited partnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity, or any agent thereof, that has sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter. In any event, the term "property owner" shall be restricted to include only the owner(s) or authorized agent(s) of such owner(s), such as a developer of land sought to be subdivided. 
The phrases public improvements or public facilities or public infrastructure means facilities, infrastructure and other appurtenances, typically owned and maintained by the city, which serve a public purpose in providing a needed service or commodity, such as wastewater collection and treatment and water storage and distribution, and which protect the general health, safety, welfare and convenience of the city's citizens, including efficiency in traffic circulation and access for emergency services. Required public improvements or public facilities or public infrastructure may include, but shall not be limited to, street and alley paving, including any necessary median openings and left turn lanes on major thoroughfares; water lines and pumping stations; sanitary sewer lines and lift stations; storm drainage structures and storm water management devices; water quality and erosion controls; screening and retaining walls; fire lane paving and fire hydrants; landscaping, where such is used for required screening or other required landscaped area, and associated irrigation system; and any required public sidewalks, street lights and street name signs. The terms "public improvements" or "public facilities" or "public infrastructure" shall not include facilities or infrastructure of private providers of utility services other than water and wastewater, but shall be deemed to include facilities and infrastructure that the city would normally require of a development but which will be owned and maintained by an entity such as a homeowner's association, as in the case of private streets. 
Record plat means a map, drawing or chart prepared according to the provisions of this chapter, and containing all engineering and legal data, dedications, and certificates necessary to the recording of same in the map and plat records of the county. A record plat may also be referred to as a final plat. 
Replatting or replat means this is the re-subdivision of any part or all of a block or blocks of a previously platted subdivision, addition, lot or tract. 
Right-of-way means a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a street or alley. Where appropriate, right-of-way may include other facilities and utilities such as sidewalks; railroad crossings; electrical, communication, oil and gas facilities, water and sanitary and storm sewer facilities; and any other special use. The use of right-of-way shall also include parkways and medians outside of the paved portion of the street. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right of-way, and shall not be included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. 
Standard street means a standard street is a street or road that meets or exceeds the minimum specifications in the city's standard street specifications, and which is constructed to the ultimate configuration for the type of roadway it is designated for on the city's thoroughfare plan. 
Street means a right-of-way, whether public or private and however designated, which provides vehicular access to adjacent land. Streets may be of the following categories: 
(1)  Major thoroughfares, also known as arterial streets or primary thoroughfares, which provide vehicular movement from one neighborhood to another or to distant points within the city, and including freeways or highways leading to other communities. 
(2)  Collector streets, also known as feeder streets or secondary thoroughfares, which provide vehicular circulation within neighborhoods, and from local streets to major thoroughfares. 
(3)  Local residential streets, also known as minor thoroughfares or streets, which primarily provide direct vehicular access to abutting residential property. 
(4)  Private streets are streets which are owned and maintained by a homeowner's association or property owners' association, and which are not dedicated to the public. 
Street improvements means this means any street or thoroughfare, together with all appurtenances required by city regulations to be provided with such street or thoroughfare including, but not limited to, walkways (sidewalks), drainage facilities to be situated in the right-of-way for such street or thoroughfare, traffic control devices, street lights and street signs, for which facilities the city will ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation. 
Street length means this phrase means the same as block length. 
Street right-of-way means the width of the right-of-way for any roadway is the shortest perpendicular distance between the lines which delineate the rights-of-way of the street. 
Subdivision (also known as addition) means a division or re-division of any tract of land situated within the city's corporate limits or its extraterritorial jurisdiction into two or more parts, lots or sites, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, division of ownership, or building development. Subdivision includes the re-subdivision of land or lots which are part of a previously recorded subdivision. 
Substandard street means an existing street or road that does not meet the minimum specifications in the city's standard street specifications, and which is not constructed to the ultimate configuration for the type of roadway it is designated for on the city's thoroughfare plan. 
Surveyor means a licensed land surveyor or a registered public surveyor, as authorized by state statutes to practice the profession of surveying. 
TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (formerly TNRCC). 
Temporary improvements means improvements built and maintained by the property owner that are needed to remedy a circumstance that is temporary in nature, such as a temporary drainage easement or erosion control device, that will be removed upon completion of the subdivision or shortly thereafter. 
Yard means the open area between building setback lines and lot lines. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2019-1126-001, § 4, 11-26-2019)  
Sec. 65-12. - Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent of any owner to subdivide or plat any land into lots, blocks and streets or to sell property therein and thereby which has not been platted or subdivided in accordance with this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any term or provision of this chapter. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 or each offense. Each and every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Civil enforcement. Appropriate civil actions and proceedings may be maintained in law or in equity to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to impose additional penalties, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation of these regulations, whether such violation occurs with respect to lands within the corporate boundaries of the city or within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Secs. 65-13—65-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLATTING PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 65-21. - In general. 
(a)  Classification of subdivisions and additions. Before any land subdivision is filed for record with the county clerk, the property owner shall apply for and secure city council approval of the required subdivision plat, in accordance with the following procedures, unless otherwise provided within this chapter. 
(1)  Minor subdivision plats may be approved for residential or nonresidential properties. Minor plat approval by the city manager requires the submission of a final plat drawing and other submission materials required by section 65-30. Lots may be conveyed or sold only after the plat has been approved by the city and the plat has been recorded with Collin or Hunt County. 
(2)  Major subdivision plats may be approved for residential or nonresidential properties. The procedure for approval of a major subdivision typically involves three steps: a concept plan, preliminary plat and final plat. Sections 65-28 through 65-30 provide the requirements for each submittal. Major plat approval shall be in accordance with sections 65-24 through 65-26. All major subdivision plats must be reviewed by the commission and approved by the city council, pursuant to sections 65-24 through 65-26. Upon completion of the required public improvements, or upon submission and city approval of the appropriate surety for required public improvements in accordance with article VI, the property owner may file the final plat in the land records of Collin or Hunt County. Lots may be sold only after the final plat has been recorded in the appropriate county. No conveyance or sale of any portion or lot of the property may occur until after the final plat is approved by the city council and filed. 
(3)  Replats may be approved, after public hearings before the planning and zoning commission and city council, in accordance with section 65-32. 
(b)  Zoning requirements. A property within the city's corporate limits that is being proposed for platting must be properly zoned as required for the proposed subdivision prior to submission of an application for approval of any plat. In addition, the proposed development layout or subdivision design shown on the proposed plat must be in conformance with all standards and requirements prescribed in the city's zoning ordinance. 
Any plat submitted for approval by the city shall conform to and be in conformity with the city's zoning ordinance, if the property is located within the city's corporate limits, and, if the property is located within the city's corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction, it shall conform to and be in conformity with the city's comprehensive plan, including all adopted water, sewer, storm drainage, future land use, park, recreation, open space and thoroughfare plans. 
(c)  Pre-application conference. Prior to formal application for approval of any concept plan or plat, the applicant and/or representatives shall request and attend a mandatory pre-application conference to become familiar with the city's development regulations and the subdivision process. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-22. - Administratively complete application and submission dates. 
(a)  Administratively complete. The filing date of a full and complete plat submittal ("plat application") is the date on which the application for a preliminary plat, final plat, development plat, replat, minor plat, minor replat, amending plat, or record plat is considered administratively complete. An application for a preliminary plat, final plat, development plat, replat, minor plat, minor replat, amending plat, conveyance plat or record plat shall be considered administratively complete when the correct application has been submitted together with the completed corresponding plat and all of the fully completed supporting documents and information, which documents and information are generally set out in the submittal checklist published by the city, necessary for the city manager, city secretary and/or city engineer or their designee(s) to review the application for conformity with the requirements identified by and through the Code of Ordinances, City of Farmersville, Texas, and all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the State of Texas and the United States plus the payment of the full amount of the applicable application fees required for the processing of such application. 
(b)  Rejection of incomplete plat applications. Submitted plat applications not deemed to be administratively complete shall be returned to the applicant without any further action by the city. The fact that a city employee reviewed a plat application to determine whether it is administratively complete shall not be binding on the city as the official acceptance of the application for filing. 
(c)  Disagreement regarding administrative completeness. If an applicant disagrees with the city manager or the city engineer or their designee(s) that their plat application is not administratively complete, the applicant shall provide the city manager with written notice of their challenge to administrative completeness, pay the applicable fees, and demand a technical review of the plat application with the understanding that the plat application will be reviewed in accordance with the requirements of Texas Local Government Code § 212.009, or any successor statute. 
(d)  Right to refile application. After it is determined that a plat application is not administratively complete and returned to the applicant, the applicant may make the changes to the defective plat application required to make it administratively complete and submit a new plat application. 
(e)  Submission dates. An administratively complete application for approval of any plat shall be submitted to the city at least 16 calendar days but no more than 30 calendar days, prior to the commission meeting at which the applicant desires the plat to be considered. 
(f)  Expiration of application. An application for approval of a plat or plan for development shall be deemed to expire on the forty-fifth day after the application is submitted to the city for processing if the applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance as specified in the determination provided to the applicant. No vested rights accrue solely from the filing of a plat application that has expired pursuant to this section, or from the filing of a complete application that is subsequently denied. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1126-001, § 5, 11-26-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2019-1126-001, § 5, adopted Nov. 26, 2019, repealed the former § 65-22, and enacted a new § 65-22 as set out herein. The former § 65-22 pertained to official submission date and completeness of application and derived from Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, adopted May 8, 2018.  
Sec. 65-23. - Fees, applications forms and procedures. 
(a)  Fees, policies and procedures. City council shall establish a schedule of fees as required to recoup costs related to the administration of this chapter. In addition to the requirements outlined herein for each type of development application, the city manager is hereby authorized to maintain policies and procedures applicable to the submission and processing of applications including, but not limited to, application forms, compliance checklists, dedication language blocks for plats, tax certificate requirements and other similar items that must be used and submitted by the applicant(s). 
(b)  Payment of fees. All application fees as outlined in Appendix A (Master Fee Schedule) of the Farmersville Code, as may be amended from time to time, shall be paid prior to action being taken on the plat application. If any required fees are not paid as specified herein for any plat application such plat application shall be rejected as being an incomplete plat application and shall not be determined to be administratively complete until all such applicable application fees have been paid in full and the plat application has me all other requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2019-1126-001, § 6, 11-26-2019)  
Sec. 65-24. - Submission procedures and city review process. 
(a)  Pre-development meeting. Prior to applying for a plat, the subdivider should consult with the city manager and the city engineer or their duly authorized representatives concerning the ultimate land use of the proposed development, the most advantageous subdivision plan, the suitability of the location of the proposed subdivision, the arrangement of streets, alleys, and lots, the layout of utility lines and availability of service from trunk mains and other regulations and policies of the city regarding development. 
(b)  Submission materials. 
(1)  Letter of intent. The subdivider shall submit a letter to the city manager showing his name and address and that of his land planner, engineering consultant and/or surveyor and stating his intent to subdivide a particular property, briefly describing the location, amount of land, particulars as to the intended use of the property and any variances, if requested. Such letter of intent shall be accompanied by a completed application for plat approval, the appropriate fee and drawings of the plat, as indicated herein. 
(2)  Completed application form. The application shall include a written application form that bears the signature(s) of the property owner(s) of the subject property, along with the appropriate submission fee, (inspection fees may be paid at the time the actual inspection is made of the project), copies of the plat in a size and format specified by the city, a copy of any applicable development agreement pertaining to the subject property (if any), and any other applicable information and materials required by the city. The city requires proof of land ownership prior to approval of any development application involving real property. 
(3)  Tax certificates and proof of no outstanding city fees, debts, obligations or assessments. The application shall be accompanied by an original tax certificate from each taxing unit with jurisdiction of the real property indicating that no delinquent ad valorem taxes are owed on the subject property. Documentation shall also be included that shows there exists no delinquent assessments, fees, or other debts or obligations to the city and which are directly attributable to the subject property. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to provide evidence or proof that all taxes, assessments, debts or obligations have been paid at the time of submission for any application for approval under this chapter. 
(4)  Engineer's summary report. The application shall also be accompanied by an engineer's summary report which describes, in as much detail as necessary, the following: the overall nature and scope of the proposed development including, but not limited to, the following: the current approved zoning of the property, proposed use(s) and acreage of each proposed use, minimum lot sizes, widths and depths, number of lots to be created, and special amenities or facilities that will be included in the development; how the property will be served with required utilities and services; how storm water drainage will be handled; and, an itemization and description of any variance or waiver from the provisions of this chapter that will be sought. 
(5)  Approved driveway spacing, utility service provider letters and school district letter. If the proposed development will have access points onto a major thoroughfare, the application shall also include a letter from the appropriate governmental entity, such as TxDOT or Collin or Hunt Counties, acknowledging and approving proposed driveway locations and corresponding median openings and left turn lanes, if applicable. Letters shall also be provided, together with the application, from each of the applicable utility service providers for basic utility services specifically including water, wastewater, gas, electricity and solid waste, verifying their ability to provide an adequate level of service for the proposed development. If the proposed development is located in the ETJ and will have wastewater served by on-site septic facilities ("OSSF") or some other wastewater facility ("Alternate Wastewater Service") rather than being served by and through the city's underground sanitary sewer the applicant shall obtain approval of, and provide city with evidence of approval of the alternate wastewater service from the appropriate governmental entity, such as the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) or Collin or Hunt Counties before the plat application will be considered administratively complete. The application shall also be accompanied by a letter from the Farmersville Independent School District that addresses the district's ability to accommodate the additional number of school-age children that will be generated by the proposed development, and that expresses any desire the district may have to obtain a future school site within any portion of the subject property. 
(6)  Size, format and scale. All plat drawings and other corresponding plans and drawings, including engineering plans and landscape and screening plans, shall be submitted in a size, format and engineering scale as approved by the city, and in a format that will be acceptable for eventual filing at Collin County or Hunt County. The city may deny a hearing and any approval if the applicant does not submit the complete information and fees required by this chapter in a timely manner. 
(7)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to knowingly or willfully misrepresent, or fail to include, any information required by this chapter in any plat application or during any public hearing or meeting of the planning and zoning commission or city council. Such a violation shall constitute grounds for denial of the plat. 
(8)  Request to extend 30-day requirement. After the plat has been scheduled on an agenda (or at any time prior), the applicant may request, in writing, an extension of the 30-day approval requirement specified in Texas Local Government Code § 212.009 for a period not to exceed 30 days , in order to allow more time to correct deficiencies, address concerns, or otherwise improve the plat pursuant to the city's regulations. A request to extend the 30-day time period an additional 30 days must be submitted to the planning and zoning commission or the city council as determined appropriate by the city manager. 
(9)  Simultaneous submission of plats. In the event that an applicant submits preliminary and final plat applications simultaneously, as provided in section 65-29(d), the city manager shall schedule both plat applications for action by the commission within 30 calendar days of the plats being determined administratively complete, unless the applicant has voluntarily executed a written request for extension of the 30-day review period for one or both plats and the request is approved by the commission or city council. If the preliminary plat has not received approval prior to consideration of the final plat by the commission, then the commission shall approve with conditions or disapprove (deny) the final plat if not withdrawn by the applicant. The city council shall take action on either one or both plat applications, as applicable, within 30 calendar days of the commission's action. Affirmation of, or minor modifications to, the commission's recommendation to approve the plat(s) with conditions shall require a simple majority vote of the council members present and voting. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2019-1126-001, § 7, 11-26-2019)  
Sec. 65-25. - Approval process. 
(a)  At such time as the city manager or the city engineer, or their respective designee(s), determine that a plat application is administratively complete, city staff will begin its technical review of the plat application for the preliminary plat, final plat, development plat, replat, minor plat, minor replat, amending plat, or record plat (collectively "plat"), and shall submit the plat application together with the plat to the city manager, the planning and zoning commission or the city council, as appropriate, together with the city manager's recommendation regarding the plat application and plat so as to allow the planning and zoning commission or the city council to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the plat application and affiliated plat within 30 days in accordance with Section 212.009(a) of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. 
(b)  Action on initial submittal. 
(1)  By the city manager. In the event the city manager conditionally approves an amended plat or minor plat or minor replat, the city manager shall provide the applicant a written statement of the conditions for the conditional approval in accordance with Section 212.0091 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. 
(2)  By the commission or council. In the event the planning and zoning commission or city council conditionally approves a plat or disapproves a plat, the commission or council shall provide the applicant a written statement of the conditions for the conditional approval or reasons for disapproval in accordance with Section 212.0091 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. 
a.  Action on written response remedying conditions/reasons for disapproval. After the conditional approval of a plat or disapproval of a plat, an applicant may submit to the city a written response that satisfies each condition for the conditional approval or remedies each reason provided for the disapproval, in accordance with Section 212.0093 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. 
1.  By the city manager. In the event the city receives such a response from an applicant regarding an amended plat or minor plat or minor replat, the city manager shall determine whether to approve the applicant's previously conditionally approved amended plat or minor plat or minor replat not later than the 15th day after the date the response was submitted, in accordance with Section 212.0095 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. If, however, the city manager is unable to approve the same, the city manager shall cause the applicant's previously conditionally approved amended plat or minor plat or minor replat to be considered and ruled upon by the commission or council either of which may also disapprove the applicant's previously conditionally approved amended plat or minor plat or minor replat not later than the 15th day after the date the response was submitted, in accordance with Section 212.0095 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. 
2.  By the commission or council. In the event the city receives such a response from an applicant, the commission, or council shall determine whether to approve the applicant's previously conditionally approved or disapproved plat not later than the 15th day after the date the response was submitted, in accordance with Section 212.0095 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. The commission or council may also disapprove the applicant's previously conditionally approved or disapproved plat not later than the 15th day after the date the response was submitted, in accordance with Section 212.0095 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1126-001, § 8, 11-26-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2019-1126-001, § 8, adopted Nov. 26, 2019, repealed the former § 65-25, and enacted a new § 65-25 as set out herein. The former § 65-25 pertained to action by the planning and zoning commission and city council and derived from Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, adopted May 8, 2018.  
Sec. 65-26. - Appeals. 
(a)  Reasons for disapproval. If the commission recommends disapproval (denial) of a plat application or denies a concept plan application, the commission shall state such disapproval and the specific technical reasons therefore. 
(b)  Process. The property owner or applicant of the tract of land under consideration who is aggrieved by the planning and zoning commission's final disapproval of a plat under Texas Local Government Code § 212.0095 for which plat the planning and zoning commission is the final decision maker may appeal such disapproval to the city council within 10 days of the date that the decision to disapprove was made by the planning and zoning commission. All requests for appeals must be made in writing, identify the specific basis for the appeal, and be submitted to the city manager. Any appeal to city council under this provision shall not be considered a filing under Texas Local Government Code chapter 212, and thus shall not require council action within 30 days or 15 days, respectively. The city manager or designee shall prepare a report and place the plat on the agenda for consideration by the city council. 
(c)  Action of city council. The council may change the decision of the commission by a three-fourths majority vote of the council members present and voting. The council may also, where appropriate, remand the plat back to the commission for reconsideration if it believes that there is a compelling reason to do so, such as the introduction of significant new facts or testimony. The city council shall be deemed to have concurred in the disapproval or denial of any plat application that is disapproved or denied by the commission until such time as the city council specifically overrules the commission's decision as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2019-1126-001, § 9, 11-26-2019)  
Sec. 65-27. - Lapse of approval, reinstatement and dormant projects. 
(a)  Concept plans and preliminary site plans. The approval of any concept plan or preliminary plat as required by this chapter, shall be effective for two years beyond the date that the plat was approved by the commission or council, except as otherwise provided herein. On or before the second anniversary of council approval of the plat, the applicant must have submitted an application for the next consecutive step in the platting process. If this next consecutive step is not accomplished, then the approved plat shall be deemed to have expired and shall become null and void. 
(b)  [Preliminary plats.] When a preliminary plat has been approved by the commission or council or is otherwise deemed approved, a final plat for all or a part of the area shall be submitted within six months thereafter; otherwise the approval shall terminate and shall be void. However, prior to the expiration of said approval, the time for filing of the application for the record plat may be extended at the written request of the subdivider. The first filing extension (not to exceed 90 days) may be granted by the city manager or referred to the planning and zoning commission or city council. Any further requests for extensions shall be considered by the planning and zoning commission or city council. 
If a preliminary plat expires, the general development plan and/or concept plan, if one was approved, that underlies and forms the basis for the preliminary plat shall also expire contemporaneously with the expiration of the preliminary plat. 
Following the expiration of the preliminary plat, the subdivider at any time thereafter may submit a new general development plan and/or concept plan, if required, and/or preliminary plat for commission or council approval following the procedures and regulations then in effect. 
(c)  Final plats. The approval of a final plat shall be effective for a period of two years beyond the date that the plat was approved by the commission and council. If the required fees are not paid and the applicable site construction not commenced within this time period, the final plat shall expire and become null and void, unless such time period is extended or reinstated by the city manager. 
(d)  Filing of final plats. Following the acceptance of all improvements, the final plat shall be filed at Collin County or Hunt County at the city's earliest convenience. A filed final plat is valid in perpetuity, unless vacated or amended. Failure to file a final plat in a timely manner may be subject for withholding of building permits, certificates of occupancy and connection of city utilities. 
(e)  Lapse of approval of engineering plans. The approved engineering plans shall be valid for a period of one year following approval by the city engineer. The city council may, upon written request by the applicant, grant an extension of approval for a time period no greater than one year, after which the engineering plans shall be subject to re-approval by the city engineer if no construction has occurred. 
(f)  Extension and reinstatement procedure. Prior to the lapse of approval for a plat, the property owner may petition the city to extend the plat approval. Such petition shall be considered by the city council, and an extension may be granted by council for a specific period of time. If no petition for extension of plat approval is submitted by the property owner prior to the expiration date, then the plat shall be deemed to have expired and shall become null and void. The property owner must thereafter submit a new plat application for approval, including applicable fees, and shall conform to the development regulations then in effect. 
The city council may extend the approval subject to additional conditions based upon newly enacted city regulations or state legislation, or such as are necessary to ensure compliance with the original conditions of approval and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The council may also specify a shorter time for extension of the plat than the original two-year approval period. 
(g)  Dormant projects. Any plan or plat approved prior to May 11, 2004 without an expiration date and for which no progress had been made toward completion of the project. 
(h)  Re-applications and fees. Should a development proposal or plat application lapse or expire, or should it be denied by the commission or the council, then that application ceases "pending" status and the project, and its corresponding series of development approvals and permits, shall be deemed to be ended, or "completed." Any re-application for any type of development approval for that property shall be considered commencement of a new project, and shall be accompanied by new application materials, including new submission fees, and shall conform to all applicable city ordinances in effect at the time of submission of the new application. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2019-1126-001, § 10, 11-26-2019)  
Sec. 65-28. - Concept plan. 
(a)  Purpose and applicability. The purpose of a concept plan is to allow the planning and zoning commission to preview proposed major thoroughfare and collector street patterns; land use patterns and trends; environmental issues and constraints; conformance to the comprehensive plan, future land use plan, thoroughfare plan, water and sewer master plans, and other applicable plans of the city; and, if the subject property is within the city's corporate limits, the zoning ordinance; and the property's relationship to adjoining subdivisions or properties. Review of a concept plan also assists the city in evaluating the possible impacts of the proposed development in terms of provision of essential public facilities and services, respecting and preserving important natural features and the environment, provision of open space and recreational opportunities, and protecting the general health, safety and welfare of the community. Concept plans may be used to separate large properties into parts for phasing site planning and development. Submission and approval of a concept plan is the first step in the approval process for all residential or nonresidential development projects; however, the city manager may allow an applicant to initiate the subdivision process with a preliminary plat based on the size of the property and the nature of the proposed development. 
(b)  Concept plan content. 
(1)  General. All plans must include the date of preparation, appropriate engineering scale, north arrow, vicinity map, and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of both the property owner and the individuals preparing the plans. 
(2)  Site features. The plan shall describe existing natural features such as contours at not less than two-foot intervals, trees over six inches in caliper, drainage ways and other water features and physical improvements by including the following items: 
a.  The slope or grade of the property; 
b.  The location of creeks, rivers, washes, gullies, ponds, wells, lakes and wetlands in addition to any floodway and 100-year floodplain within the property; 
c.  The location of any groves or stands of trees or wooded areas including any majestic or historic trees; 
d.  Any places, natural features, or structures of local or historic significance; and 
e.  Any areas of existing impervious coverage and the location of any transitions from natural land to impervious surface. 
(3)  Plan layout. The concept plan shall include the following: 
a.  A metes and bounds description of the overall tract; 
b.  Conceptual representation of proposed use(s) and generalized representation of proposed improvements; 
c.  Identification of all areas to be dedicated to the city or to have public easements, such as roadways, utilities, open space and drainage areas; 
d.  General indication of how the proposed development will be able to achieve the required points for applicable design standards required in this chapter; 
e.  Location of all proposed screening between the site and adjacent property; 
f.  Indication of each phase of development if separate phases are proposed; and 
g.  The location of collector roadways proposed in the development, right-of-way widths, and the location of collector access points to abutting or adjoining streets and highways. 
(c)  Other materials. Other material that may be required and submitted in support of the application: 
(1)  Draft development agreement and any covenants, conditions, restrictions and agreements that govern the construction, use, maintenance and operation of roadways, parks, open space, drainage areas and facilities; 
(2)  A preliminary geotechnical report that addresses soil, subsurface and slope conditions that may affect development; 
(3)  A traffic study or traffic impact analysis, as determined by the city engineer, showing the projects impact on roadway and intersection capacity; and 
(4)  A development schedule indicating the approximate date on which construction is expected to begin and the rate of anticipated development to completion. 
(d)  Extent of area shown. When the overall development project is to be developed in phases, the concept plan area shall include the entire property from which the phases are being subdivided and an approximate development schedule together with the projected sequence and timing of developing each such phase. Where significant natural or man-made features, such as existing thoroughfares or creeks, make inclusion of the entire property in the concept plan unnecessary to adequately review the items listed in the preceding paragraph, the concept plan may include a smaller study area. Boundaries such as existing major thoroughfares, creeks, political subdivisions, or other such natural or man-made features may be used to delineate the smaller study area. 
(e)  Planning and zoning commission review and actions. The commission may approve, approve with conditions or stipulations or deny for specific technical reasons any concept plan. The concept plan does not require review and approval of the council. 
(f)  Concurrent review. A concept plan may, with the approval of the city manager, be submitted and reviewed concurrently with the preliminary plat for residential uses only. For nonresidential uses, the concept plan and the plat must be reviewed separately as changes to the concept plan may require amendments to the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-29. - Preliminary plat. 
(a)  Purpose and applicability. A preliminary plat allows the commission and the city council to evaluate the proposed plat for conformity with requirements and conditions identified at the time of concept plan approval and to evaluate construction plans for public improvements or to provide adequate security for construction of the same. A preliminary plat is required for all subdivisions prior to the construction of public improvements; however, the city manager may allow an applicant to proceed to a final plat without filing of a preliminary plat based on the size and nature of the proposed development. If an applicant does not submit a preliminary plat, a facilities agreement in accordance with section 65-75 must be submitted and approved by the city council to guarantee the installation of required public improvements. 
(b)  Phasing. The preliminary plat shall constitute only that portion of the approved concept plan which the applicant proposes to construct and record initially, provided however, that such portion conforms to all the requirements of this chapter and with any other applicable regulations and codes of the city. 
(c)  Information required upon or with preliminary plat. The proposed preliminary plat and associated engineering plans shall show the following information (detailed engineering information may be shown on a separate plan or document if approved by the city engineer): 
(1)  A vicinity, or location, map that shows the location of the proposed preliminary plat within the city (or within its ETJ) and in relationship to existing roadways; 
(2)  Boundary lines, abstract or survey lines, corporate or other jurisdictional boundaries, existing or proposed highways and streets (including right-of-way widths), bearings and distances related to state plane coordinates and sufficient to locate the exact area proposed for the subdivision, and all survey monuments (identified and labeled; see section 65-43 for specifications); the length and bearing of all straight lines, radii, arc lengths, tangent lengths and central angles of all curves shall be indicated along the lines of each lot (curve and line data may be placed in a table format); accurate reference ties via courses and distances to at least one recognized abstract or survey corner or existing subdivision corner shall be shown; 
(3)  The plat shall also include a note describing the corner tie as required above and further tie at least one corner of the subdivision that is being developed or redeveloped to the City's approved vertical control monumentation, the details of which monumentation are contained in appendix 1 attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference for all purposes allowed by law; the developer shall establish two permanent monuments per development (at points approved by the city engineer) that shall be tied to said vertical control monumentation; and, the boundary line description of the tract being subdivided shall close to an accuracy of one in 10,000; 
(4)  The name, location and recording information of all adjacent subdivisions (or property owners of adjacent un-platted property), including those located on the other sides of roads or creeks, shall be drawn to the same scale and shown in dotted lines adjacent to the tract proposed for subdivision in sufficient detail to show accurately the existing streets, alleys, building setbacks, lot and block numbering, easements, and other features that may influence the layout of development of the proposed subdivision; adjacent un-platted land shall show property lines, the names of owners of record, and the recording information; 
(5)  The location, widths and names of all streets, alleys and easements (the applicant must coordinate with appropriate utility entities for placement of necessary utility easements and for location of all streets and median openings on highways or arterial roadways), existing or proposed, within the subdivision limits and adjacent to the subdivision. A list of proposed street names shall be submitted for all new street names (street name approval is required at the time the preliminary plat is approved); 
(6)  The location of all existing property lines, existing lot and block numbers and date recorded, easements of record (with recording information), buildings, existing sewer or water mains, gas mains or other underground structures, or other existing features within the area proposed for subdivision; 
(7)  Proposed arrangement and square footage of lots (including lot and block numbers) and proposed use of same including: 
a.  For nonresidential uses, the location and size of buildings (this information may be provided on a separate sheet, such as on a voluntary concept plan or preliminary site plan (see the zoning ordinance); and, 
b.  For single family residential developments, a separate table of all lots' sizes including the mean and median lot size (excluding common areas); 
(8)  A title block within the lower right hand corner of the plat (and engineering plans) which shows the title or name under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, the name and address of the property owner and the name of the land planner, licensed engineer or registered public surveyor who prepared the plat or plans, the scale of the plat, the date the plat was prepared, and the location of the property according to the abstract or survey records of Collin County or Hunt County, Texas, The subdivision name shall not duplicate (or phonetically replicate) the name of any other platted subdivision in the city or its ETJ unless required to identify separate phases of the development. The city may require a different subdivision name if there is potential for confusion by public safety officials or the general public; 
(9)  Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, schools, playgrounds, other public uses or for private facilities or amenities; 
(10)  Scale, date, north arrow oriented to the top or left side of the sheet, and other pertinent informational data; 
(11)  Contours with intervals of two feet or less shown for the area, with all elevations on the contour map referenced to the city's approved vertical control monumentation contained in appendix 1 or a subsequent control monument set as part of a development or re-development and approved for such use by the city engineer; 
(12)  Areas contributing drainage to the proposed subdivision shall be shown in the engineering plans; locations proposed for drainage discharge from the site shall be shown by directional arrows; 
(13)  All physical features of the property to be subdivided, including the location and size of all water courses, the 100-year flood plain according to Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) information, any U.S. Army Corps of Engineers flowage easement requirements, ravines, bridges, culverts, existing structures, drainage area in acres of area draining into subdivisions, the outline of major wooded areas or the location of major trees, six inches in diameter and larger when measured four feet above ground level, and other features pertinent to the subdivision; 
(14)  Engineering plans of water and sewer lines and other infrastructure (including sizes) to be constructed in the subdivision; the proposed connections to distribution mains shall be indicated; 
(15)  Proposed phasing of the development; where a subdivision is proposed to occur in phases, the applicant, in conjunction with submission of the preliminary plat, shall provide a schedule of development; the dedication of rights-of-way for streets and street improvements, whether on-site or off-site, intended to serve each proposed phase of the subdivision; the city council shall determine whether the proposed streets and street improvements are adequate pursuant to standards herein established, and may require that a traffic impact analysis be submitted for the entire project or for such phases as the city council determines to be necessary to adjudge whether the subdivision will be served by adequate streets and thoroughfares; 
(16)  Proposed or existing zoning of the subject property and all adjacent properties, as well as a tabulation of site development information and the intended manner of compliance with the design standards of the zoning ordinance including the required points for optional standards. 
(17)  Minimum finished floor elevations of building foundations shall be shown for lots adjacent to a flood plain or within an area that may be susceptible to flooding; 
(d)  Concurrent review. The applicant may choose to submit a final plat for review concurrently with the preliminary plat. In such case, the city may schedule concurrent review of both plats, provided that all required information and other items are submitted for both plats, including full engineering plans and the appropriate assurances for the completion of all improvements, as per article VI, and provided that adequate review can be achieved by the city and commission. 
(e)  Standards for approval. The city manager shall be furnished with a drawing of the preliminary plat together with the number of copies of the plan deemed necessary by the city to complete the required reviews or staff reports, and any necessary supporting documents describing the type of development, provision of services, development procedure and timing, and engineering studies. No plat shall be considered submitted or filed with the city until it is determined to be administratively complete by the city. 
No preliminary plat shall be recommended for approval by the commission or approved by the city council unless the following standards have been met: 
(1)  The plat substantially conforms with the approved concept plan, or other studies and plans approved by the city, as applicable; 
(2)  The layouts and engineering plans for required public improvements and city utilities have been submitted by the applicant for approval by the city engineer (whether specifically stated or not, preliminary plat approval shall always be subject to any additions or alterations to the engineering plans as deemed necessary by the engineer, as needed, to ensure the safe, efficient and proper construction of public improvements within the subdivision); and 
(3)  The plat conforms to applicable zoning (if situated within the city's corporate limits) and all other pertinent development regulations and the requirements of state and federal law. 
(f)  Effect of approval. Approval of a preliminary plat by the city council shall be deemed general approval of the street and lot layout shown on the preliminary plat (approval for construction of the necessary streets, water lines, sewer lines, and other required improvements and utilities shall be authorized only through the city engineer's approval of the engineering plans), and to the preparation of the final plat. Except as provided for herein, approval of the preliminary plat shall constitute conditional approval of the final plat when all conditions of approval and when all procedural requirements set forth in this chapter have been met. 
(g)  Engineering plans. Along with the preliminary plat application, the applicant shall submit complete engineering plans for streets, alleys, storm sewers and drainage structures, water and sanitary sewer facilities, screening and retaining walls, landscaping and irrigation, and any other required public improvements for the area covered by the preliminary plat. The engineering plans shall also contain any plans deemed necessary to show or document compliance with the city's ordinances pertaining to non-point source pollution control, on-site sewage facility rules, and any other applicable codes and ordinances of the city that are related to development of a land parcel. Cost estimates shall also be submitted with the engineering plans. A complete sets of engineering plans shall include the following plans or sheets (generally in this order), as well as any additional plans or sheets deemed necessary and requested by the city engineer: 
(1)  Cover or title sheet — Preliminary plat. 
(2)  Final site plan (for nonresidential and multi-family projects only — See the zoning ordinance for specific requirements and approval procedures) — Existing conditions plan, which shows existing topography, vegetation, tree inventory, existing natural and man-made physical features, etc. — Grading, erosion control, and water quality control plans — Paving and storm drainage plans — Utility plans for water, sanitary sewer, etc. — Traffic control plans (if necessary) — Screening and retaining wall plans — Landscaping and irrigation plans. 
The city engineer shall review, or cause to be reviewed, the plans and specifications and if approved, shall mark them approved and shall return one set to the applicant. If not approved, one set shall be marked with the objections noted and returned to the applicant for correction, whereupon the applicants engineer shall correct the plans as requested and shall resubmit the corrected plans back to the city engineer for re-review. 
The applicant shall have engineering plans prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer licensed in the state, as required by state law governing such professions and in accordance with this chapter and the city's design manuals and standard construction details. All engineering plans submitted for city review shall be dated and shall bear the responsible engineer's registration number, his or her designation of "professional engineer" or "P.E.", and the engineers seal and signature. The city engineer shall approve engineering plans when such plans meet all of the requirements of this chapter and the design manuals and standard construction details. 
Engineering plans shall be in conformance with the design manuals and standard construction details and with the requirements set forth herein. Engineering plans showing paving and design details of streets, alleys, culverts, bridges, storm sewers, water mains, sanitary sewers, sidewalks, screening and retaining walls, landscape and irrigation plans (if appropriate), and other engineering details of the proposed subdivision shall be prepared at a legible scale and shall be submitted to the city engineer (or designee) along with a copy of the preliminary plat of the subdivision. 
As part of the engineering plans, a drainage plan showing how the drainage of each lot relates to the overall drainage plan for the plat under consideration shall be submitted. The drainage plan shall be made available to each builder within the proposed subdivision and all builders shall comply with the drainage plan. 
Once the engineering plans are approved by the city engineer, the property owner shall provide additional sets of the approved plans as required by the city engineer, for use during construction. A full set of the city-approved engineering plans must be available for inspection on the job site at all times. 
(h)  Additional studies and/or technical analyses. It is generally understood and accepted that additional studies or analyses may be necessary prior to the consideration of a plat, as determined by the city engineer. This may include, but not be limited to flood studies, drainage analyses, and/or traffic impact analyses, the results of which may have significant impacts regarding the final layout of the plat. As a result, said studies and technical analyses shall be submitted and approved prior to the submittal of a plat. 
(i)  Utility company review. The applicant shall also provide copies of letters from applicable local utility companies stating that each utility company has reviewed the preliminary plat and stating any requirements, including easements, they may have. This requirement may be deferred until the time of final plat submittal by the city engineer. 
(j)  Timing of public improvements. 
(1)  Public improvements shall be installed and accepted by the city following approval of the preliminary plat and release of construction by the city engineer. However, the city engineer may permit all or some of the public improvements to be installed, offered for dedication, or accepted by the city after approval of the final plat by the city council if there exists a compelling reason that is consistent with the public health, safety or welfare to do so (also see article V). 
(2)  The city council may permit or require the deferral of the construction of public improvements if, in its judgment, deferring the construction would not result in any harm to the public or would offer significant advantage in coordinating the site's development with adjacent properties and off-site public improvements. The deferred construction of any required public improvement(s) must be approved by the city council at the time of final plat approval, and the necessary assurances for completion of the improvements, in accordance with article V, shall be a stipulation, or condition, of approval of the preliminary or final plat. 
(3)  If the city council does not require that all public improvements be installed, offered for dedication, or accepted by the city prior to approval of the final plat, the applicant shall provide assurances or security for the completion of the improvements or escrowed funds, as provided in article V and article VI. 
(k)  Revisions to approved preliminary plat. Minor revisions to the preliminary plat may be needed before the final plat can be filed of record. Such minor revisions as slight enlargement or shifting of easements or lot lines, addition of private or franchise utility easements, correction of bearings or distances, correction of minor labeling errors, addition of erroneously omitted informational items and labels, etc. may occur on the final plat without having to re-approve the preliminary plat. Major revisions, such as reconfiguration of lot lines or easements, relocation of driveways or access easements or fire lanes, any modification to the perimeter or boundary of the property, and relocation, addition or deletion of any public improvement (including corresponding easements), shall necessitate re-submission and re-approval of the plat as a revised preliminary plat. The procedures for such re-approval shall be the same as for a preliminary plat, and such re-approval may constitute a new project thus necessitating submission of a new application form, payment of new fees, and other requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2019-1126-001, § 11, 11-26-2019)  
Sec. 65-30. - Final plat. 
(a)  Subsequent to a preliminary plat being approved by the commission and/or council as provided in this chapter, the subdivider may submit a final plat for all or a portion of the area reflected on the approved preliminary plat for approval. 
(b)  Purpose and applicability. The purpose of a final plat is to record the subdivision of property including the accurate description of blocks, rights-of-way, easements, building lines and street names. A final plat shall be required for all subdivisions of property and the recording of single lots in accordance with section 65-4. The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat, as approved, and shall incorporate all applicable conditions, changes, directions and additions imposed by the planning and zoning commission and city council upon the preliminary plat. The final plat shall not be submitted prior to approval of the preliminary plat (see section 65-29(d) for exception). No plat shall be considered submitted or filed with the city until it is determined to be administratively complete by the city. 
(c)  Information required on a final plat. The final plat shall contain all information that is required for a preliminary plat except that physical features of or on the land, such as topography, buildings, structures, water bodies and tree cover, shall not be shown on the final plat. The final plat shall also provide a place for the county clerk of the respective county to stamp the date and location where the plat will be filed (i.e., volume or cabinet ___________, page or slide ___________) in the lower right-hand corner of the plat drawing, and conform to the standards of Collin County or Hunt County for filing of plats. 
(d)  Dedication and easement language. The final plat shall include formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all streets local government uses, utilities, parks and easements, in a form approved by the city attorney. The plat shall include any other applicable language, such as for drainage, floodway or other special types of easements, or such as for a private street subdivision, as deemed appropriate and necessary by the city manager to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(e)  Additional plans and exhibits required. 
(1)  A plan at the same scale as the plat showing the proposed layout, lot numbers, setback lines, and any existing or proposed easements and rights-of-way for single family and duplex residential subdivisions; 
(2)  An exhibit showing the entire proposed subdivision layout on a single page will be required if a multiple page record plat is submitted; and 
(3)  Any study or analysis detailing drainage, flood, traffic, or other miscellaneous impacts deemed necessary by the city engineer shall be submitted and approved prior to the submittal of a record plat. 
(f)  Certificates required. The following certificates shall be included: 
(1)  Certification by a public surveyor registered in the state, that the plat represents a survey made by him or under their direct supervision, and that all the monuments shown thereon actually exist, and that their location, size and material are correctly shown; 
(2)  A certificate of ownership and dedication, on a form approved by the city manager or designee, of all streets, alleys, parks, open spaces and public ways to public use forever, signed and acknowledged before a notary public by the owner and any and all lienholders of the land, and a complete and accurate description of the land subdivided and dedications made; 
(3)  An original certificate, signed by the county tax assessor-collector, stating that all taxes and assessments then due and payable on the land contained within the subdivision have been paid; 
(4)  Approval certificate. 
a.  The following certificate shall be placed on the plat in a manner that will allow the completion of the certificate by the proper party: 
Approved 
_____
Presiding Officer 
City of Farmersville, Texas 
_____
Date 
  
Attest 
_____
Board, Commission or City Secretary 
City of Farmersville, Texas 
_____
Date 
b.  The presiding officer identified on the certificate shall be determined as indicated below: 
i.  For plats requiring administrative staff approval, the city manager shall be the presiding officer and the city secretary shall be the attesting signatory. 
ii.  For plats requiring planning and zoning commission approval, the chairman of the commission shall be the presiding officer. However, if the vice-chair presides over a meeting where a plat is approved, the vice-chair shall be authorized to serve as the presiding officer. The planning and zoning commission secretary shall be the attesting signatory. 
iii.  For plats requiring city council approval, the mayor, or mayor pro-tem in the mayor's absence, shall be the presiding officer and the city secretary shall be the attesting signatory. 
(g)  The subdivider shall place the following notation on each page of a final plat containing land that is situated within the corporate limits of the city: 
(1)  All proposed lots situated in whole or in part within the city's corporate limits comply with the minimum size requirements of the governing zoning district and the requirements of the subdivision ordinance. 
(h)  The subdivider shall place the following notation on each page of a record plat containing land that is situated outside the city's corporate limits and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city: 
(1)  All proposed lots situated entirely outside the city's corporate limits and within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction comply with the requirements of the subdivision ordinance. 
(i)  The subdivider shall place an owner's dedication certificate in the format approved by the city engineer on at least one page of the record plat. 
(j)  Standards for approval. No final plat shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission or approved by the city council unless the following standards have been met: 
(1)  The plat substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat and other studies and plans, as applicable; 
(2)  The construction and installation of required public improvements and city utilities has been completed and the improvements have been accepted by the city as conforming to the city's regulations and design standards (or the proper assurances for construction of the improvements have been submitted and approved by the city, per article V); and 
(3)  The plat conforms to applicable zoning, subdivision and other development related regulations, including the city's non-point source pollution control ordinance (article 11.100 of the Code of Ordinances, as amended), on-site sewage facility rules (as applicable; article 11.200 of the Code of Ordinances, as amended), and any other applicable codes or ordinances of the city that are related to development of a land parcel. 
(k)  Acceptance of improvements. When all of the improvements are found to be constructed and completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and with the city's standards, and upon receipt by the city of a maintenance bond or certificate of deposit in accordance with article V from each contractor, "As Built" plans, in the quantity and format required by the city, shall be submitted with a letter stating the contractor's compliance with this chapter. After such letter is received, the city engineer shall receive and accept for the city the title, use and maintenance of the improvements according to section 65-78. The approved final plat shall not be filed with the county prior to receipt of the above letter and other items, nor prior to acceptance of the improvements by the city. 
(l)  Certificate of compliance. Upon final approval of a final plat required by these regulations, the city council shall issue to the person applying for approval a certificate stating that the final plat has been approved by the council. For purposes of this section, final approval shall not occur until all conditions of approval have been met. 
(m)  Effect of approval. Approval of a final plat authorizes the property owner, upon fulfillment of all requirements and conditions of approval and upon completion of construction of all required improvements (or submission of the proper assurances for construction of same, per article V) to submit the required documents, in a format acceptable to the county clerk, of the plat for filing with Collin or Hunt County. Lots may be sold only when the final plat has been approved by the city council and the plat has been filed. No conveyance or sale of any portion or lot of the property may occur until after the final plat is approved by the city council and filed with the appropriate county. 
(n)  Filing of plat. Subsequent to acceptance of public improvements by the city engineer, the applicant shall return copies of the final plat and a digital plat file, with any other required documents and necessary fees as specified by the city, to the city manager. All necessary filing materials shall bear original signatures and seals. No plat or replat of a subdivision of real property shall be filed for record or have recorded in the county clerk's office a plat or replat unless the plat or replat has attached to it an original tax certificate from each taxing unit with jurisdiction of the real property indicating that no delinquent ad valorem taxes are owed on the real property. The city manager shall secure the signatures of city authorities, and return the signed original plats to the applicant within 30 days of receipt. The applicant shall file the final plat at the office of the county clerk of Collin County or Hunt County within 30 calendar days following signature by the city. The applicant shall return to the city manager both mylar and paper copies in the quantity and format specified by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2019-1126-001, § 12, 11-26-2019)  
Sec. 65-31. - Development plats. 
(a)  Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212, subch. B, §§ 212.041 through 212.050, as amended. 
(b)  Applicability. For purposes of this section, the term "development" means the new construction or the enlargement of any external dimension of any building, structure or improvement of any nature (residential or nonresidential). This section shall apply to any land lying within the city or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The development of any tract of land which has not been platted or replatted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, unless expressly exempted herein; 
(2)  The development of any tract of land for which the property owner claims an exemption from this chapter, including requirements to replat, which exemption is not expressly provided for in such regulations; 
(3)  The development of any tract of land for which the only access is a private easement or street; 
(4)  The division of any tract of land resulting in parcels or lots each of which is greater than five acres in size, and where no public improvement is proposed to be dedicated. 
(c)  Exceptions. No development plat shall be required, where the land to be developed has received final plat or replat approval prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. The city council may, from time to time, exempt other development or land divisions from the requirements of this section. 
(d)  Prohibition on development. No development shall commence, nor shall any building permit, utility connection permit, electrical connection permit or similar permit be issued, for any development or land division subject to this section, until a development plat has been reviewed by the commission, approved by the city council, and submitted to the county for filing. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the city shall not require building permits or otherwise enforce the city's building code in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction in relation to any development plat required by this section. 
(e)  Standards of approval. The development plat shall not be approved until the following standards have been satisfied: 
(1)  The proposed development conforms to all city plans, including but not limited to, the comprehensive plan, utility plans and applicable capital improvements plans; 
(2)  The proposed development conforms to the requirements of the zoning ordinance (if located within the city's corporate limits) and this chapter; 
(3)  The proposed development is adequately served by public facilities and services, parks and open space in conformance with City regulations; 
(4)  Appropriate agreements for acceptance and use of public dedications to serve the development have been tendered; and 
(5)  The proposed development conforms to the design and improvement standards contained in this chapter and in the city's design manuals and standard construction details, and to any other applicable codes or ordinances of the city that are related to development of a land parcel and the requirements of state and federal law. 
(f)  Conditions. The city council may impose such conditions on the approval of the development plat as are necessary to assure compliance with the standards in subsection (e). 
(g)  Approval procedure. The application for a development plat shall be submitted to the city in the same manner as a final plat (see section 65-30), and shall be approved or denied by the city council following review and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission in a similar manner as a final plat. Upon approval, the development plat shall be filed at the county in the same manner as prescribed for a final plat, and approval of a development plat shall expire if all filing materials are not submitted to the city manager and if the plat is not filed at the county within the time periods specified for a final plat. 
(h)  Submittal requirements. In addition to all information that is required to be shown on a final plat (see section 65-30), a development plat shall: 
(1)  Be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor; 
(2)  Clearly show the boundary of the development plat; 
(3)  Show each existing or proposed building, structure or improvement or proposed modification of the external configuration of the building, structure or improvement involving a change therein; 
(4)  Show all easements and rights-of-way within or adjacent to the development plat; and 
(5)  Be accompanied by the required number of copies of the plat, a completed application form, the required submission fee, and a certificate showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that no delinquent taxes exist against the property in accordance with section 65-24. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-32. - Replatting. 
(a)  Replat required. Unless otherwise expressly provided for herein, a property owner who proposes to replat all or any portion of an already approved final plat, other than to amend or vacate the plat, must first obtain approval for the replat under the same standards and by the same procedures prescribed for the final platting of land by this chapter. All improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the same requirements as for a preliminary or final plat, as provided herein. The city manager may waive or modify minor requirements for a preliminary replat under certain circumstances where the proposed replat does not involve a large parcel of land or an existing structure or business on the subject property, and where the proposed plat revisions are relatively simple in nature. A public hearing must be conducted by the planning and zoning commission and city council prior to consideration and action on a replat. No replat shall be considered submitted or filed with the city until it is determined to be administratively complete by the city. 
(b)  Replatting without vacating preceding plat. A replat of a subdivision or portion of a subdivision may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that plat if the replat: 
(1)  Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted; 
(2)  Is approved by the planning and zoning commission and/or the city council as required by this chapter 65; and 
(3)  Does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions imposed on the property in question. 
(c)  Additional requirements for certain replats. In addition to compliance with subsection (b), a replat without vacating the preceding plat must conform to the requirements of this section if: 
(1)  During the preceding five years, any of the area to be replatted was limited by an interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than two residential units per lot; or 
(2)  Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more than two residential units per lot. 
If a proposed replat described by this subsection (c) requires a variance or an exception from any of the requirements of this chapter 65, a public hearing must be held by the commission and/or the city council with notice of the public hearing being given before the 15th day before the date of the hearing by: 
(1)  Publication in the city's officially designated newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in Collin County; and 
(2)  By written notice, with a copy of subsection (c)(3) attached, forwarded by the city to the owners of lots within the original subdivision that are within 200 feet of the lots to be replatted, as indicated on the most recently approved municipal tax roll or in the case of a subdivision with the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, the most recently approved county tax roll of the property upon which the replat is requested. The notice may be delivered by depositing the notice, properly addressed with postage prepaid, in a post office or postal depository within the boundaries of the municipality. 
(3)  If the proposed replat requires a variance, as defined in section 65-9, and is protested in accordance with this provision the approval of the proposed replat will require the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the members present of the commission or the city council, or both. For a legal protest, written instruments signed by the owners of at least 20 percent of the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed replat and extending 200 feet from that area, but within the original subdivision, must be filed with the city prior to action by the planning and zoning commission or the city council, or both prior to the close of the public hearing. In computing the percentage of land area subject to the 20 percent rule described above, the area of streets and alleys shall be included. Compliance with this provision is not required if the area sought to be replatted was designated for other than single or duplex family residential use by notation on the last legally recorded plat or in the last legally recorded restrictions applicable to the plat. 
If a proposed replat described by this subsection (c) does not require a variance or an exception from any of the requirements of this chapter 65, and is approved by the council or commission, the city will deliver a written notice by mail regarding the approval of the replat no later than the 15th day after the date the replat is approved to each owner of a lot in the original subdivision that is within 200 feet of the lots that were replatted according to the most recent city tax roll. The notice will also include the zoning designation of the property after the replat as well as a telephone number and email address for the city that an owner of a lot may use to contact the city about the replat. 
(d)  Addition or deletion of lots. Any replat which adds or deletes lots must include the original subdivision and lot boundaries. If a replat is submitted for only a portion of a previously platted subdivision, the replat must reference the previous subdivision name and recording information, and must state on the replat the specific lots sought to be changed. 
(e)  Additional requirements. 
(1)  If the previous plat is vacated as prescribed in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.013, as amended, a public hearing is not required for a replat of the area vacated. 
(2)  The replat of the subdivision shall meet all the requirements for a final plat for a new subdivision that may be pertinent, as provided for herein. 
(3)  The title shall identify the document as a final plat of the ___________ addition, block ___________, lot(s) ___________, being a replat of block ___________, lot(s) ___________ of the ___________ addition, an addition to the city, as recorded in volume/cabinet ___________, page/slide ___________ of the records of (the appropriate) county of record. 
(4)  An application submittal for a replat shall be the same as for a final plat, and shall be accompanied by the required number of copies of the plat, a completed application form, the required submission fee, and a certificate showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that no delinquent taxes exist against the property in accordance with section 65-24(a). 
(5)  The replat shall be filed at the county in the same manner as prescribed for a final plat, and approval of a replat shall expire if all filing materials are not submitted to the city, and if the replat is not filed at the county within the time periods specified for a final plat. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2019-1126-001, § 13, 11-26-2019)  
Sec. 65-33. - Amended plats. 
(a)  An amended plat shall meet all of the informational and procedural requirements set forth for a final plat, and shall be accompanied by the required number of copies of the plat, a completed application form, the required submission fee, and a certificate showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that no delinquent taxes exist against the property in accordance with section 65-24(a). 
(b)  The city manager may approve an amending plat, which may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding or final plat without vacation of that plat, if the amending plat is signed by the applicants only and if the amending plat is solely for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  Correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat; 
(2)  Add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat; 
(3)  Correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat; 
(4)  Indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments; 
(5)  Show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character or that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat; 
(6)  Correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the municipal authority responsible for approving plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded plats; 
(7)  Correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots if: 
a.  Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  Neither lot is abolished; 
c.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and 
d.  The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the other owners in the plat; 
(8)  Relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line or easement; 
(9)  Relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots if: 
a.  The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and 
c.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots; 
(10)  To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six or fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat if: 
a.  The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the City; 
b.  The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and 
c.  The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the city council has approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area; 
(11)  Replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if: 
a.  The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and 
c.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and 
d.  The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities. 
(c)  The city manager may, at his or her discretion and for any reason, elect to present the amending plat to the planning and zoning commission and city council for consideration and approval. The city manager is not authorized to disapprove an amending plat and shall refer any amending plat which the city manager refuses to approve to the commission and the city council for consideration within the time period required by state law. 
(d)  Notice, a public hearing, and the approval of other lot owners are not required for the approval and issuance of an amending plat. 
(e)  The amended plat shall be entitled and clearly state that it is an "amended plat." It shall also state the specific lots affected or changed as a result of the amended plat, and shall include the original subdivision plat boundary. All references to "final plat" or "replat" shall be removed. 
(f)  Other than noted above, the procedure for approval of plat amendment(s) shall be the same as in section 65-32. 
(g)  The amending plat shall be filed at the county in the same manner as prescribed for a final plat, and approval of an amending plat shall expire if all filing materials are not submitted to the city secretary, and if the plat is not filed at the county within the time periods specified for a final plat. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-34. - Plat vacation. 
(a)  By property owner. The property owner of the tract covered by a plat may vacate, upon review by the commission and approval by the city council, the plat at any time before any lot in the plat is sold. The plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the plat vacated is approved and recorded in the manner prescribed for the original plat (instrument language is available from the city, upon request). 
(b)  By all lot owners. If some or all of the lots covered by the plat have been sold, the plat, or any part of the plat, may be vacated on the application of all the owners of lots in the plat with approval obtained in the manner prescribed for the original plat. 
(c)  Criteria. The planning and zoning commission shall review, and the city council shall approve, the petition for vacation on such terms and conditions as are in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.013 (as amended), and as are reasonable to protect the public health, safety and welfare. As a condition of vacation of the plat, the city council may direct the petitioners to prepare and seek approval of a revised final plat in accordance with this chapter such that the property does not become un-platted. 
(d)  Effect of action. On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the vacated plat shall have no effect. Regardless of the commission's and council's action on the plat vacation, the property owner will have no right to a refund of any monies, fees or charges paid to the city nor to the return of any property or consideration dedicated or delivered to the city except as may have previously been agreed to by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-35. - Minor plats. 
(a)  A minor plat will be approved, approved with conditions, or disapproved in accordance with the provisions of sections 65-24 and 65-25 except as such process is modified herein-below. 
(b)  General requirements. A minor plat shall meet all of the informational and procedural requirements set forth for a final plat, and shall be accompanied by the required number of copies of the plat, a completed application form, the required submission fee, and a certificate showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that no delinquent taxes exist against the property in accordance with section 65-24. No minor plat shall be considered submitted or filed with the city until it is determined to be administratively complete by the city. 
(c)  Applicability. An application for approval of a minor plat may be filed only in accordance with state law, when all of the following circumstances apply: 
(1)  The proposed division results in four or fewer lots; 
(2)  All lots front onto an existing public street and the construction or extension of a street is not required to meet the requirements of this chapter; and 
(3)  Except for right-of-way and easements, the plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision. 
(d)  Additional requirements. Private wells and private wastewater treatment facilities shall be considered adequate when existing public water and wastewater lines are not within 500 feet of the proposed lots. 
(e)  City manager action. The city manager may approve a minor plat involving four or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities, or may, for any reason, elect to present the minor plat to the planning and zoning commission and city council for consideration and approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval in accordance with the provisions of section 65-25. The city manager is not authorized to disapprove a minor plat and shall refer any minor plat which the city manager refuses to approve to the planning and zoning commission and/or city council for consideration and approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval in accordance with the provisions of section 65-25 within the time period required by state law. 
(f)  Title. The minor plat shall be entitled and clearly state that it is a "minor plat." 
(g)  Filing of minor plat. The minor plat shall be filed at the county in the same manner as prescribed for a final plat, and approval of a minor plat shall expire if all filing materials are not submitted to the city and if the plat is not filed at the county within the time periods specified for a final plat. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2019-1126-001, § 15, 11-26-2019)  
Secs. 65-36—65-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 65-41. - Adequate public facilities policy. 
The land proposed for subdivision must be adequately served by essential public facilities and services. These services include street access, water, waste water disposal and off-site drainage. No plat or replat may be approved unless it conforms to this policy and its standards. This policy may be further defined and supplemented by other ordinances adopted by the city. There is an essential nexus between the demand on public facilities systems created by a new development and the requirement to dedicate rights-of-way and easements and to construct capital improvements to offset such impacts. 
(1)  Street access. All platted lots must have direct access to a public street or roadway, private street or an approved public way. 
a.  Except for lots which gain access from an approved cul-de-sac, all subdivisions must have two means of access or approach, which must be connected via improved roadways to the city's improved thoroughfare and street system. Where development phasing or constraints of the land prevent the provision of a second, separate means of access, the city may accept a temporary street connection, or a median divided street or entry to satisfy this requirement. Requirements for dedication of rights-of-way and improvement of approach roads may be increased depending upon the size or density of the proposed development, or if such need is demonstrated by a traffic impact analysis. 
(2)  Water. All platted lots must connect to an approved water system which is capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes. 
a.  Except for lots along an approved cul-de-sac, all lots must be provided service connections from a looped water main providing water flow from two directions or sources. 
b.  Design and construction of a water source on the site shall be in accordance with applicable regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
c.  Water service must be sufficient to meet the fire flow requirements of the proposed development, except where a suitable alternative means of fire protection is approved by the city's fire chief. 
d.  The city may accept development phasing, development restrictions, and/or the construction of improvements to maintain adequate fire protection. 
(3)  Waste water. All platted lots must be served by an approved means of waste water collection and treatment. 
a.  On-site waste water treatment systems, and on-site pretreatment of industrial waste, are permitted only with approval of the city and the appropriate authority in Collin or Hunt counties. 
b.  The projected waste water discharge of a proposed development shall not exceed the capacity of the waste water system. 
c.  The city may accept the phasing of development and/or improvements to the system so as to maintain adequate waste water capacity. 
(4)  Drainage. Increased stormwater runoff attributable to new development must not exceed the capacity of the downstream drainage system or adversely affect adjoining property. Where the projected runoff would exceed capacity, the city may accept the phasing of development, the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and/or the construction of offsite drainage improvements as a means of mitigation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-42. - Blocks and lots. 
(a)  Blocks. The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes, setbacks and dimensions. 
(3)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic and for pedestrians or bicyclists traveling to a public park or school site within the neighborhood. 
(4)  Intersecting streets shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross-traffic adequately, to provide adequate fire protection, and to conform to customary subdivision practices. Where no existing subdivision or topographical constraints control, block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length. Where no existing subdivision or topographical constraints control, the block lengths shall not be less than 300 feet in length. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 600 feet in length. However, in cases where physical barriers or property ownership creates conditions where it is appropriate that these standards be varied, the length may be increased or decreased in accordance with the variance procedures set forth in section 65-1(i). 
(b)  Lots. Lots shall conform to the minimum requirements of the established zoning district. 
(1)  Each lot shall front onto a dedicated, improved public street unless platted as an approved private street subdivision in accordance with this chapter (see Section 65-46). Lot width and access shall conform to the provisions of the city's zoning ordinance, comprehensive plan, and any other applicable city code or ordinance. Lot access onto highway, arterial and collector streets is subject to approval by the city council, which may require a traffic study or other information prior to approval of the preliminary plat in order to fully study all access issues. In all cases, lots shall meet the minimum frontage requirements in subsection (b)(6). 
(2)  Irregular-shaped lots shall have sufficient width at the building line to meet lot width and frontage requirements of the appropriate zoning district, and shall provide a reasonable building pad without encroachment into front, side or rear yard setbacks or into any type of easement. Also, the rear width shall be sufficient to provide access for all necessary utilities, including access for driveways and solid waste collection when alleys are present. In general, triangular, severely elongated or tapered, flag or panhandle lots shall be avoided, and the city reserves the right to disapprove any such lot which, in its sole opinion, will not be suitable or desirable for the use intended. 
(3)  Side lot lines shall be at 90-degree angles or radial to street right-of-way lines to the greatest extent possible. The city reserves the right to disapprove any lot which, in its sole opinion, is shaped or oriented in such a fashion as to be unsuitable or undesirable for the use intended, or which is not attractively or appropriately oriented toward its street frontage. 
(4)  Double frontage lots shall be avoided, except where they may be essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials, as defined in section 65-44, or to overcome a specific disadvantage or hardship imposed by topography or other factors. Where lots have double frontage, building setback lines shall be established for each street side, and rear yard screening shall be provided in accordance with section 65-51. Residential lots shall not back onto any residential street or collector street within a residential area or neighborhood. 
(5)  Building lines. Front and street side building lines shall be shown on a concept plan and on any type of plat for all lots, and shall be consistent with the zoning ordinance requirements for the district in which the development is located, if subject to the city's zoning regulations and with any other applicable city ordinance. 
(6)  Frontage on public streets and cross access. The subdivision shall be designed to provide adequate emergency access for public safety vehicles. Each residential lot in the subdivision shall have a minimum 30 feet of frontage on a dedicated street and, except in the central area zoning district, each multi-family and non-residential lot shall have a minimum of 100 feet, or as required by the applicable zoning ordinance, unless other provisions have been authorized through planned development approval or the grant of a variance. When adjacent to an existing or planned median divided street, all lots shall have access to a median opening, either directly or through a shared cross access easement between it and adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-43. - Monuments. 
(a)  Placement of monuments. In all subdivisions and additions, monuments shall be established at the corner of each block in the subdivision consisting of an iron rod or pipe not less than five-eighths-inch in diameter and 24 inches deep, and set six inches below the ground surface. Lot corner monuments shall be placed at all lot corners except corners which are also block corners, consisting of iron rods or pipes of a diameter of not less than one-half-inch and 18 inches deep, and set flush with the top of the ground. In addition, all curve points in right of way lines shall be monumented by five-eighths diameter rods, 24 inches deep, set six inches below the ground surface. Each block corner monument shall include a cap with the surveyor's name and registration number attached to it. All block corners shall be installed prior to the final inspection of the subdivision by the city. Lot corners shall be installed prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Vertical control. At least one corner of a subdivision that is being developed or re-developed within the city's corporate limits or ETJ shall be tied to the city's approved vertical control monumentation. Details regarding the city's vertical control monumentation are contained in appendix 1 attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference for all purposes allowed by law. The developer shall also establish two permanent monuments per development (at points approved by the city engineer) that shall be tied to the city's approved vertical control monumentation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-44. - Streets and alleys. 
(a)  Street design. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, location and construction of all streets shall conform to the city's thoroughfare plan as well as the design manual and standard construction details, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets or driveways (whether within the city, within its ETJ area, or within adjacent municipal or County areas), to topographical conditions, to public safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. Reserve or residual strips of land controlling access to or egress from other property, or to or from any street or alley, or having the effect of restricting or damaging the adjoining property for subdivision purposes, or which will not be taxable or accessible for improvements shall not be permitted in any subdivision unless such strips of land are required by the city in the public interest (such as to enhance public safety or other public interest). All streets shall be constructed in accordance with the city's design manual and standard construction details. 
(b)  Alleys. No alleys shall be required. If provided or constructed by the developer, alleys shall conform to the adopted design manual and standard construction details. 
(c)  Adequacy of streets and thoroughfares. 
(1)  Responsibility for adequacy of streets and thoroughfares. The property owner shall assure that the subdivision is served by adequate streets and thoroughfares, and shall be responsible for the costs of all rights-of-way and street improvements adjacent to the development, in accordance with the following policies and standards, and subject to the city's cost participation policies on oversized facilities. 
(2)  General adequacy policy. Every subdivision shall be served by improved streets and thoroughfares adequate to accommodate the vehicular traffic to be generated by the development. Proposed streets shall provide a safe, convenient and functional system for traffic circulation; shall be properly related to the city's thoroughfare plan, road classification system, comprehensive plan and any amendments thereto; and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each development. 
(3)  Road network. New subdivisions shall be supported by a road network having adequate capacity, ingress/egress, and safe and efficient traffic circulation. The adequacy of the road network for developments of 100 or more dwelling units, or for developments generating 5,000 or more "one-way" trips per day, or for developments involving collector or arterial streets not appearing on the city's adopted thoroughfare plan, or where deemed required by the city engineer, shall be demonstrated by the preparation and submission, along with the concept plan or preliminary plat application, of a traffic impact analysis. The traffic impact analysis shall be prepared in accordance with section 65-45. The traffic impact analysis shall take into consideration the need to accommodate traffic generated by the development, land to be developed in common ownership and other developed property. If the property to be developed is intended as a phase in a larger development project, or constitutes a portion of the land to be ultimately developed, the city council may require a demonstration of the adequacy of the road network pursuant to this section for any or all additional phases or portions of the property as a condition of approval for the proposed concept plan or plat. If the applicant submits a traffic impact analysis for an entire phased development project, the city may require an update of the study for later phases of the development. If the concept plan or plat conforms with the thoroughfare plan and if the concept plan or plat is for a development of less than 100 dwelling units or for a development generating less than 5,000 "one-way" trips per day, then a traffic impact analysis may be required at the discretion of the city engineer. 
(4)  Off-site improvements. Where a traffic impact analysis demonstrates the need for such facilities, the property owner shall make such improvements to off-site collector and arterial streets and intersections as are necessary to mitigate traffic impacts generated by the development or related developments. 
(5)  Dedication of right-of-way. The property owner shall provide all rights-of way required for existing or future streets, and for all required street improvements, including perimeter streets and approach roads, as shown in the thoroughfare plan, design manual and standard construction details or other valid development plans approved by city council. In the case of perimeter streets, at least one-half of the total required right-of-way width for such streets shall be provided unless the proposed development is on both sides of the street, in which case the full right-of-way width shall be provided. In some instances, more than one-half of the required right-of-way width shall be required when a half street is impractical or unsafe and depending upon the actual or proposed alignment of the street, such as in the case of a curved street, as may be required by the city council. 
a.  Perimeter streets. Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision or addition, the other one-half of the street shall be dedicated, and an appropriate amount of the street shall be improved, by the developer of the subdivision or addition. 
b.  Slope easements. The dedication of easements, in addition to dedicated rights-of-way shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. Such slopes shall be no steeper than three feet horizontal run to one foot vertical height, or a three-to-one slope. 
(6)  Intersection improvements. Intersection improvements and traffic control devices shall be installed as warranted in accordance with the traffic impact analysis. Construction and design standards shall be in accordance with the city's design manual and standard construction details. 
(7)  Phased development. Where a subdivision is proposed to occur in phases, the applicant, in conjunction with submission of the preliminary plat, shall provide a schedule of development. The schedule shall set forth the intended plan of development and dedication of rights-of-way for streets and street improvements, whether on-site or off-site, intended to serve each proposed phase of the subdivision. The city engineer shall determine whether the proposed phasing of any streets and street improvements are adequate pursuant to standards herein established, and may require that a traffic impact analysis be submitted for the entire project or such phases as the city determines to be necessary to adjudge whether the subdivision will be adequately served by the phased dedication and construction of such streets and thoroughfares. 
(8)  Arrangement of streets not shown on the thoroughfare plan. For streets that are not shown on the city's thoroughfare plan, such as local residential streets, the arrangement of such streets within a subdivision shall: 
a.  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets from or into surrounding areas, including at least two points of access; 
b.  Conform to a special area plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the city council to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformity to existing streets impractical; 
c.  Provide for additional future access, such as by stubbing out streets for future extension to the outer boundary of the subdivision, to adjacent vacant areas which will likely develop under a similar zoning classification or for a similar type of land use; and 
d.  Not conflict in any way with existing or logically anticipated driveway openings. 
(9)  Collector and residential streets. Residential collector streets and minor residential streets shall be laid out such that their use by through traffic will be discouraged, such as via circuitous routes or multiple turns or offsets, but such that access is provided to adjacent subdivisions. Wherever the right-of-way width of a collector or residential street must transition to a greater or lesser width, such transition shall occur along the front, side or rear lot lines of adjacent lots and shall not occur within the street intersection itself. In other words, the right-of-way width shall be the same on both sides of any street intersection. 
(10)  Adjacency of residential properties. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the city council may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage (lots which back onto the arterial), deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through traffic and local traffic. 
(11)  Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is required by the city and approved by the city council. 
(12)  Half streets. Construction of half streets shall be prohibited, except when essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conforming with the other requirements of this chapter and the thoroughfare plan, and where the city council makes a determination that there is no immediate benefit to be gained by constructing the full street section since no access from the street will be needed by the subdivision in question. The city council may also find that it would be more practical, or cost effective, to delay construction of the other one-half of a street until the adjoining property is developed. 
If the property owner is responsible for one-half of the street, then the property owner shall either construct the facility along with his or her development or shall provide escrow for the construction cost of his or her share of the facility (including all applicable street appurtenances such as median openings, left turn lanes into the development, sidewalks, drainage structures, etc.). Whenever a partial street has been previously platted along a common property line, the other portion of the street right-of-way shall be dedicated such that the right-of-way is increased to the streets ultimate planned width. Improvements shall be made to all on-site facilities as defined herein (see definitions, section 65-11). 
(13)  Perimeter streets and associated improvements. When a proposed subdivision, whether residential or nonresidential, abuts on one or both sides of an existing substandard street, or on a planned or future road as shown on the thoroughfare plan, being substandard according to the then existing current thoroughfare plan, the developer shall be required to improve his or her reasonable share of the existing on-site facility as that term is defined herein, including appurtenant sidewalks, screening and landscaping, storm drainage structures, water quality or erosion controls, and other on-site facilities as defined in section 65-11, to bring the same to city standards, or to replace it with a standard city street as determined by the traffic impact analysis, if required, and at no cost to the city. 
a.  The developer's share of improvements to a substandard perimeter road shall be at least 25 feet of pavement (including curb, if any), which is approximately equivalent to one-half (50 percent) of a collector street width (i.e., two through traffic lanes), along the entire front footage of the subdivision, unless the traffic impact analysis, if required, indicates that some other pavement width is necessary to achieve and maintain an acceptable level of service on the roadway. If the subdivision is to be located on both sides of the roadway, at least 25 feet of pavement shall be constructed by the developer on each side of the road along the entire front footage of the subdivision on each respective side of the road, unless the traffic impact analysis indicates that some other pavement width is necessary to achieve and maintain an acceptable level of service on the roadway. Design and construction of the roadway shall be in accordance with the city's thoroughfare plan (with respect to right-of-way width and general location), the design manuals, and with any other applicable city codes and ordinances. 
b.  Depending upon the specific roadway in question, and upon the traffic impact analysis results, any oversizing above the minimum 25 feet width may be borne by the city, the county, the state or by some other entity to the extent that the cost of oversizing exceeds the subdivisions roughly proportionate impact. The city council may, at its option, accept escrow funds in lieu of immediate roadway construction if the subdivision derives principal access from another improved roadway and if delaying construction and improvement of the road will not harm or otherwise inconvenience neighboring property owners or the general public. 
c.  Streets which dead-end at power lines or similar rights-of-way or easements, and which are intended for future extension across these rights-of-way or easements, shall be constructed in the right-of-way or easement for half the distance across the right-of-way or easement, and shall be further restricted as set forth in subsection (c)(14). A note shall be placed on the final plat clearly labeling the dead-end streets that will, at some point, be extended across the power line easement (or right-of-way), and signage shall be placed at the end of the constructed street stub, such as on the barricade, also stating that the street will be extended in the future. Signage size and lettering shall be in accordance with the city requirements. 
(14)  Dead-end streets. Except in unusual cases, no dead-end streets will be approved unless such dead-end streets are provided to connect with future streets on adjacent land. In the case of dead-end streets, which will eventually be extended into the adjacent subdivision, no more than one lot (per side) can front onto the dead-end street stub unless a temporary turnaround bulb (with an off-site easement) is provided at the end. A temporary dead-end street shall not exceed the maximum allowed length of a normal cul-de-sac, and the temporary turnaround bulb must be constructed like a cul-de-sac. However, the city engineer may authorize the use of asphalt or other durable paving material than concrete for the arc, or wing, portions of the temporary turnaround bulb in order to minimize the cost of removing those portions later. A note shall be placed on the final plat clearly labeling any dead-end streets (if any) that will at some point be extended into the adjacent property, and signage shall be placed at the end of the constructed street stub, such as on the barricade, also stating that the street will be extended in the future. Signage and lettering must be large enough to be legible by a person with normal vision at a 20-foot distance. Any required temporary turnaround easements shall be shown on the final plat along with their appropriate recording information, if they are off-site or established by separate instrument. 
(15)  Extension of existing streets. New streets that extend existing streets shall be dedicated at equal or greater right-of-way widths than the existing streets, or as otherwise required by the city's thoroughfare development plan and approved by the city engineer. 
(16)  Construction of new streets. All new streets within a subdivision shall be constructed in accordance with paving widths and specifications as set forth in the design manual and standard construction details of the city at the time at which the preliminary plat application is officially submitted and deemed a complete application. 
(17)  Points of access. All subdivisions shall have at least two points of access from improved public roadways (also see section 65-41). Driveway access onto roadways shall be provided and designed in accordance with the city's design manual and construction details that are in effect at the time the preliminary plat application is officially submitted and deemed a complete application. 
(18)  Street lights. All street lighting shall be installed in conformance with the city's zoning ordinance. Mercury vapor luminaries shall not be accepted. All fixtures shall be hooded in a way that directs all lighting downward. 
(19)  Street names. Street names must be submitted to the city, for review and approval as a part of the preliminary plat application, and shall become fixed at the time of approval of the preliminary plat. On the final plat, street names shall not be changed from those that were approved on the preliminary plat unless special circumstances have caused the major realignment of streets or a proposed street name(s) is discovered to have already been used elsewhere in the city (or some other similar eventuality). If additional street names are needed for the final plat, then they must be submitted for review and approval by the city, the U.S. Postal Service, and applicable emergency service providers (including 911) along with the final plat application. A fee may be established by the city for the changing of street names after approval of the preliminary plat. 
a.  Surnames of people or the names of corporations or businesses shall not be used as street names, unless approved by the city council. The city will maintain a list of existing street names (and "reserved" street names that have been approved on a preliminary plat), and will update the list as new streets are platted. 
b.  New street names shall not duplicate existing street names (for example, Smith Street vs. Smythe Street; Oak Drive vs. Oak Place vs. Oak Court vs. Oak Circle; Cascade Drive vs. Cascading Drive); shall not be so similar as to cause confusion between names (for example, Lakeside Drive vs. Lake Side Drive vs. Lake Siding Drive); and shall not sound like existing street names when spoken (for example, Oak Drive vs. Doak Drive vs. Cloak Drive; Lantern Way vs. Land Tern Way). Suffixes shall be in agreement when a street is extended (for example Oak Street cannot extend Oak Drive). 
c.  New streets which extend existing streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. Streets crossing thoroughfares or other roadways shall bear the same name on both sides of the thoroughfare, wherever practical. A cul-de-sac or loop that is named after another through street (such as Oak Court or Oak Circle or Oak Trail) must actually connect to the main street (Oak) from which the name is derived. 
d.  The property owner shall install all street name signs and poles for the development. Installation shall be complete prior to approval of the engineering plans by the city engineer. 
e.  Street name signs as specified by the city shall be installed in accordance with the city's guidelines before issuance of a building permit for any structure on the streets approved within the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-45. - Traffic impact analysis. 
(a)  Analysis requirements. Any proposed development project or plat involving a significant change to a proposed roadway alignment from that shown on the city's thoroughfare plan, or involving a development of 100 or more dwelling units, or for developments generating 5,000 or more "one-way" trips per day, or as otherwise required by the city engineer must be preceded by submission and approval of a traffic impact analysis as specified in subsection (b). 
(b)  Required components of traffic impact analysis. Whenever this chapter or the city council, in unique instances which do not necessarily meet the above criteria but which may significantly affect the public health, safety or welfare — such as a proposed subdivision that will only be accessed via substandard roadways which may pose an impediment to emergency response vehicles — requires submission and city council approval of a traffic impact analysis, the following elements shall be included: 
(1)  General site description. The traffic impact analysis shall include a detailed description of the roadway network within one mile of the site, a description of the proposed land uses, the anticipated dates of construction, and the anticipated completion date of the proposed land development shall be provided. This description, which may be in the form of a map, shall include the following items: 
a.  All major intersections; 
b.  All proposed and existing ingress and egress locations; 
c.  All existing roadway widths and rights-of-way; 
d.  All existing traffic signals and traffic-control devices; and 
e.  All existing and proposed public transportation services and facilities within a one-mile radius of the site. 
(2)  Proposed capital improvements. The traffic impact analysis shall identify any changes to the roadway network within one mile of the site that are proposed by any government agency or other developer. This description shall include the above items as well as any proposed construction project that would alter the width or alignment of roadways affected by the proposed development. 
(3)  Roadway impact analysis. 
a.  Transportation impacts. 
1.  Trip generation. The average weekday trip generation rates (trip ends), the average weekend trip generation rates (for uses other than residential or institutional), the highest average a.m. and p.m. hourly weekday trip generation rates, and the highest hourly weekend generation rates (for uses other than residential or institutional) for the proposed use shall be determined based upon the trip generation rates contained in the most recent edition of the institute of transportation engineers, trip generation manual; or shall be based upon data generated by actual field surveys of area uses compatible to the proposed use and approved by the city engineer. 
2.  Trip distribution. The distribution of trips to arterial and collector roadways within the study area identified in subsection (b)(1) (general site description), above, shall conform with accepted traffic engineering principles taking into consideration the land use categories of the proposed development; the area from which the proposed development will attract traffic; competing developments (if applicable); the size of the proposed development; development phasing; surrounding existing and anticipated land uses, population and employment; existing and projected daily traffic volumes; and existing traffic conditions identified pursuant to subsection (b)(1). 
b.  Adequacy determination. The roadway network included within the traffic impact analysis shall be considered adequate to serve the proposed development if existing roadways identified as arterials and collectors can accommodate the existing service volume, and the service volume of the proposed development, and the service volume of approved but unbuilt developments holding valid, unexpired building permits at a level of service "C" or above. 
(4)  Intersection analysis. 
a.  Level of service analysis. For intersections within the roadway traffic impact analysis area described subsection (b)(1), a level of service analysis shall be performed for all arterial to arterial, arterial to collector, and collector to collector intersections, and for any other pertinent intersections identified by the city engineer. Also, level of service analysis will be required on all proposed site driveway locations for all nonresidential developments. The city may waive analysis of minor intersections and site driveway locations within the one-mile radius. The level of service analysis shall be based upon the highest hourly average a.m. or p.m. peak weekday volume or highest average hourly peak weekend volume as determined from a two-day survey of weekday volumes and, where necessary, a one-day survey of weekend volumes. The level of service analysis shall take into consideration the lane geometry, traffic volume, percentage of right-hand turns, percentage of left-hand turns, percentage (and typical size) of trucks, intersection width, number of lanes, signal timing and progression, roadway grades, pedestrian and bicycle flows, school routes, number of accidents, and peak hour factor. 
b.  Adequacy analysis. The intersections included within the traffic impact analysis shall be considered adequate to serve the proposed development if existing intersections can accommodate the existing service volume, the service volume of the proposed development, and the service volume of approved but unbuilt developments holding valid, unexpired building permits at level of service "C" or above. 
(5)  Effect of adequacy determination. If the adequacy determination for roadways and intersections indicates that the proposed development would cause a reduction in the level of service for any roadway or intersection within the study area identified in subsection (b)(1) that would cause the roadway to fall below the level of service required hereto, the city council may deny the request or may require one of the following conditions as a condition of approval: 
a.  The deferral of building permits until the improvements necessary to upgrade the substandard facilities are constructed; 
b.  A reduction in the density or intensity of development; 
c.  The dedication or construction of facilities needed to achieve the level of service required herein; or 
d.  Any combination of techniques identified herein that would ensure that development will not occur unless the levels of service for all roadways and intersections within the traffic impact analysis study are adequate to accommodate the impacts of such development. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-46. - Private street subdivisions. 
(a)  Private streets. Subdivisions having private streets may be established only under the terms set forth in this section, and pursuant to any other ordinances or guidelines for private street developments as may be adopted for use by the city either as part of this chapter or as separate ordinances or policies. All private streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the city's design manual and standard construction details for publicly dedicated streets. The term private street shall be inclusive of alleys, if provided. 
(b)  Eligibility criteria. Private streets shall be permitted only within a subdivision satisfying each of the following criteria: 
(1)  The subdivision shall have a sufficient number of lots and value to demonstrate through an approved economic analysis the viability of private maintenance by the development served; 
(2)  The streets to be restricted to private use are not intended for regional or local through traffic circulation (see subsection (c)); 
(3)  The subdivision is located in an area that is surrounded on three sides, meaning at least 75 percent of the perimeter, by natural or man-made barriers, so as to be accessible from only a single direction of the compass; 
(4)  The subdivision is located adjacent to an existing or approved public street that can be reasonably connected, even though the street connection may require the construction of a bridge or culvert; 
(5)  The subdivision shall have at least two points of vehicular access connected via improved roadways to the city's improved thoroughfare and street system by one or more approach roads, as required herein above; 
(6)  A mandatory property owners (homeowners) association, which includes every owner of a lot within the private street development, shall be formed and shall be responsible for maintenance of the private streets and alleys. (See subsection (e) and section 65-63); and 
(7)  The subdivision conforms to any other special guidelines for private street developments as may be approved separately by the city council. 
(c)  Certain streets excluded. Roads or streets that are shown on the city's thoroughfare plan, such as highways, major or minor thoroughfares or arterials, or collectors, shall not be used, maintained or constructed as private streets, and a private street subdivision shall not cross or interfere with an existing or future collector or arterial street. Also, the planning and zoning commission and city council may deny the creation of any private street if, in their sole determination, the private street would negatively affect traffic circulation on public streets, or if it would impair access to the subject or adjacent property; impair access to or from public facilities including schools or parks; or if it would cause possible delays in the response time of emergency vehicles. 
(d)  Parks, greenbelts and wildlife preserves excluded. A private street subdivision shall not cross or interfere with public access to an existing or future public pedestrian pathway, hike and bike trail, greenbelt, park or wildlife preserve as shown on the city's parks and open space master plan or as already dedicated for public use. 
(e)  Property owners or homeowners association required. Subdivisions developed with private streets shall have a mandatory property owner's association (the association) which includes all property and lots served by the private streets in accordance with the requirements of section 65-63. The association shall own and be responsible for the maintenance of private streets and appurtenances. The association shall provide for the payment of dues and assessments required to maintain the private streets. The association documents shall be reviewed and approved by the city manager and the city attorney to ensure that they conform to these and other applicable city rules and regulations prior to final plat approval. The association documents shall be filed of record at Collin County or Hunt County prior to final plat acceptance in order to ensure that there is an entity in place for long-term maintenance of private streets and all related appurtenances. The association may not be dissolved without the prior written consent of the city council. No portion of the association documents pertaining to the maintenance of private streets and alleys, and assessments therefore, may be amended without the prior written consent of the city council. The Association and its operations must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Reserve fund. The association documents must establish a reserve fund for the maintenance of private streets and other improvements such as common greenbelts, security station structures and equipment, and other significant association infrastructure. This reserve fund shall not be commingled with any other association fund. The balance of the fund shall be equal to the total replacement cost of the private streets and other improvements divided by the average life expectancy of those improvements times the age of the improvements. The life expectancy for a subdivision with concrete streets shall be a minimum of 20 years. 
a.  The Association shall have an annual review performed by a certified public accounting firm verifying the amount in the reserve fund. A copy of this review shall be provided to the city. 
b.  If the specific use permit is revoked or the private streets converted to public streets, the reserve fund shall become the property of the city. 
(2)  Assessment for repairs and assignment of association lien rights. The association declaration shall provide that should the association fail to carry out its duties as specified in these regulations, the city or its lawful agents shall have the right and ability, after due notice to the association, to perform the responsibilities of the association if the association fails to do so in compliance with any of the provisions of these regulations or of any applicable city codes, regulations or agreements with the city and to assess the association or the individual lot owners for all costs incurred by the city in performing said responsibilities if the association fails to do so, and the city shall further have any and all liens and lien rights granted to the association to enforce the assessments required by the declaration, and/or to avail itself of any other enforcement actions available to the city pursuant to state or city codes and regulations. 
(3)  Required disclosures. The association documents shall address, but shall not be limited to, the following three paragraphs: 
a.  The association documents must indicate that the streets within the development are private, owned and maintained by the property owners' association and that the city has no obligation to maintain or reconstruct the private streets. 
b.  The association documents shall include a statement indicating that the city may, but is not obligated to, inspect private streets, and require repairs necessary to insure maintenance to city standards. 
c.  The association may not be dissolved without the prior written consent of the city. 
(f)  Private street lot. Private streets must be constructed within a separate lot owned by the property owner's association. This lot must conform to the city's standards for public street rights-of-way. An easement covering the street lot shall be granted to the city and its employees providing unrestricted access to and use of the private streets and private street lot in pursuit of their official duties. This right shall also extend to all utility providers operating within the city and to other necessary governmental service providers, such as the U.S. Postal Service. The easement shall also permit the City to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the private street lot that may impair emergency access. 
(g)  Construction and maintenance cost. The city shall not pay for any portion of the cost of constructing or maintaining a private street. 
(h)  Infrastructure and utilities. Any public water, sewer and drainage facilities, street lights, and traffic control devices, such as traffic signs, placed within the private street lot shall be designed and constructed to city standards, and shall be accepted by and dedicated to the city prior to filing the record plat for the subdivision. All private traffic control devices and regulatory signs shall conform to the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as amended, and to city standards. 
The metering for utilities such as water, gas and electricity shall be located on the individual lots to be served, not grouped together in a centralized location(s), such as gang-box style metering stations, which shall not be permitted. 
(i)  Plans and inspections. Development applications for subdivisions with private streets must include the same plans and engineering information required for public streets and utilities. City requirements pertaining to inspection and approval of improvements shall apply, and fees charged for these services shall also apply. The city may periodically inspect private streets, and may require any repairs necessary to ensure efficient emergency access and to protect the public health, safety, convenience and welfare. 
(j)  Restricted access. The entrances to all private streets shall be clearly marked with a sign, placed in a prominent and visible location, stating that the streets within the subdivision are private, and that they are not maintained nor regularly patrolled by the city. Guard houses, access control gates, and cross arms, if used, shall be constructed per subsection (k). All restricted access entrances must be manned 24 hours every day, or they must provide a reliable, alternative means of ensuring city and emergency access to the subdivision, preferably with an Opticom-type system for emergency access, by the city and other utility or public service providers with appropriate identification. The method to be used to ensure city and emergency access into the subdivision shall be approved by the city council and by all applicable emergency services providers prior to engineering release for construction of the development. If the association fails to maintain reliable access as required herein, the city may enter the subdivision and remove any gate or device which is a barrier to access at the sole expense of the association. The association documents shall contain provisions in conformity with this section which may not be amended without the written consent of the city council. 
(k)  Entrance design standards. Any private street (and any other type of gated entrance) which has an access control gate or cross arm must have a minimum uninterrupted pavement width of 27 feet at the location of the gate or access control device, both ingress point and egress point, regardless of the type of device used. If an overhead, or lift-up, barrier is used, it must rise to a minimum of 14 feet in height above the road surface, and this clearance height shall be extended for a minimum distance of 50 feet in front of and behind the location of the device. All gates and cross arms must be of a breakaway design. A minimum vehicle stacking distance of 100 feet shall be provided from the right-of-way line of the public road from which the private street subdivision is accessed to the first vehicle stopping point, which point is usually an access request keypad, a telephone, or a guard's window. Adequate distance shall be provided between the access request point(s) and the entry barrier, or gate, to accommodate a vehicle turnaround as described below. 
A paved turnaround space must be located in front of (i.e., prior to passage through) any restricted access entrance barrier, between the access request device and the barrier or gate, to allow vehicles that are denied access to safely exit onto public streets without having to back up, particularly into the public street upon which the entrance is located. The design and geometry of such turnaround shall be of sufficient pavement width and having such inside turning radius that it will accommodate smooth, single-motion U-turn movements by service, delivery and utility trucks as well as passenger vehicles. 
A site plan showing the design and location of all proposed access restricted entrances shall be submitted for review by the city engineer along with the engineering plans for the subdivision, and must be approved by the city council along with approval of the preliminary plat. The city engineer may require submission of additional drawings, plans or exhibits demonstrating that the proposed turnaround will work properly, and that vehicle turnaround movements will not compromise public safety on the entry and/or exit roadway or on the adjacent public street(s). 
(l)  Waiver of services. The subdivision final plat and record plat, property deeds and property owner's association documents shall note that certain city services shall not be provided for private street subdivisions. Among the services that will not be provided are: routine law enforcement patrols, enforcement of traffic and parking regulations, and preparation of accident reports. Depending upon the characteristics of the development and upon the access limitations posed by the design of entrances into the subdivision, other services (such as sanitation) may not be provided, as well. 
(m)  Petition to convert to public streets. The association documents shall allow the association to petition the city to accept private streets and any associated property as public streets and rights-of-way upon written notice to all association members and upon the favorable vote of a majority of the membership. However, in no event shall the city be obligated to accept said streets as public streets. Should the city elect to accept the streets as public streets, then the city has the right to inspect the private streets and to assess the lot owners for the expense of needed repairs concurrent with the city's acceptance of the streets. The city shall be the sole judge of whether repairs are needed. Upon acceptance of the private streets as public streets the city may also require, at the associations or the lot owners expense, the removal of any guard houses, access control devices, landscaping or other aesthetic amenities located within the street lot or within any other roadway common area that are not consistent with a public street development. The association documents shall provide for the city's right to such removal and assessment. Those portions of the association documents pertaining to the subject matter contained in this section shall not be amended without the written consent of the city council. However, the association documents must be modified and re-filed to remove requirements specific to private street subdivisions at such time as the city accepts the private streets as public streets. 
(n)  Hold harmless. The subdivision final plat and record plat shall contain language whereby the property owners association, as owner of the private streets and appurtenances, agrees to release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, any other governmental entity, and any public utility for damages to the private streets that may be occasioned by the reasonable use of the private streets by same, and for damages and injury (including death) arising from the condition of the private streets, out of any use of access gates or cross arms, or out of any use of the subdivision by the city or governmental or utility entity (such plat language is available from the city). 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-47. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Sidewalks required. Pedestrian concrete walkways (sidewalks) not less than five feet wide or as required by the zoning ordinance shall be required within all non-residential and residential subdivisions on both sides of all streets. Sidewalks shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for each abutting development as set forth in the city's design manual and standard construction details. 
(b)  Provision of escrow. The cost and provision of any perimeter sidewalks, such as along major thoroughfares, may be escrowed as a part of a developer's agreement, if approved by the city. The city has the right, but not the obligation, to refuse escrow and to require paving of the sidewalks if, in the city's sole opinion, immediate provision of the sidewalks is necessary for safe pedestrian circulation or if it would otherwise protect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(c)  Timing of construction. As deemed appropriate by the city engineer, sidewalks shall be constructed at time of development of subdivision, or the funds for such construction shall be escrowed to city and will be reimbursed to developer as sidewalks are constructed. 
(d)  Exemption. Notwithstanding the foregoing, sidewalks shall not be required in subdivisions with lot sizes at least one acre or more in size. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-48. - Water and wastewater facility design. 
(a)  Water. All new subdivisions shall be connected with an approved water system, and shall be capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes, including fire protection. The design and construction of water system improvements shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Design and construction of a water source on the site shall be in accordance with applicable regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
(2)  Design and construction of water service from the city shall be in accordance with the city's design manual and standard construction details manual, and in accordance with TCEQ standards, whichever requirement is most stringent. 
(3)  Design and construction of a fire protection system shall be in accordance with the city's design manual and standard construction details, and in accordance with the fire department serving the site (i.e., the city or the county, as applicable). 
(b)  Wastewater. All new subdivisions shall be required to connect to the city's wastewater system unless served by other means approved by the city council. The design and construction of the wastewater system improvements shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Design and construction of on-site waste disposal systems shall comply with applicable regulations of the TCEQ, applicable regulations of Collin or Hunt County, and with the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, whichever requirement is most stringent. 
(2)  Design and construction of wastewater collection and treatment service from the city shall be in accordance with the standards in the city's design manual and standard construction details, and in accordance with TCEQ standards, whichever requirement is most stringent. 
(c)  Applicant's responsibilities. The applicant shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Phasing of development or improvements in order to maintain adequate water and wastewater services; 
(2)  Extensions of utility lines to connect to existing utility services; 
(3)  Providing or procuring all necessary easements for the utilities (whether on-site or off-site); 
(4)  Providing proof to the city of adequate water and wastewater service; 
(5)  Providing provisions for future expansion of the utilities if such will be needed to serve future developments or lines larger than 12 inches; 
(6)  Providing all operations and maintenance of the utilities, or providing proof that a separate entity will be responsible for the operations and maintenance of the utilities; 
(7)  Providing all fiscal security required for the construction of the utilities; 
(8)  Obtaining approvals from the applicable utility providers if other than the city; and 
(9)  Complying with all requirements of the utility providers, including the city. 
(d)  Extension of services. Extension of water and wastewater lines shall be made along the entire frontage of the subdivision adjacent to a street or thoroughfare. If the subdivision is not adjacent to a thoroughfare, the extension of utilities shall be accomplished in such a manner as to allow future connections to said utilities by new subdivisions. If new subdivisions will never be constructed beyond a developing subdivision due to physical constraints, the city council may waive the requirement for adjacent utility line construction at the time of preliminary plat approval and prior to construction of the subdivision. 
(e)  Other regulations. Installation, operations and maintenance of utilities not specifically referenced herein shall comply with regulations of the TCEQ and with any other applicable State rules and regulations, whichever requirement is most stringent. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-49. - Storm water collection and conveyance systems. 
(a)  System design requirements. Drainage improvements shall accommodate runoff from the upstream drainage area in its anticipated maximum "build-out" condition, and shall be designed to prevent overloading the capacity of the downstream drainage system. The city may require the phasing of development, the use of control methods such as retention or detention, or the construction of off-site drainage improvements in order to mitigate the impact of the proposed development. No storm water collection system shall be constructed unless it is designed in accordance with the city's design manual and standard construction details by a licensed professional engineer, and unless it is reviewed and approved by the city engineer. All plans submitted to the city engineer for approval shall include a layout of the drainage system together with supporting calculations for the design of the system. 
(b)  Erosion and sedimentation controls. All erosion and sedimentation controls shall conform to the design manual and standard construction details, stormwater management plan, city ordinance, or EPA requirements, whichever is most stringent. For erosion and sedimentation control, the city uses the latest edition of Storm Water Quality Best Management Practices for Construction Activities in North Central Texas (by the NCTCOG), a copy of which is on file at the city. 
(c)  Permission required. No person, individual, partnership, firm or corporation shall deepen, widen, fill, reclaim, reroute or change the course or location of any existing ditch, channel, stream or drainage way without first obtaining written permission of the city engineer and any other applicable agency (such as FEMA or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers) having jurisdiction. The city engineer may, at his or her discretion, require preparation and submission of a flood study for a proposed development if there are concerns regarding storm drainage on the subject property or upstream or downstream from the subject property. The costs of such study, if required, shall be borne by the developer. 
(d)  Minimizing cut and fill. In order to help reduce storm water runoff, and resulting erosion, sedimentation and conveyance of non-point source pollutants, the layout of the street network, lots and building sites shall, to the greatest extent possible, be sited and aligned along natural contour lines, and shall minimize the amount of cut and fill on slopes in order to minimize the amount of land area that is disturbed during construction. Development shall attempt to balance cut and fill required for the development. 
(e)  Prohibition of cross-street flow. No cross-street flow (i.e., perpendicular to traffic flow) of storm water runoff shall be permitted unless approved by the city engineer. When and if such drainage flow is allowed, it must be across a concrete street (i.e., valley gutter) and as approved by the city engineer. 
(f)  Retention and detention. All storm water retention or detention facilities that are not located underground shall be designed using materials and techniques as established in the city's design manual and standard construction details or as may be required by the city engineer and shall be maintained by a homeowners association. 
(g)  Labeling of inlets. Developer shall install on each storm inlet a permanent title, plaque or impression stating that this inlet discharges into a river, creek, etc. in order to discourage dumping of debris and toxics. (City shall adopt a design/logo for this purpose.) 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-50. - Retaining walls. 
(a)  Retaining wall requirements. In general, the use of retaining walls shall be minimized, wherever possible, through minimal and balanced cut and fill on property. When property within or directly adjacent to a subdivision contains changes in elevation exceeding two and one-half feet and the slope exceeds one unit vertical in two units horizontal, a retaining wall shall be required at the locations specified herein prior to the acceptance of the subdivision: 
(1)  Location A. The grade change roughly follows a side or rear lot line. 
(2)  Location B. The grade change is adjacent to a proposed building site boundary. 
(3)  Location C. The grade change is adjacent to a water course or drainage easement. 
Retaining walls shall not be constructed parallel to and/or within any portion of a utility easement. 
(b)  Retaining wall design and construction. All retaining wall design and construction shall be in compliance with the provisions of the building code and the design manuals and standard construction details of the city, and shall be approved by the building official. 
(c)  Retaining wall maintenance. Retaining walls shall be maintained by the owner of the property where such retaining wall is located. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-51. - Screening, entry features and landscaping requirements. 
(a)  Screening required. Where subdivisions are platted so that the rear or side yards of single-family or two-family residential lots are adjacent to an arterial thoroughfare (greater than 60 feet in right-of-way width on the thoroughfare plan); a four lane collector street; are separated from a thoroughfare by an alley; or back up to a collector or residential street (which is not allowed unless specifically approved by city council), the developer shall provide, at his or her sole expense, screening according to the following alternatives and standards. All screening including columns and decorative features shall be adjacent to the right-of-way and fully located on the private lot(s), within a separate lot or within a landscape easement assigned to the homeowners association across several lots. All forms of screening shall conform to the requirements of city ordinances and policies that govern sight distance for traffic safety and meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Screening shall be provided in accordance with, and shall be constructed to, standards and criteria as set forth in the city's design manuals and standard construction details and other related city code(s) and policy(s). 
(2)  A maintenance easement at least five feet in width shall be dedicated to the homeowners association on the private lot side and adjacent to the screening wall or device. 
(3)  The screening wall shall be installed prior to approval of the final plat and prior to final acceptance of the subdivision. Landscape materials may be installed before the subdivision is accepted, upon approval of the city engineer. 
(4)  All plants, such as trees, shrubs and ground covers, shall be maintained by a homeowners association meeting the requirements of section 65-63, shall be living and in sound, healthy, vigorous and growing condition. All plant beds shall be irrigated, with meters charged to the homeowners association. 
(5)  All masonry and steel screening wall plans and details must be designed and sealed by a Texas licensed professional engineer, and must be approved by the building official. 
(6)  Required height of screening devices, including spans between columns, shall be a minimum of six feet and shall be no more than eight feet tall. Decorative columns, pilasters, stone caps, sculptural elements, and other features may exceed the maximum eight-foot height by up to two feet for a total maximum height of ten feet for these features, provided that such taller elements comprise no more than ten percent of the total wall length in elevation view. Features that are taller than ten feet in height shall require city council approval. 
(7)  Screening walls and devices shall not be constructed within any portion of a utility easement unless specifically authorized by the city and other applicable utility provider. 
(b)  Entryway features (neighborhood identification). Subdivisions may provide a landscaped entryway feature at access points from streets and thoroughfares into the subdivision. The entryway feature shall be placed on private property and within an easement identified for such use and shall observe all sight visibility requirements. All feature or landscaping shall be located on private property so that long-term maintenance responsibility will be borne by the property owner or an approved homeowners association (see section 65-63). Entryway features that are located within city right-of-way shall only be allowed city council approval and only with the execution of an agreement with the city that relieves the city of maintenance responsibility and that indemnifies and holds the city harmless for damage or injury incurred by or in conjunction with such features in the right-of-way. 
(1)  Design requirements. The entryway feature shall include low maintenance, living landscaped materials as approved by the city manager. The design of the entryway feature shall also include an automatic underground irrigation system, and may also include subdivision identification, such as signage located on the wall. All plants shall be living and in a sound, healthy, vigorous and growing condition, and they shall be of a size, fullness and height that is customary for their container or ball size, as per the latest edition of the "American Standard for Nursery Stock", by the American Association of Nurserymen, as may be amended. Any walls or structures used in the entryway feature must conform to the city's regulations pertaining to maximum height within the front yard of residential lots (see the zoning ordinance) wherever the adjacent lot sides onto the arterial street and the wall will be located within the front yard setback area. The design of the entryway shall be in accordance with design policies in the city's design manuals and standard construction details. The design of the entryway shall be reflected on the landscape and irrigation plans submitted along with the engineering plans and the preliminary plat, and shall be approved by the city manager. 
(2)  The maintenance of the entryway shall be the responsibility of the applicant for a period of at least two years or until building permits have been issued for 90 percent of the lots in the subdivision, whichever event is later. Following that period of time, maintenance responsibility shall be borne by the private property owner(s) upon whose lot(s) the entryway feature is located, or by an approved homeowners association (see section 65-63). 
(c)  Landscaping. All landscaping and landscape screening shall conform with the city's zoning ordinance, and as interpreted and approved by the city staff. 
(d)  Signage. All signage used to identify subdivisions shall conform with the city's sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-52. - Private utility services. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following meanings shall apply: 
Feeder line or feeder/lateral line means high voltage supply electric lines that emanate from substations used to distribute power through an area to an unspecified number of customers. 
Lateral lines means those electric or telephone lines used to distribute power from a feeder line to a single subdivision. These electric lines are normally connected to a feeder line through a sectionalizing device such as a fuse. 
Service lines means those electric lines used to connect between the utilities' supply system or lateral lines and the end users meter box. 
Utility services means the facilities of any person, firm or corporation providing electric, natural gas, telephone, cable television, or any other such item or service for public use approved but not necessarily provided by the city. 
(b)  Underground utilities. All utilities, including electrical and communication lateral lines, shall be installed underground along major and principal four-lane undivided streets, local collector streets and local streets, as indicated on the thoroughfare plan, unless approved by the city engineer. Temporary electrical services may be placed above ground along major and principal four-lane undivided streets, but must be placed underground as adjacent property develops. Electrical service lines for residential and non-residential properties from overhead distribution lines shall be placed underground from the right-of-way to the point of service. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any existing facilities in place prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived to be placed underground. 
(1)  Cost recovery. Nothing herein shall prohibit or restrict any utility company from recovering the difference in cost of overhead facilities and underground utilities from the property owner in accordance with the provisions of such utility's approved tariff. No utility company shall be required or permitted to begin construction of underground facilities unless and until the property owner or developer of the subdivision has made arrangements satisfactory to the specific utility company for the payment of such difference between the cost of overhead facilities and underground facilities, as approved by the city engineer. 
(2)  Support equipment. All electrical and telephone support equipment, including transformers, amplifiers and switching devices necessary for underground installations, shall be pad or ground-mounted, or shall be mounted underground and not overhead, unless the subdivision is served from perimeter overhead electrical facilities. Pad or ground-mounted utility equipment shall be completely screened from view of any public roadway, and shall not be located within any required visibility area, such as at street intersections or corners or at driveway openings or within city right-of-way. 
(c)  Easements. The location, size and type of all private utility easements running over, across and through or otherwise serving the subdivision shall be identified on the final plat. Verification of acceptance of easement locations and widths by the utilities shall be provided to the city, by the applicant, prior to final plat approval by the city council, and all easements shall be reviewed by the utility companies and by the city engineer (for those to the city) prior to granting final approval for any residential subdivision affected by this section. 
(d)  Letters of commitment. The applicant shall, prior to final plat approval, provide a letter of commitment from each utility provider stating that said utility providers will ensure the provision of necessary infrastructure and service to all portions of the proposed development prior to acceptance of the subdivision by the city. Failure to submit such letters of commitment from utility providers shall constitute grounds for denial of the final plat application on the basis that there is no written assurance that the development can be served by essential utility services. 
(e)  Metering. Except for multi-family, condominium and mobile home park developments, the metering for utilities such as water, gas and electricity shall be located on the individual lots to be served, not grouped together in one or more centralized locations, in accordance with the Texas Administrative Code, (16 TAC), Section 24.89(a)(4). 
(f)  Location of utilities. Utilities along residential and collector streets shall be located in an alley or separate easements adjacent to the street rights-of-way. Street crossings shall be installed contemporaneously with the construction of the street to avoid disruption or boring. 
(g)  Installation before acceptance. All utilities shall be installed before the city accepts any subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-53. - Easements. 
(a)  Minimum width and location. The minimum width for city easements shall be 15 feet or as otherwise required by the city engineer. The minimum width for city drainage easements shall be as required by the city engineer. The width of easements for other utility providers, such as for gas, electric, telephone or cable television, shall be as required by that particular entity. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to determine appropriate easement widths required by other utility companies (also see section 65-52). Wherever possible, easements shall be centered on or along front or side lot lines rather than across the interior or rear of lots, particularly where no alleys will be provided behind the lots. 
(b)  Storm water and drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way or channel, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with such course and of such additional width as may be designated by the city engineer, subject to determination according to proper engineering considerations. The required width shall conform to the requirements set forth by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and/or the city. Single-loaded parallel streets or parkways may be required adjacent to certain portions of creek or drainage ways to provide maintenance access and/or public access to recreation areas (see section 65-61(c). Other utilities may be permitted within the drainage easement only if approved by the city engineer and any other applicable entity requiring the drainage easement. 
(c)  Easement to be kept clear. No fences or other structures shall be located within a drainage easement. 
(d)  Subdivisions with no alleys. Where alleys are not provided in a residential subdivision, a minimum 15-foot wide utility easement shall be provided along the front of all lots, adjacent to and flush with the street right-of-way line for the potential placement of utility facilities. 
(e)  Platting required. For new development, all necessary on-site easements shall be established on the subdivision plat and not by separate instrument, and they shall be labeled for the specific purpose, and to the specific entity, for which they are being provided. Examples include, but are not limited to, the following: a water, sanitary sewer or drainage easement, which is dedicated to the city for a water or sanitary sewer line or for a drainage structure; an access easement, which is dedicated to the public for unrestricted access purposes; a fire lane easement, which is dedicated to the city and its fire suppression and emergency medical service providers for access purposes; or an electrical, gas or telephone easement, which is dedicated to the specific utility provider that requires the easement. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Secs. 65-55—65-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PARKS, OPEN SPACE AND PUBLIC FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 65-61. - Areas for parks and public use. 
(a)  Parks and public open space. The applicant shall give consideration to suitable sites for parks, playgrounds and other areas for public use so as to conform with the recommendations and requirements of the comprehensive plan. Any provision for parks and public open space areas shall be indicated on the preliminary and final plat, and shall be in accordance with the zoning ordinance, and subject to approval by city council. 
(b)  Park land dedication. 
(1)  Any person, firm, or corporation offering a preliminary or final plat for development of any area zoned and to be used for single-family, duplex, townhouse or multi-family residential purposes within the city shall include on such preliminary and final plat the dedication (to the city) of land for public park purposes. 
The location and size of public parks within the city shall be as approved by the city council. That determination shall be based upon existing circumstances at the time. 
(2)  The dedicated land required hereby shall be suitable and dedicated for park and recreational purposes only. Such land shall be free of flood plain and major utility easements, and shall be suitable for appropriate recreational and leisure activities. Lands occupied by major utility easements and transmission lines shall not be accepted. Areas having environmentally sensitive ecosystems, attractive views, topographical interest or unique natural features shall be preferred and encouraged for park land dedication. 
(3)  All subdivisions involving five or more lots shall be subject to a dedication of five percent of the gross area of the subdivision to the public for use as parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, open spaces, or green areas. In cases where it appears that the property to be dedicated is not suitable for such purpose or purposes, the city council may at its option, require the developer to deposit with the city an amount of money equivalent in value to five percent of the gross area, after any adjustment as described in the previous paragraph, of such proposed subdivision. In the event that the city council elects to require the deposit of such monetary sum, the amount shall be calculated on the basis of the then current tax roll fair market value of the area included in such subdivision, immediately prior to the final platting and approval thereof by the city. In such cases, all monies derived from such sources shall be used by the city either for the acquisition of additional park sites, open spaces, or green areas in said city, or for capital improvements to existing parks, open spaces or green areas, and no portion thereof may be used for maintenance to existing parks or for any other purpose. 
(c)  Public park access. Park land shall be easily accessible to the public and open to public view so as to benefit area residents. A proposed subdivision adjacent to a public park or open space area shall not be designed to restrict reasonable access or visibility into the park and shall not have lots backing to the park land. Rather, the park land shall be placed along a single loaded street. Street connections between residential neighborhoods shall be provided, wherever possible, to provide reasonable access to parks and open space areas. Proposed access and public availability, both physical and visual, of parkland shall be reviewed and approved by the city's park board and by city council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-62. - Protection of drainage and creek areas. 
(a)  Natural conditions. All creeks and drainage areas shall be preserved and protected in their natural condition wherever possible, unless significant storm drainage improvements are required by the city in these areas. All development adjacent to creeks and drainage areas shall be in accordance with the city's design manuals and standard construction details, with applicable policies in the comprehensive plan, and with any other city policies or ordinances related to aesthetics or public enjoyment of creeks and waterways. 
(b)  Definitions and methodology for determining the floodway management area (FMA). The definitions for "floodway" and "floodway fringe" shall correspond to those set forth by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the concept of a floodway is used as a tool to assist the local community in the aspect of flood plain management. Under this concept, the area of the 100-year flood is divided into a floodway and floodway fringe. The floodway is the channel of a stream plus any adjacent flood plain areas that must be kept free of encroachment in order that the 100-year flood may be carried without substantial increases in flood heights as defined by FEMA. The area between the floodway and boundary of the 100-year flood is termed the floodway fringe. The floodway fringe is the area which can be used for development by means of fill according to FEMA and city engineering criteria. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the floodway management area (FMA) will correspond to the floodway fringe, as defined by FEMA (or as may be modified per a flood study approved by FEMA). 
(c)  Areas where an FMA is required. All drainage areas or regulated floodways and floodway fringe areas as referenced on the applicable flood boundary map (the flood insurance rate map, or FIRM) shall be included in the FMA. If FEMA does not specify a floodway fringe zone in any of the creeks or their tributaries, it shall be the developer's responsibility to establish and identify the FMA based upon fully developed conditions and the 100-year flood. The determination shall be made by a licensed professional engineer and approved by the city engineer. Where improvements to a drainage area are required by other ordinances of the city for the purpose of safety or other reasons related to drainage, those ordinances shall also be observed. The FMA is intended to apply to a creek or channel which is to remain open or in its natural condition. The creek shall remain in its natural state unless improvements are permitted or required by the city due to the pending development of properties adjacent to or upstream of the required improvements. 
(d)  Ownership and maintenance of the FMA. The area determined to be the FMA shall be designated on the preliminary and final plat. Approximate locations shall be shown on zoning change requests and concept plans — accurate locations of the FMA shall be established on the preliminary and final plat and prior to site construction. At the city's option, the FMA shall be protected by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Dedicated to the city for flood management purposes (flood areas shall not be dedicated for parks or recreation purposes); or 
(2)  Easement(s). Creeks or drainageways on tracts which have private maintenance provisions, other than single- or two-family platted lots, can be designated as the FMAs by an easement to the city on the preliminary and final plat (with the appropriate plat language, as required by the city). Subdivisions with platted single-family or two-family lots may designate the FMA by easement provided there are adequate maintenance provisions through a mandatory homeowner's association, but no lots or portions of lots may be platted in the FMA easement unless specifically allowed by the city. The area designated as FMA may be identified by a tract number; or 
(3)  Designation of the FMA for certain recreational uses normally associated with or adjacent to flood prone areas (no structures allowed in the FMA), such as golf courses or certain types of parks. The uses allowed shall be in conformance with the zoning ordinance and approved by the planning and zoning commission and city council. Use of the FMA as public parkland shall also require approval by the city's park board. 
Prior to acceptance of any drainageway as an FMA by the city, the area shall be cleared of all debris and placed in a maintainable state. Floodway management areas dedicated to the city shall be left in a natural state except those areas designated for recreational purposes and unless storm drainage requirements do not permit this to occur. 
(e)  Design criteria. The following design criteria shall be required for development adjacent to the FMA: 
(1)  Adequate access shall be provided to and along the FMA for public and/or private maintenance. An unobstructed area a minimum of 20 feet wide with a maximum 5:1 slope (five feet horizontal to one foot vertical), the length of the floodway shall be provided adjacent to or within the FMA on one side. On the opposite side of the drainage area, an unobstructed area having a minimum width of five feet shall be provided. 
(2)  Lots in a single-family, PD single-family, or duplex residential zoning district shall not be platted within the FMA, and no more than 50 percent of the linear length of the FMA (on each side) shall be allowed to have lots backing or siding onto it. If lots back or side onto an FMA, at least two points of access to the FMA, each a minimum of 20 feet in width, shall be provided. Streets, alleys and open-ended cul-de-sacs may qualify as access points if designed such that they are navigable by maintenance vehicles (e.g., alleys must be at least 20-foot wide). All areas of the FMA shall be accessible from the access points and shall be visible from such access points. Lots used for multi-family dwellings may be platted in the FMA if the FMA is identified as an easement and is maintained as open space for use by the residents, and provided that access to the FMA is possible by City maintenance vehicles, should that need arise. If the FMA is to be public parkland, then adequate public access shall also be provided to the FMA. 
(3)  Public streets may be approved in the FMA by the planning and zoning commission and city council (if they conform to applicable engineering standards). 
(4)  Public streets may be required to be constructed adjacent to some (or all) portions of the FMA to allow access for maintenance or recreational opportunities, and/or to allow increased visibility into creek areas for public safety and security purposes. 
(5)  Alternate designs to facilitate equal or better access may be permitted if approved by the planning and zoning commission and city council. 
(6)  Drainage areas that have been altered and are not in a natural condition can be exempted from an FMA and this section at the discretion of the city council and upon recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-63. - Property owners or homeowners associations. 
(a)  Applicability. An incorporated nonprofit property owners or homeowners association (hereafter referred to collectively as homeowners association or association) must be created when a subdivision contains either common open space or other improvements which are not intended to be dedicated to the city for public use, such as private streets, a private recreation facility, landscaped entry features, floodplains and drainage easements or other private amenities. The homeowners association shall also be responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping, buffering, screening, irrigation and associated improvements adjacent to residential subdivisions along public thoroughfares. The city is not responsible for enforcing deed restrictions or protective covenants. 
(b)  Required plans and documents. The city may require the following: 
(1)  Plans and illustrations of the proposed amenities and/or common areas; 
(2)  Cost estimates of construction, maintenance and operating expenses; 
(3)  Association documents, deed restrictions, contracts and agreements pertaining to the amenities and/or common areas; and 
(4)  Provision of surety as required for maintenance and other expenses related to the amenities and/or common areas. 
(c)  Approval required. All amenities to be placed on land dedicated to the city, or involving the potential use of public funds for maintenance and operation shall require city council approval prior to approval of the final plat. The city council may deny any such amenity at its sole discretion. 
(d)  Completion. All amenities and/or common areas must be completed and in place prior to the city engineer accepting the public improvements and prior to the final release of a certificate of occupancy and occupying of residential structures. 
(e)  Establishment. Documents establishing the property owners' association shall be submitted to the city for review by the city attorney for conformance with this and other applicable ordinances prior to the approval of a final plat. The documents shall specify: 
(1)  That the membership in the association is mandatory for all owners of property within the subdivision; 
(2)  All association responsibilities and property interests; 
(3)  By-laws related to the governance of the association; 
(4)  Covenants for maintenance assessments which run with the land; 
(5)  Responsibility for liability insurance and local taxes; 
(6)  Authority for the association to secure funds from its members sufficient to meet its responsibilities. This authority shall include the ability to collect dues, to increase dues, charge special assessments and place liens against property for failing to pay dues and assessments; 
(7)  A requirement that the association shall provide and maintain contact information with the city secretary's office; 
(8)  The right of immediate access to common areas at all times for any governmental authority or agency, including but not limited to the city and the county, their agents and employees if necessary for the preservation of public health, safety and welfare; 
(9)  A prohibition on amendments pertaining to the maintenance of private streets and alleys, amenities and/or common areas and related assessments without the written consent of the city council; 
(10)  A requirement that prohibits dissolution of the association without the prior written consent of the city council; and 
(11)  Other city requirements as applicable. 
(f)  Maintenance reserve fund. Prior to the transfer of the association to the lot owners, the developer must provide a reserve fund equivalent to one years dues based on full association membership. 
(g)  Property association activation. Concurrent with the transfer of the association the developer must transfer to the association control over all utilities related to the property and amenities and/or storm water controls to be owned by the association. The developer must also disclose to the association the total cost to date related to the operation and maintenance of common property and amenities. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-64—65-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPLETION, ACCEPTANCE AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 65-71. - Improvements in general. 
(a)  General requirements. The requirements of this chapter as set forth below are designed and intended to ensure that, for all subdivisions of land within the scope of this chapter, all improvements required herein are installed properly and: 
(1)  The city can provide for the orderly and economical extension of public facilities and services; 
(2)  All purchasers of property within the subdivision shall have a usable, buildable parcel of land; and 
(3)  All required improvements are constructed in accordance with city standards. 
(b)  Compliance with adequate public facilities policy. No subdivision shall be approved unless and until adequate public facilities exist or provision has been made for water facilities, wastewater facilities, drainage facilities, electricity and street facilities which are necessary to serve the development proposed, whether or not such facilities are to be located within the property being platted or off-site, as required by the adequate public facilities policy in section 65-41. Wherever the subject property abuts adjoining undeveloped land, or wherever required by the city to serve the public good, utilities shall be extended to adjacent property lines to allow connection of these utilities by adjacent property owners when such adjacent property is platted and/or developed. 
(c)  Required public improvements. Public improvements that are required by the city for the acceptance of the subdivision by the city shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Water and wastewater facilities; 
(2)  Storm water drainage, collection and conveyance facilities; 
(3)  Water quality, erosion and sedimentation controls; 
(4)  Streets; 
(5)  Street lights; 
(6)  Street signs; 
(7)  Alleys; 
(8)  Sidewalks; 
(9)  Screening and/or retaining walls; 
(10)  Traffic control devices required as part of the project; 
(11)  Gas, electric, cable, phone utilities installed; and 
(12)  All appurtenances necessary to the above, and any other public facilities required as part of the proposed subdivision. 
(13)  All applicable fees, including but not limited to water and sewer impact fees, roadway impact fees, park fees, pro rata payments, escrow funds for infrastructure, security and maintenance bonds. 
(d)  Compliance with standards, codes and ordinances. All aspects of the design and implementation of public improvements shall comply with the city's then current design standards and any other applicable city codes and ordinances, including preparation and submittal of engineering plans and construction inspection. The construction of all of the improvements required in this chapter shall conform to the latest edition of the city's design manuals and standard construction details, as may be amended, and to any other applicable city standards. 
(e)  Changes or amendments to the design manuals and standard construction details and other construction or design documents. The design manuals and standard construction details will, from time to time, require revisions and updates to allow for changing construction technology. When changes are required, the design manuals and standard construction details may be amended by separate ordinance. It is the applicant's responsibility to be aware of, and to conform with, all design manuals and standard construction details requirements (including amendments) that are in place as of the time a complete development application for a preliminary plat (including required engineering/construction plans) is received by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-72. - Water and wastewater requirements. 
(a)  General requirements. No final plat shall be approved for any subdivision within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction until the applicant has made adequate provision for a water system and a sanitary sewer system of sufficient capacity to adequately provide service to all tracts and lots within the area to be subdivided. The design and construction of the water system and of the sanitary sewer system to serve the subdivision shall be in conformance with the city's master plans for water and wastewater facilities and with the city's design manuals and standard construction details, and shall be approved by the city engineer (see also section 65-48). 
(b)  Size and location. A water system with mains of sufficient size and having a sufficient number of outlets to furnish adequate and safe domestic water supply and to furnish fire protection to all lots shall be provided. Water lines shall extend to the property line to allow future connections into adjacent undeveloped property, and a box for the water meter(s) for each lot shall be installed either in the right-of-way or immediately adjacent to the right-of-way in an easement. Services for utilities shall be made available to the property line of each lot in such a manner as will minimize the necessity for disturbing the street pavement and drainage structures when connections are made. 
(c)  Fire protection. Fire protection shall be provided in accordance with section 65-48, the city's design manuals and standard construction details manual, and any other city policy or ordinance pertaining to fire protection or suppression. The fire chief shall have the authority to approve the locations and placement of all fire hydrants and fire lanes and he or she may, at his or her discretion, modify fire hydrant spacing or fire lane placement based upon special design or distance circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-73. - Storm drainage and water quality controls. 
(a)  Adequacy of system. An adequate storm sewer system consisting of inlets, pipes and other underground structures with approved outlets shall be constructed where runoff of storm water and the prevention of erosion cannot be accomplished satisfactorily by surface drainage facilities. Areas subject to flood conditions or inadvertent storm water retention, such as standing or pooling water, as determined by the city engineer, will not be considered for development until adequate drainage has been provided. 
(b)  Design criteria. The criteria for use in designing storm sewers, culverts, bridges, drainage channels, and drainage facilities shall conform to section 65-49. In no case shall drainage areas be diverted artificially to adjacent properties or across roadways. Storm water drainage from one lot onto another shall not be allowed unless such does not pose any harm or inconvenience to the downstream property owner(s), unless specifically approved by the city engineer, and unless the necessary off-site drainage easement is procured on and across the affected property(s). 
(c)  Developer's maintenance responsibilities. The developer shall ensure that all drainage improvements within public easements or rights-of-way are functioning properly prior to the expiration of the maintenance bond. The developer shall be responsible for removing any significant build-up of sediment or debris from drainage improvements, with the exception of backyard and side yard drainage swales, at the eleventh month of the second year for the required two-year maintenance bond for the applicable facilities. The city shall inspect the improvements to determine any maintenance or correction of deficiencies at the conclusion of this period. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-74. - Withholding city services and improvements until acceptance. 
(a)  Dedication and acceptance required. The city hereby defines its policy to be that the city will withhold all city services and improvements of whatsoever nature, including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of all other city services from any subdivision or property until all of the street, utility, storm drainage and other public improvements, as well as lot improvements such as retaining walls and grading and installation of improvements required for proper lot drainage and prevention of soil erosion on the individual residential lots, are properly constructed according to the approved engineering plans and to city standards, and until such public improvements are dedicated to and accepted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-75. - Guarantee of public improvements. 
(a)  Property owners guarantee. Before accepting for filing the final plat of a subdivision located entirely or partially within the city's corporate limits or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the city council must be satisfied that all required public improvements have been (or will be) constructed in accordance with the approved engineering plans and with the requirements of this chapter as well as the city's thoroughfare plan, master plans for water and wastewater facilities, design manuals and standard construction details and other applicable development ordinances. 
(b)  Facilities agreement and guarantee. A developer shall be required to enter into an agreement with the city which shall govern his subdivision if there are pro rata payments, city participation in cost, escrow deposits or other future considerations, other nonstandard development regulations or if all public improvements required to be dedicated to the city will be not completed prior to acceptance of the final plat for filing, or filing the record plat, minor plat, or final plat in the county records. This agreement shall be based upon the requirements of this chapter; and shall provide the city with specific authority to complete the improvements required in the agreement in the event of default by the developer, and to recover the full legal costs of such measures. The city may subordinate its facilities agreement to the prime lender if provided for in said agreement. 
The facilities agreement shall be a legally binding agreement between the city and the developer specifying the individual and joint responsibilities of both the city and the developer. Unusual circumstances relating to the subdivision shall be considered in the facilities agreement such that the purpose of this chapter is best served for each particular subdivision. The developer shall include in such an agreement a hold harmless and indemnity clause agreeing to hold the city harmless against any claim arising out of the developer's subdivision of the property or any actions taken therein. 
In the event of a disagreement between the developer and the city manager or the city engineer concerning stipulations of the facilities agreement, the city council shall review said stipulations and make recommendation for resolving the disagreement. 
The developer shall have a continuing responsibility under this facilities agreement after the filing of the record plat, minor plat, or final plat until all facilities and improvements required under this facilities agreement have been completed. It is the council's intent that the facilities agreement shall place the city in the same position that it would occupy had the required adequate public facilities been designed, constructed and accepted by the city prior to recording the plat for the subdivision in question. When the construction of required improvements has proceeded to the point that certain parts of the subdivision are adequately served, the city engineer may release specified portions of the subdivision for use prior to the completion of all improvements, unless the release of such improvements will jeopardize or hinder the continued construction of required improvements. Any facilities agreement shall remain in force for all portions of the subdivision for which a release has not been executed. 
The city council may determine the duration of the facilities agreement. The city council may also require the property owner to complete or dedicate some of the required public improvements prior to acceptance of the final plat, and to enter into a facilities agreement for completion of the remainder of the required improvements. The facilities agreement shall also contain such other terms and conditions as are agreed to by the property owner and the city. 
(c)  Improvement agreement required for oversize reimbursement. The city shall require a facilities agreement pertaining to any public improvement for which the developer shall request reimbursement from the city for oversize costs. The city council, as it deems appropriate, has the authority to authorize the approval of such agreement as meeting the requirements of the city, and the city shall not withhold approval as a means of avoiding compensation due under the terms of this chapter. 
(d)  Security. Whenever the city permits an applicant to enter into a facilities agreement, it shall require the applicant to provide sufficient security, covering the completion of the public improvements. The security shall be in the form of cash escrow or, where authorized by the city, a performance bond or an irrevocable letter of credit or other security acceptable to the city manager and the city attorney, as security for the promises contained in the improvement agreement. Security shall be in an amount equal to 120 percent of the estimated cost of completion of the required public improvements and lot improvements. The issuer of any surety bond and irrevocable letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the city manager and the city attorney. 
(e)  Performance bond. If the city council authorizes the applicant to post a performance bond as security for its promises contained in the improvement agreement, the performance bond shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All performance bonds must be in the forms acceptable to the city manager and the city attorney; 
(2)  All performance bonds must be executed by such sureties as are named in the current list of "Companies Holding Certificates of Authority as Acceptable Sureties on Federal Bonds and as Acceptable Reinsuring Companies", as published in Circular 570, as may be amended, by the Financial Management Service, Surety Bond Branch, U.S. Department of the Treasury; 
(3)  All performance bonds must be signed by an agent, and must be accompanied by a certified copy of the authority for him or her to act; 
(4)  All performance bonds shall be obtained from surety or insurance companies that are duly licensed or authorized in the state to issue performance bonds for the limits and coverage required. 
If the surety on any performance bond furnished by the applicant is declared bankrupt, or becomes insolvent, or its right to do business in terminated in the State of Texas, or the surety ceases to meet the requirements listed in Circular 570, the developer shall, within 20 calendar days thereafter, substitute another performance bond and surety, both of which must the foregoing requirements and be acceptable to the city. 
(f)  Irrevocable letter of credit. If the city council authorizes the applicant to post a letter of credit as security for its promises contained in the improvement agreement, the letter of credit shall: 
(1)  Be irrevocable; 
(2)  Be for a term sufficient to cover the completion, maintenance and warranty periods, but in no event less than two successive one year terms; 
(3)  Require only that the city present the issuer with a sight draft and a certificate signed by an authorized representative of the city certifying to the city's right to draw funds under the letter of credit; and 
(4)  Be issued by a financial institution that allows presentment in person by the city within the physical area covered by the North Central Texas Council of Governments. 
(g)  Partial reduction in security. As portions of the public improvements are completed in accordance with the design manuals and standard construction details and the approved engineering plans, the applicant may make written application to the city manager to reduce the amount of the original security. If the city manager is satisfied that such portion of the improvements has been completed in accordance with city standards, he or she may, but is not required to, cause the amount of the security to be reduced by such amount that he or she deems appropriate, so that the remaining amount of the security adequately insures the completion of the remaining public improvements. 
(h)  Guarantee. The developer shall guarantee all public improvements free of defects for a two-year period from the date of acceptance of said improvements by the city. Upon acceptance by the city of all required public improvements, the city shall reimburse 100 percent of the security if the applicant is not in breach of the facilities agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-76. - Temporary improvements. 
The applicant shall build and pay for all costs of temporary improvements required by the city, and shall maintain those temporary improvements for the period specified by the city. Prior to construction of any temporary facility or improvement, the applicant shall file with the city a separate facilities agreement and escrow or, where authorized, an irrevocable letter of credit, in an appropriate amount for temporary facilities, which agreement and escrow or letter of credit shall ensure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained and timely removed. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-77. - Failure to complete improvements. 
For plats for which no facilities agreement has been executed and no security has been posted, if the public improvements are not completed within the period specified by the city, the plat approvals shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases where a facilities agreement has been executed and security has been posted, and the required public improvements have not been installed within the terms of the agreement, the city may: 
(1)  Declare the agreement to be in default and require that all the public improvements be installed regardless of the extent of completion of the development at the time the agreement is declared to be in default; 
(2)  Suspend final plat approval until the public improvements are completed, and may record a document to that effect for the purpose of public notice; 
(3)  Obtain funds under the security and complete the public improvements itself or through a third party; 
(4)  Assign its right to receive funds under the security to any third party, including a subsequent owner of the subdivision for which public improvements were not constructed, in whole or in part, in exchange for that subsequent owner's promise to complete the public improvements on the property as reflected in a facilities agreement with the subsequent owner; or 
(5)  Exercise any other rights or remedies available under the law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-78. - Acceptance of dedication offers. 
Acceptance of formal offers for the dedication of streets, public areas, easements or parks shall be by authorization of the city manager. The approval by the city council of a preliminary or final plat shall not, in and of itself, be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the city of any street, public area, easement or park shown on the plat. The city may require the plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-79. - Maintenance and guarantee of public improvements. 
(a)  Two-year maintenance period. The property owner shall maintain all required public improvements for a period of two years following acceptance of the subdivision by the city, and shall also provide a two-year maintenance bond (warranty) that all public improvements will be free from defects for a period of two years following such acceptance by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-80. - Construction procedures. 
(a)  Site development permit. A site development permit is required from the city prior to beginning any site development-related work in the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction which affects erosion control, storm drainage, vegetation or tree removal, or a flood plain. 
(b)  Preconstruction conference. The city shall require that all contractors participating in the construction meet for a preconstruction conference to discuss the project prior to release of a grading permit and before any filling, excavation, clearing or removal of vegetation and trees that are larger than six caliper inches in diameter. All contractors shall be familiar with and shall conform to applicable provisions of the city's landscape ordinance (the city zoning ordinance). 
(c)  Conditions prior to authorization. Prior to authorizing release of a site development permit, the city engineer shall be satisfied that the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The preliminary plat has been approved by the city council (and any conditions of such approval have been satisfied); 
(2)  All required engineering documents are completed and approved by the city engineer; 
(3)  All necessary off-site easements and dedications required for city-maintained facilities and not shown on the plat must be conveyed solely to the city, such as by filing of a separate instrument, with the proper signatures affixed. The original of the documents and the appropriate fees for filing the documents meeting Collin or Hunt County requirements, and the city's submission guidelines, as may be amended from time to time shall be returned to the city prior to approval and release of the engineering plans by the city engineer; 
(4)  All contractors participating in the construction shall be presented with a set of approved plans bearing the stamp of release of the city engineer, and at least one set of these plans shall remain on the job site at all times; 
(5)  A complete list of the contractors, their representatives on the site, and telephone numbers where a responsible party may be reached at all times must be submitted to the city; and 
(6)  All applicable fees must be paid to the city. 
(d)  Non-point source pollution controls and tree protection. All non-point source pollution controls, erosion controls, and tree protection measures and devices shall be in place, to the city engineers satisfaction, prior to commencement of construction on any property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-81. - Inspection and acceptance of public improvements. 
(a)  General procedure. Construction inspection shall be supervised by the city engineer. Construction shall be in accordance with the approved engineering plans and the design manuals and standard construction details of the city (and all other applicable codes and ordinances). Any change in design that is required during construction should be made by the licensed professional engineer whose seal and signature are shown on the plans. Another engineer may make revisions to the original engineering plans if so authorized by the owner of the plans, and if those revisions are noted on the plans or documents and signed and sealed by the subsequent engineer(s). All revisions shall be approved by the city engineer. If the city engineer finds, upon inspection, that any of the required public improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the city's standards and design manuals and standard construction details, then the property owner shall be responsible for completing and correcting the deficiencies such that they are brought into conformance with the then applicable standards. 
(b)  Letter of satisfactory completion. The city will not deem required public improvements satisfactorily completed until the applicant's engineer and surveyor have certified to the city engineer, through submission of detailed sealed "as-built", or record, drawings of the property which indicate all public improvements and their locations, dimensions, materials and other information required by the city engineer, and until all required public improvements have been completed. The "as-builts" shall also include a complete set of sealed record drawings of the paving, drainage, water, sanitary sewer and other public improvements, showing that the layout of the lines and grades of all public improvements are in accordance with the engineering plans for the plat, and showing all changes made in the plans during construction, and containing on each sheet an "as-built" stamp bearing the signature and seal of the licensed professional engineer and the date. One reproducible drawing of the utility plan sheets containing the as-built information shall also be submitted. The engineer or surveyor shall also furnish the city with a copy of the approved final plat and the engineering plans in a digital format that is compatible with the city engineer's CADD system. When such requirements have been met to the city engineers satisfaction, the city manager shall thereafter make a recommendation to the city council for consideration of satisfactory completion of the public improvements. Once the city council votes its approval of satisfactory completion, the city engineer shall issue the letter of satisfactory completion. 
Acceptance of the development shall mean that the developer has transferred all rights to all the public improvements to the city for use and maintenance. The city council may, at its option, accept dedication of a portion of the required public improvements if the remaining public improvements are not immediately required for health and safety reasons, and if the property owner has posted a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or cash bond in the amount of 120 percent of the estimated cost of those remaining improvements for a length of time to be determined by the city council. If the value of the remaining public improvements is greater than $10,000.00 and are not completed within the determined length of time, the city will impose a penalty that equals ten percent of the performance bond, letter of credit, or cash bond. The obligation to complete the improvements remains with the developer, and all future building permits or certificates of occupancy will be withheld until the improvements are complete. If the remaining public improvements are less than $10,000.00 in value, the developer shall pay the actual dollar amount. The length of time may be extended due to inclement weather or unforeseen delays by mutual agreement between the developer and the city. 
Upon acceptance of the required public improvements, the city engineer shall submit a certificate to the developer stating that all required public improvements have been satisfactorily completed. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-82. - Deferral of required improvements. 
(a)  Approval required. The city council may, upon petition of the property owner and favorable recommendation of the city engineer, defer at the time of plat approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all public improvements as, in its judgment, are not required in the immediate interests of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  Facilities agreement. Whenever a petition to defer the construction of any public improvements required under this chapter is granted by the city council, the property owner shall execute a facilities agreement in accordance with the preceding provisions in this chapter regarding facilities agreements. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-83. - Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  General requirements. No building permit shall be issued for a lot, building site, building or use of a lot or building unless the lot or building site has been officially recorded by a final plat approved by the city council, and unless all public improvements, as required by this chapter for final plat approval have been completed. 
(b)  Exception for up to ten single-family residential lots. Notwithstanding the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section, the city manager (or building official) may release building permits for a portion of a residential subdivision then being platted not to exceed the lesser of ten single-family residential lots or ten percent of the new single-family residential lots in that phase of the subdivision then being platted (individually and collectively the "early release lots"), provided that: 
(1)  A final plat and the construction plans for the required public improvements for the entire phase of the subdivision then being platted have been approved by the city; and 
(2)  All required public improvements necessary to provide fire and emergency protection have been completed for that portion of the development in which the early release lots are situated. More particularly, the following required public improvements must be constructed in accordance with the city's subdivisions ordinance and engineering design manual: 
a.  The full width of all streets (concrete with curb and gutter) on which each of the early release lots is situated, including at least two points of access or other approved full width street feature that allow emergency vehicles to turn around and meets the minimum requirements of the International Fire Code, as adopted by the city; and 
b.  The full width of all streets (concrete with curb and gutter) extending the entire length of the roadways between each of the early release lots and the nearest collector roadway to allow emergency vehicles safe and prompt ability to provide emergency services; and 
c.  Fire hydrants located within such proximity of each early release lot as is required to meet the minimum requirements of the then adopted editions of the International Building Code, International Fire Code, and International Residential Code together with potable water lines sized to meet the minimum requirements of the subdivisions ordinance connected to such fire hydrants and actively providing fire-flow water service. 
(3)  No sanitary sewer connection will be provided to any of the early release lots until such time as all of the required public improvements that are necessary to serve the proposed development have been constructed and final accepted by the city. 
(4)  No early release lot may be sold nor title conveyed until all of the required public improvements that are necessary to serve the proposed development have been constructed and final accepted by the city and the final plat has been approved by the city and recorded at the county. 
(c)  No certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a building or the use of property unless all required public improvements have been completed and final accepted by the city and the final plat has been approved by the city and recorded with the county. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2020-0609-001, § 2, 6-9-2020)  
Secs. 65-84—65-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PARTICIPATION AND ESCROW 
 
Sec. 65-91. - Participation policies. 
(a)  City's share of improvement costs. The city shall participate in the costs of public improvements which are not for the primary benefit of the development and which have been oversized to serve other developments only to the extent and according to the standards and requirements of the design manuals and construction standards and of the requirement of the state local government code. All city participation is subject to a development agreement entered into between the city and the owner. 
(b)  Owner's responsibility. The property owner shall be responsible for the entire costs of designing and installing all public improvements which primarily serve the subdivision or addition. Facilities required by these regulations shall be considered as primarily serving the subdivision or addition unless otherwise determined by the city. 
(c)  Oversized or offsite improvement. The property owner shall also be responsible for its share of the costs of oversized or offsite public improvements needed to assure adequacy of public facilities and services for the addition or subdivision, subject to participation and escrow policies contained in this article. The property owner shall be responsible for extending streets, water, sewer or drainage facilities offsite to his property as required by the commission and/or required to ensure adequacy of public facilities. 
(d)  Pro rata. Should the subdivision or addition abut an existing water or sanitary sewer line installed by someone other than the city, the owner shall pay to the city a "developers liability" charge to be refunded to the original installer of the line, as prescribed by the pro rata ordinance of the city. 
(e)  Lift stations. Should a lift station, either temporary or permanent, be necessary to provide a sanitary sewer service to the subdivision or addition, the property owner shall construct the station and all appurtenances, at his own expense. If and when the lift station is no longer needed, the installation will, unless other provisions are made, remain the property of the city for reuse or disposal. A "developers liability" charge for such lift stations and appurtenances may be established as prescribed in the pro rata ordinance of the city. 
(f)  Limitations and exceptions. The city shall not participate in the following costs: 
(1)  Those portions of the costs of any public improvements not expressly authorized by the design manuals and construction standards. 
(2)  Costs of clearing and grubbing for streets and thoroughfares. 
(3)  Costs of constructing streets build wider than called for in the thoroughfare plan. 
(4)  Costs of lights, decorative finishes or other similar expenses, unless required by the city engineer. 
(5)  Costs of pipe or box culverts, headwalls (regardless of size), or the costs of retention/detention ponds or slope protection. 
(6)  Costs of detours, pavement transitions and cross-overs. 
(7)  Costs of relocating or adjusting private utility company facilities. 
(8)  Costs of underground box culverts not require by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 65-92. - Escrow policies and procedures. 
(a)  Request for escrow. Whenever this chapter requires a property owner to construct a street or thoroughfare, or other type of public improvement, the property owner may, if there exists unusual circumstances, such as a timing issue due to pending roadway improvements by another agency such as TxDOT or Collin or Hunt County, that would present undue hardships or that would impede public infrastructure coordination or timing, petition the city to construct the street or thoroughfare, usually at a later date, in exchange for deposit of escrow as established in this section. If more than one street or thoroughfare must be constructed to meet adequacy requirements for roadways, as demonstrated by a traffic impact analysis, the city engineer may prioritize roadways for which escrow is to be accepted and require the deposit of all funds attributable to the development in escrow accounts for one or more of such affected roadways. The city council shall review the particular circumstances involved (a traffic impact analysis may be required to facilitate the city councils deliberations on the matter), and shall determine, at its sole discretion, whether or not provision of escrow deposits will be acceptable in lieu of the property owner's construction of the street or thoroughfare with his or her development. 
(b)  Escrow deposit with the city. Whenever the city shall agree to accept escrow deposits in lieu of construction by the owner of the property under this chapter, the property owner or developer shall deposit in escrow with the city an amount equal to 120 percent of the costs of design, construction, permits, reviews and approvals, inspections, insurance, payment and performance bonds, maintenance bonds, and any additional land acquisition costs. Such amount shall be paid prior to release of the engineering plans by the city engineer. The property owner and the property owner's transferees, successors and assigns shall be jointly and severally liable or responsible to the city for any and all costs related to the design and construction of the required roadway or public improvement that exceed the amount escrowed. 
(c)  Determination of escrow amount. The amount of the escrow shall be determined by using the maximum comparable turnkey bid price of construction of the improvements (including design, permits, reviews and approvals, inspections and any additional land acquisition that may be needed). Such determination of the escrow amount shall be made as of the time the escrow is due hereunder. 
(d)  Termination of escrow. Escrows which have been placed with the city under this section or in accordance with previously approved street improvement policies, and which have been held for a period of 20 years from the date of such payment or agreement, in the event that the city has not authorized the preparation of plans and specifications for construction of such roadway facilities for which the escrow was made, shall, upon written request, be returned to the current property owner, with any accrued interest. Such return does not remove any obligations of the property owner for construction of the required facilities if a building permit has not been issued on the subject lot or if a new application for a building permit is filed. 
(e)  Refund. If any street or highway for which escrow is deposited is constructed by a party other than the city, or is reconstructed by another governmental authority at no cost to the city, the escrowed funds and accrued interest shall be refunded to the current property owner or applicant who originally paid the escrow amount after completion and acceptance of the public improvements. In the event that a portion of the cost is borne by the city and the other portion of the cost by another party or governmental authority, the difference between the property owner's actual proportionate cost and the escrowed funds, including accrued interest, if any, shall be refunded after completion and acceptance of the improvements. 
(f)  Interest limitation. If money is refunded within six months of deposit, only the principal will be refunded. Monies returned after this date will be refunded with interest accrued, calculated at one percent less than the rate of actual earnings. Existing funds, collected for previous subdivision development such as perimeter street funds, shall be refunded as stated in subsection (d), principle and earned interest. 
(g)  Agreement requirements. An agreement and escrow of funds pursuant to this section shall meet all of the requirements regarding a facilities agreement as set forth in section 65-82(b). 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-002, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Chapter 68 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.001 et seq.; Development Corporation Act, V.T.C.A, Local Government Code § 501.001 et seq.; real and tangible personal property taxable, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.01; intangible personal property taxable, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.02; freeport exemption of tangible personal property, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 11.251; homestead exemption, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 41.001; municipal hotel occupancy taxes, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 351.001 et seq.; tax abatement in municipal reinvestment zones, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 312.201 et seq.; authority to levy certain occupation taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 101.008. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 68-1—68-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal hotel occupancy taxes, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 351.001 et seq.; levy of tax authorized, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 351.002; tax rates, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 351.003. 
 
Sec. 68-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consideration means the cost of a hotel room only if the room is ordinarily used for sleeping, and does not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the room or a person in the room unless related to the cleaning and readying of the room for occupancy. 
Hotel means a building in which members of the public may obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. 
(1)  The term "hotel" includes a: 
a.  Hotel; 
b.  Motel; 
c.  Tourist home; 
d.  Tourist house; 
e.  Tourist court; 
f.  Lodging house; 
g.  Inn; 
h.  Boarding house; 
i.  Rooming house; 
j.  Bed and breakfast inn; or 
k.  Other building where a room is furnished for a consideration. 
(2)  The term "hotel" does not include a: 
a.  Hospital; 
b.  Sanitarium; or 
c.  Nursing home. 
Hotel room means a room in a hotel that members of the public obtain for sleeping accommodations and which may also include kitchen facilities, sitting rooms and other related appurtenances. 
Tourism means the guidance or management of tourists. 
Tourist means an individual who travels from the individual's residence to a different municipality, county, state, or country for pleasure, recreation, education, or culture.  
Sec. 68-20. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person violates or fails to perform an act required by this article, or files a report containing false information. Each instance of a violation of this article is a separate offense, and each day that a person remains in violation shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  An offense under this article is a class C misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-3. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.  
Sec. 68-21. - Levied; exceptions. 
(a)  A tax of seven percent of the consideration paid for a hotel room is levied on a person who, under a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or agreement, pays the consideration for the use or possession, or for the right to the use or possession of, a hotel room that costs $2.00 or more each day and is ordinarily used for sleeping. 
(b)  The tax applies to any hotel within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, except as provided in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.025(b). 
(c)  This article does not impose a tax on: 
(1)  A person who has the right to use or possess a hotel room for at least 30 consecutive days, so long as there is no interruption of payment for the period; or 
(2)  The United States, a governmental entity of the United States, or an officer or employee of the United States. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103, as amended, the state, or an agency, institution, board, or commission of the state other than an institution of higher education, as that term is defined by V.T.C.A., Education Code § 61.003, as amended, shall pay the tax imposed by this section and is entitled to a refund of the amount of tax paid. 
(e)  A person entitled to a refund of tax paid under this section shall make an application for a refund in the form prescribed by the city.  
Sec. 68-22. - Collection. 
(a)  A person who owns, operates, manages, or controls a hotel or collects payment for the use or possession, or for the right to the use or possession, of a hotel room shall collect the tax levied by section 68-21 for the city. 
(b)  A person who collects the tax shall deposit the tax proceeds into in a separate liability account and may not use the tax proceeds for any purpose other than payment to the city. 
(c)  Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax levied by section 68-21 for the city. The hotel operator shall be entitled to one percent of the hotel occupancy tax revenues collected as reimbursement for the operator's administrative costs for collecting the tax. However, as further described in this article, this reimbursement may be forfeited at the discretion of the city if the hotel operator fails to timely pay over the tax or timely file a report as required by the city or files a false report with the city.  
Sec. 68-23. - Quarterly reports; payments. 
(a)  A quarterly period under this section is based on the city's fiscal year, with the first quarter beginning on October 1 and ending on December 31. 
(b)  On or before the last day of the month following each quarterly period, a person required to collect the tax imposed under section 68-21 shall: 
(1)  File a written report with the city for that quarterly period, with a copy of the report for state hotel occupancy taxes required by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.151, as amended, for the same quarterly period; and 
(2)  Pay the tax due for the quarter. 
(c)  A report under this section shall be in the form prescribed by the city and shall include the total: 
(1)  Consideration paid for rooms subject to the tax in the preceding quarter; 
(2)  Amount of tax collected; and 
(3)  Amount of tax exemptions granted. 
(d)  If requested by the city, a person responsible for collecting the tax shall provide the city with: 
(1)  The names, addresses, and identification relied upon to grant an exemption from the tax; and 
(2)  Any other information the city may reasonably require. 
(e)  The city manager may request, and a person required to collect the tax shall provide within a reasonable time, additional documentation verifying the information contained in the report to the city.  
Sec. 68-24. - Procedure to withhold portion of hotel purchase amount to pay tax due. 
(a)  If a hotel owner sells a hotel, the purchaser or his assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price sufficient to pay the amount of tax due until the seller provides a: 
(1)  Receipt issued by the city showing that the amount of tax due has been paid; or 
(2)  Certificate issued by the city showing that no tax is due. 
(b)  A purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold the amount of the purchase price as required by this section is liable for the unpaid tax required to be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price. 
(c)  The purchaser of a hotel may file a written request with the city for the issuance of a certificate stating that no tax is due or for a statement of the amount required to be paid before a certificate may be issued. The city shall issue the certificate or statement not later than the 60th day after the date that the city receives the request. 
(d)  If the city fails to issue the certificate or statement within the period provided in subsection (c) of this section, the purchaser is released from the obligation to withhold the amount of tax from the purchase price or pay the amount of tax due.  
Sec. 68-25. - Rules for effective collection; access to records. 
(a)  The city manager may promulgate rules to effectively collect the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Upon reasonable notice, a person responsible for collecting the tax shall give the city access to the records necessary to determine the accuracy of a report filed or the amount of tax due under this article.  
Sec. 68-26. - Allocation and use of tax revenue. 
(a)  The revenue derived from the tax authorized by this article may be used only as provided by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.101, as amended, to promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry as follows: 
(1)  The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation, and maintenance of convention center facilities or visitor information centers, or both; 
(2)  The furnishing of facilities, personnel, and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants; 
(3)  Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and convention delegates or registrants to the city or its vicinity; 
(4)  The encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of the arts including instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape and sound recording, and other arts related to the presentation, performance, execution, and exhibition of these major art forms; 
(5)  Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums: 
a.  At or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities or visitor information centers; or 
b.  Located elsewhere in the city or its vicinity that would be frequented by tourists and convention delegates; and 
(6)  Expenses, including promotion expenses, directly related to a sporting event in which the majority of participants are tourists who substantially increase economic activity at hotels and motels within the city or its vicinity. 
(b)  Revenue derived from the tax shall only be expended to directly enhance and promote tourism and the city's convention and hotel industry. Tax revenue may not be used as general revenue for general city governmental operations.  
Sec. 68-27. - Penalties and interest on unpaid tax. 
(a)  In addition to the tax imposed under this article, a person shall pay a penalty of five percent of the tax due if the person: 
(1)  Fails to file a report on or before the due date; 
(2)  Fails to pay the tax imposed on or before the due date; or 
(3)  Files a report containing false information. 
(b)  A person who fails to pay any amount of the tax and penalty due under subsection (a) of this section on or before the 60th day after the tax is due shall pay an additional five percent penalty on the unpaid tax. A delinquency penalty shall not be less than $1.00. 
(c)  Beginning on the 61st day after the due date, delinquent taxes shall draw interest at a rate of ten percent per annum.  
Sec. 68-28. - Additional enforcement authority. 
The city may take the following actions against a person who has failed to file a required report, failed to collect the tax imposed, or failed to pay the taxes over to the city when due, or who has filed a false report: 
(1)  Bring suit to collect the unpaid tax or to enjoin the person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report filed, as applicable, as provided by the court's order; and 
(2)  Any other remedy provided under state law.  
Secs. 68-29—68-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY TAXES 
 
Sec. 68-50. - Penalty incurred. 
(a)  Real property taxes that remain delinquent on July 1 of the year in which they become delinquent and taxes imposed on tangible personal property that remain delinquent on April 1 of the year in which they become delinquent incur an additional penalty to defray costs of collection as long as the city has contracted with an attorney, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 6.30, for the collection of the delinquent taxes against which the additional penalty is imposed. The city shall have delivered a notice of the delinquency and of the penalty imposed in this subsection to the property owner at least 30 days and not more than 60 days before July 1 of the year in which the taxes become delinquent. 
(b)  That whenever taxes that become delinquent on or after June 1 under V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 26.07(f), 25.15(e), 31.03, 31.031, 31.032, or 31.04, are given to the city's tax collection firm for collection, the city shall be entitled to and may collect the penalty percentage, set forth in section 68-51, to be charged as an additional penalty, as authorized pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.08, to defray costs of collection. After the taxes become delinquent, the city shall send a notice of the delinquency and the penalty to the property owner. The penalty provided in this subsection is incurred on the first day of the first month that begins at least 21 days after the date the notice is sent. 
(c)  A tax lien shall attach to the property on which the tax is imposed to secure payment of the penalty. 
(d)  If a penalty is imposed pursuant to this section, the city may not recover, in addition thereto, attorney's fees in a suit to collect delinquent taxes subject to the penalty. 
(e)  Should the city contract with another taxing unit for the collection of taxes, then the provisions of this section shall survive and be applicable to the delinquent taxes collected by the taxing unit collecting taxes for the city; and, in such event, the notice required by subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be delivered by the tax collector for the contracting taxing unit.  
Sec. 68-51. - Penalty percentage. 
The amount of the additional penalty imposed herein shall be an amount of money equal to 15 percent of the amount of taxes, penalty and interest due.  
Secs. 68-52—68-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX 
 
Sec. 68-60. - Taxation of telecommunications services. 
(a)  A tax is hereby authorized and imposed on all receipts from the sale of telecommunications services within the city as is provided for by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(b)  The application of the exemption provided for in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210, is hereby repealed by the city as authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210. 
(c)  The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same rate imposed by the city of all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state.  
Secs. 68-61—68-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TAXATION OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY IN TRANSIT 
 
Sec. 68-75. - Taxation of tangible personal property in transit. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms have the same meaning as defined in Section 11.253 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended. 
Bailee and warehouse have the meanings assigned by Section 7.102 of the Texas Business and Commerce Code, as amended. 
Dealer's motor vehicle inventory, dealer's vessel and outboard motor inventory, dealer's heavy equipment inventory, and retail manufactured housing inventory have the meanings assigned by Subchapter B, Chapter 23 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended. 
Goods-in-transit is defined to mean tangible personal property that: 
(1)  Is acquired in or imported into this state to be forwarded to another location in this state or outside this state; 
(2)  Is stored under a contract of bailment by a public warehouse operator at one or more public warehouse facilities in this state that are not in any way owned or controlled by the owner of the personal property for the account of the person who acquired or imported the property; 
(3)  Is transported to another location in this state or outside this state not later than 175 days after the date the person acquired the property in or imported the property into this state; and 
(4)  Does not include oil, natural gas, petroleum products, aircraft, dealer's motor vehicle inventory, dealer's vessel and outboard motor inventory, dealer's heavy equipment inventory, or retail manufactured housing inventory. 
Location means a physical address. 
Petroleum product means a liquid or gaseous material that is an immediate derivative of the refining of oil or natural gas. 
Public warehouse operator means a person that: 
(1)  Is both a bailee and a warehouse; and 
(2)  Stores under a contract of bailment, at one or more public warehouse facilities, tangible personal property that is owned by other persons solely for the account of those persons and not for the operator's account. 
(b)  A person is not entitled to an exemption from taxation of the appraised value of that portion of the person's property that consists of goods-in-transit. A person's property consisting of goods-in-transit is hereby subject to ad valorem taxation pursuant to Section 11.253 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-1025-002, § 2, 10-25-2011)  
Chapter 71 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Rules of the Road, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq.; powers of local authorities regarding regulation of traffic, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202; limitations on local authorities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 42.203; municipal authority to regulate parking, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 601.001; municipal streets generally, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 312.001 et seq.; railroad and roadway crossings, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 471.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 71-1. - Adoption of state traffic regulations. 
All of the terms, provisions and regulations of state traffic law specifically including, but not limited to, the "Rules of the Road" set out in V.T.C.A., ch. 541 of the Texas Transportation Code are hereby adopted as the terms for regulating traffic in the city limits. All ordinances, rules or regulations in conflict with the provisions of said law, unless expressly authorized therein, are hereby repealed, except such traffic regulations in the nature of additional regulations made heretofore by the ordinances of this city which are not in conflict with the provisions of said state traffic law. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-0814-001, § 2, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 71-2. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of the state traffic laws adopted in section 71-1 or any other provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor (unless such violation is by said act or other law of the state declared to be a felony), and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-3 of this Code. Each and every day, or portion of a day, that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-0814-001, § 2, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 71-3. - Signs, markings and other traffic control devices; responsibility for traffic regulation. 
(a)  The city manager shall cause his designee to plainly mark, and keep marked, all traffic lanes, parking places and loading zones, and speed limit zones and have traffic signs and traffic lights maintained as called for by this chapter or other city ordinances. 
(b)  The city manager shall cause his designee to erect and have maintained appropriate signs indicating school zones; reduced speed zones; speed zones; one-way streets and one-way traffic patterns; stop or yield intersections; truck routes and, if warranted, streets upon which truck traffic is prohibited; loading zones and limited duration loading zones; no-stopping and no-parking areas; handicap parking areas on public streets and parking lots; areas where overnight parking is prohibited; special permit parking areas; and other traffic signage allowed by and through the most recent addition of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(c)  The city manager shall cause the chief of police to regulate traffic and to enforce traffic laws. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-0814-001, § 2, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 71-4. - Duties of drivers traveling through crosswalks. 
Drivers of vehicles traveling through established crosswalks shall stop prior to entering a crosswalk that is occupied by a pedestrian crossing or waiting at the curb or in the street to cross the roadway, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to stop. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-0814-001, § 2, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 71-5. - Reasonable speed. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any street, highway or alley in the city at a speed that is greater than is reasonable under the circumstances then existing, having regard to the actual and potential hazards when approaching and crossing an intersection or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or road conditions; and in every event speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-0814-001, § 2, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 71-6. - Unmarked areas. 
Except as provided in section 71-7, the speed limit on all the streets and highways in the city not marked by signs stating a specific speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-0814-001, § 2, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 71-7. - Narrow streets and alleys. 
On a street or alley with an improved driving surface of 20 feet or less, when no special hazards exist that require lower speeds for compliance with section 71-6, the speed of any vehicle not in excess of ten miles per hour shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of ten miles per hour shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent, and that it is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-0814-001, § 2, 8-14-2018)  
Secs. 71-8—71-21. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 71-22. - Riding on certain sidewalks prohibited. 
No person shall operate a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, battery-operated toy vehicle or other similar modes of transportation on the following public sidewalks: 
(1)  McKinney Street: eastbound and westbound from Windom Street to Main Street. 
(2)  Main Street: northbound and southbound from College Street to Railroad Street. 
(3)  Washington Street: northbound and southbound from Candy Street to Railroad Street.  
Sec. 71-23. - Operation in the Onion Sheds prohibited. 
The operation of bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, and all such modes of transportation in the structures known as the Onion Sheds including, but not limited to, the ramp required by the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 USC 12101 et seq., is prohibited.  
Secs. 71-24—71-49. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BICYCLE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 71-50. - Application of traffic regulations to bicycle riders. 
Every person operating a bicycle shall be subject to the provisions of the city's traffic regulations and state statutes applicable to the drivers of motor vehicles, except as special regulations or exceptions may be provided, and except as to those provisions of such traffic regulations and statutes which, by their nature, can have no application.  
Sec. 71-51. - Operators to obey traffic control devices. 
Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the directions of official traffic signals, signs and other control devices applicable to other vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, and shall obey direction signs relative to turns permitted, unless such person dismounts from the bicycle, in which event he shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.  
Sec. 71-52. - Bicycle safety equipment. 
(a)  Brake. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake adequate to control its movement and to stop it when necessary. 
(b)  Lamp and reflector. Every bicycle, when in use during the hours of darkness, at night, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front, displaying a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet, and with a red reflector on the rear visible at all distances within 300 feet when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlights on a motor vehicle. A lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than 300 feet may be used instead of such rear reflector.  
Sec. 71-53. - Excess riders prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for more than one person to ride at the same time upon any single-seated bicycle.  
Sec. 71-54. - Riders not to cling to vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to cling to or attach himself or his bicycle to any moving motor vehicle or other vehicle.  
Sec. 71-55. - Speed. 
No person shall ride a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper, having regard to the safety of the rider and others.  
Sec. 71-56. - Riding abreast. 
Persons operating bicycles upon a street or highway, or in a park, shall not ride more than two abreast, and shall ride close together so that they do not occupy more of the width of the roadway than would be occupied by an automobile traveling in the same direction.  
Sec. 71-57. - Riding on right side. 
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, and shall exercise due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.  
Sec. 71-58. - Riders carrying articles. 
No person riding a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.  
Sec. 71-59. - Parking. 
No person shall park any bicycle in any street, highway or park, or upon any sidewalk, in such a manner as to interfere with the safety or movement of pedestrians or vehicular traffic.  
Sec. 71-60. - Riding on sidewalks. 
No person shall ride any bicycle along or upon any of the public sidewalks within the city limits.  
Sec. 71-61. - Trick riding. 
No rider of a bicycle shall remove both hands from the handlebars or his feet from the pedals while riding, or practice any trick, fancy or acrobatic riding in any public roadway.  
Sec. 71-62. - Parents and guardians not to authorize or permit violations. 
The parent of any minor child, and the guardian of any ward, shall not authorize or knowingly permit such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article.  
Sec. 71-63. - Impoundment of bicycles used in violations. 
The chief is hereby authorized and empowered to impound, for a period not to exceed 30 days, any bicycle used in violation of any of the provisions of this article, or in violation of any of the traffic regulations, so far as they are applicable. The impounding of a bicycle shall not preclude the imposition of any other penalty provided for such violation.  
Secs. 71-64—71-84. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RAILROADS 
 
Sec. 71-85. - Blocking of streets unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or his agent, employee or servant to stop and leave standing, or cause to be left standing, any railroad train, locomotive, or passenger or freight car, upon and across any public crossing of any street, alleyway or public way at any intersection thereof with a railroad line and tracks so as to obstruct such crossing for a longer period than five consecutive minutes.  
Sec. 71-86. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2011-0927-001, § 5, adopted Sept. 27, 2011, deleted § 71-86, which pertained to exceptions.  
Sec. 71-87. - Presumption that owner or lessee of train authorized blocking. 
In any prosecution of a violation of section 71-85, proof of the violation shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner or lessee of the train was cognizant of and authorized such violation.  
Sec. 71-88. - Regulation of speed. 
From and after passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, it shall be unlawful for any train, whether passenger or freight cars, to run at any place within the corporate city limits at a rate of speed greater than 25 miles per hour.  
Secs. 71-89—71-119. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - HEAVY TRUCKS AND TRAILERS 
 
Sec. 71-120. - Truck travel prohibited. 
Except as provided in section 71-123, in addition to any other city regulations regarding motor vehicles, it shall be unlawful for trucks and other vehicles weighing in excess of 7,000 pounds when empty to travel upon, or be driven over, any street, avenue or highway.  
Sec. 71-121. - Truck parking prohibited. 
Vehicles rated in excess of one ton shall not be parked on any street, avenue or highway. All vehicles, whether parked on street or off street, shall not be parked in a manner that blocks visibility at an intersection.  
Sec. 71-122. - Parking other than for loading or unloading prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, other than for loading or unloading, or maintain any truck or trailer in excess of one ton on the public square or any street, alley, or other public place adjacent to a public street or alley within the corporate city limits, unless the street, alley or parking area is a designated area allowing such parking.  
Sec. 71-123. - Truck routes and exceptions to general prohibition. 
(a)  Truck routes. The following roads, streets, highways or portions thereof are, by the terms of this section, hereby designated as truck routes upon which trucks and other vehicles that weigh in excess of 7,000 pounds when empty ("truck traffic") may travel or be driven, to the exclusion of all other roads, streets, highways or portions thereof within the city. 
(1)  All designated U.S. highways situated within the corporate limits of the city including, but not limited to, U.S. Highway 380, which road is also designated locally as Audie Murphy Parkway. 
(2)  All designated state highways situated within the corporate limits of the city including, but not limited to, State Highway 78 and Business Highway 78. (Business Highway 78 extends from and between Texas Highway 78 just north of U.S. Highway 380 in an easterly direction along McKinney Street through the City Square to the intersection of McKinney Street with Main Street and then in a northerly direction along North Main Street to its intersection with Texas Highway 78 approximately two miles north of U.S. Highway 380.) 
(3)  All designated farm-to-market (FM) roads situated within the corporate limits of the city including, but not limited to, FM 547. 
(4)  South Main Street between U.S. Highway 380 and Business Highway 78. 
(5)  Farmersville Parkway between Highway 78 and South Main Street. 
(6)  Welch Road. 
(7)  Bob Tedford Drive. 
(8)  County Roads 610 and 611 extending between U.S. Highway 380 to the south and Highway 78 to the east as such roads may hereafter be re-named. 
(b)  The city manager or his designated representative shall erect appropriate signs and markings advising motorists of the truck routes established by this section and, if warranted, of streets upon which truck traffic is prohibited by this section. 
(c)  The following vehicles shall be exempted from the prohibition of section 71-120 and this section: 
(1)  All federal, state and municipal vehicles as well as the vehicles of public utility companies that hold a properly executed franchise granted by the city; 
(2)  All vehicles traveling to or from a location that is not on a designated truck route for a legitimate business purpose including, but not necessarily limited to, repair or maintenance service or loading or unloading of goods, wares, or merchandise that requires traveling off of the designated truck routes provided that the operator of the vehicle has in his/her immediate possession evidence of the local destination and point of origin; and: 
a.  The vehicle is operated over the designated truck route to the point on the designated truck route nearest to the location of the legitimate business purpose before proceeding off of the designated truck route; 
b.  The vehicle proceeds from the designated truck route to the location of the legitimate business purpose by the shortest practical route; and 
c.  Upon the conclusion of that legitimate business purpose the vehicle returns to the designated truck route by the shortest practical route. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-0510-001, § 2, 5-10-2011)  
Secs. 71-124—71-144. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 71-145. - Parking limited to 48 hours. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to leave, stand, or park a motor vehicle or trailer on a public street or highway in the city for a period of time in excess of 48 continuous hours.  
Sec. 71-146. - Disabled only parking areas. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space or parking area designated specifically for the disabled by the city, or by a person who owns or controls private property used for parking, unless the vehicle: 
(1)  Conspicuously displays special license plates or a removable windshield identification card indicating that the vehicle is used for transporting temporarily or permanently disabled persons; and 
(2)  Is actually being used for that purpose. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle so that the vehicle blocks an access curb ramp or any other architectural improvement designed to aid the disabled. 
(c)  No person shall lend a removable windshield identification card issued to him to a person who uses the removable windshield identification card in violation of this section.  
Sec. 71-147. - No parking and loading zone areas. 
(a)  Certain areas or portions of public streets described in this article have been, are hereby and shall hereafter be, set apart, marked and designated as No Parking Zones or 10 Minute Loading Zones by, or operated by, any person within such areas or portions of such public streets. The parking of any vehicle within any space within the designated area, which is or shall be marked No Parking Zone or 10 Minute Loading Zone, shall be for each and every day of the year between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any person to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle operated by such person to be parked within the area herein designated as No Parking or to remain parked within an area marked 10 Minute Loading Zone for longer than a period of ten minutes. 
(c)  The area of the public streets within which certain areas or spaces shall be marked or designated as No Parking shall and does hereby include all areas so designated by red curb markings on the street, in accordance with the map on file in the city secretary's office. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful and considered a violation of this article for any person to park or allow any vehicle owned by it to be parked or left unattended on the east side of the 100 block of South Washington Street between the southwest corner of the city parking lot and railroad right-of-way. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful and considered a violation of this article for any person to allow any vehicle owned or operated by him to be parked or left unattended on either side of the 400 and 500 blocks of South Main Street between Summit Street and the Audie Murphy Parkway overpass. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful and considered a violation of this article for any person to allow any vehicle owned by him to be parked or left unattended on the east side of the 100 block of Pendleton Street between North Main Street and North Washington Street. 
(g)  The area on the west side of Main Street from 110 North Main Street to 103 South Main Street, between Candy Street and McKinney Street, as indicated by yellow curb markings on the street in accordance with the map on file in the city secretary's office, is designated as a 15 Minute Loading Zone between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. only. At all other times no parking shall be allowed in this area. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to leave, stand, or park a motor vehicle or trailer at any time on Pendleton Street between Hamilton and Haughton Streets, inclusively.  
Sec. 71-148. - Overnight parking prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and considered a violation of this article for any person to allow any vehicle owned by him to be parked or unattended anywhere in or along the following areas for any period of time between the hours of 12:30 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any day: 
(1)  100 block or 200 block of McKinney Street; 
(2)  100 block of North Main Street or 100 Block of South Main Street; 
(3)  100 block of North Washington Street or 100 block of South Washington Street; 
(4)  Areas designated for public parking are those areas to the: 
a.  North side of the city square, behind the buildings on the north side, and directly east of them property situated at 107 N. Washington Street, which property is also known as Block I, Lots 32B, 32C and 33 of the Farmersville Original Donation (CFC), Farmersville, Texas; 
b.  South of the city square, immediately behind and adjacent to the buildings on the south side of the square, and being the same area to the east of the property situated at 108 S. Washington Street, which property is also known as Block A, Lot 4B of the Farmersville Original Donation (CFC), Farmersville, Texas; 
c.  East of the city square, behind the buildings on the east side of the square, which area may extend from the northernmost end, being the area behind the property situated at 101 S. Main Street, which property is also known as Block C, Lot 1B of the Farmersville Original Donation (CFC), Farmersville, Texas, all the way to the end of the southernmost building on the east side of the square situated at 135 S. Main Street, which property is also known as Block C, Lot 12C of the Farmersville Original Donation (CFC), Farmersville, Texas. 
(b)  There shall be three exceptions to the provisions as specified above, and those three exceptions are as follows: 
(1)  This section shall not apply to four parking spots immediately north of and adjacent to Lot 19D, Block D, of the Farmersville Original Donation that are located on the southeast corner of the area designated for public parking behind the buildings on the south side of the City Square (the southern parking lot) by the owner of Lot 19D, Block D, of the Farmersville Original Donation. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to the use of a loading dock area and eight parking spots in the southern parking lot immediately west of and adjacent to the buildings situated on Lots 14A, 15A and 16A, Block D, of the Farmersville Original Donation by the owner(s) of Lots 10 and 14A, Block D, of the Farmersville Original Donation. 
In addition, this section shall not apply to the use, by the owner(s) of Lots 10 and 14A, Block D, of the Farmersville Original Donation, of the two parking spots in the southern parking lot that are situated adjacent to the street lamp and tree on the row of parking spaces extending in a westerly direction from Lot 14A, Block D, of the Farmersville Original Donation toward South Washington Street and which two parking spaces are the two spaces nearest to said lots. (Please see the exhibit attached hereto as exhibit A, which exhibit is incorporated herein by reference for all purposes allowed by law for further detail regarding the location of the subject loading dock and parking spaces.) 
(3)  Individuals may request the issuance of a parking permit which would allow that individual to park in the areas designated above during the prohibited hours. Should an individual desire such permit, he/she shall make application to the city for the issuance of such permit, and such permit may be issued by the city on an individual basis on a determination of the facts of necessity, on a situation by situation examination. The permits to be issued by the city shall be for the time specifications and limitations as deemed necessary by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-0412-001, § 2, 4-12-2011)  
Sec. 71-149. - Parking during business hours prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful and considered a violation of this article for any person to park or allow any vehicle owned by him to be parked or left unattended anywhere along the following areas for any period of time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday: 
(1)  400 block of North Washington Street on the east side of the street. 
(2)  400 block of North Windom Street on the west side of the street. 
(3)  200 block of Pendleton Street on the south side of the street.  
Sec. 71-150. - Areas designated as loading zone. 
The following areas are hereby designated as a 15 minute loading zone between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. only: 
(1)  The west side of Main Street between Candy Street and McKinney Street, as indicated by yellow curb markings on the street in accordance with the map contained in section 71-150; and, 
(2)  The east side of Main Street between College Street and McKinney Street, as indicated by yellow curb markings on the street in accordance with the map contained in section 71-150. 
At all other times no parking shall be allowed in these areas. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-0927-001, § 2, 9-27-2011)  
Sec. 71-151. - Map of restricted parking. 
The map of restricted parking, shall be amended and modified to reflect the revisions made to section 71-147. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-0927-001, § 3, 9-27-2011)  
Sec. 71-152. - Parking prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful and considered a violation of this article for any person, corporation, partnership, or any other entity to allow any vehicle owned by it to be parked or unattended anywhere along the 100 block of North Main Street. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-0927-001, § 4, 9-27-2011)  
Secs. 71-153—71-166. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DRIVEWAYS, IMPROVED PARKING SURFACES AND FURTHER PARKING RESTRICTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 2, adopted February 10, 2015, amended the title of div. 2 to read as set out herein. Previously div. 2 was titled auxiliary and restricted residential zone parking. 
 
Sec. 71-167. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Corner lot means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees such that public street right(s)-of-way are directly adjacent to at least two contiguous sides of the lot or parcel of land. 
Driveway means the improved parking surface that provides egress and ingress from a garage, carport, parking pad or parking lot to an adjacent street or alley. 
Driveway, double means a driveway having an improved parking surface not more than 24 feet in width at the property line and which may flare out to tie into a two-car or three-car parking pad, carport or garage. 
Driveway, single means a driveway having an improved parking surface not more than 12 feet in width at the property line and which may flare out to tie into a one-car, two-car or three-car parking pad, carport or garage. 
Front yard means an open unoccupied space on a lot facing a street extending across the lot front between the side lot lines and from the front building line of any structure on the property to the front lot or street line, with the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the front building line as specified for the zoning district in which the property is located. (See appendix illustrations 3 and 5 on file in the city secretary's office.) 
Improved parking surface means a continuous paved surface area, which is connected to the right-of-way by a driveway, used for the parking or storage of vehicles that is overlaid or otherwise paved with concrete, asphalt, paving stones or other hard surfaced durable all-weather material approved by the building official. 
Loop driveway means a half-circle single-driveway with an improved parking surface of not more than 12 feet in width at the property line flaring out to 20 feet in width at and about the apex of the half-circle that provides egress and ingress from and to the same adjacent street. A loop driveway on a corner lot may, in certain circumstances set forth herein-below, provide egress and ingress from and to each adjacent street. 
Loop driveway with extension means a loop driveway with an extension from the loop driveway and which extension from the loop driveway is an improved parking surface that is no wider than allowed for a single-driveway, as set forth herein, with a flared approach to provide egress and ingress from a one-car, two-car or three-car garage, carport or parking pad. 
Lot means a lot, plot or tract of land occupied, or to be occupied, by a building and its accessory buildings, and including such open spaces as are required under this Code and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved place. 
Parking pad means an improved parking surface used for the off-street parking or storage of up to three vehicles, and which parking pad has no covering and is connected to the right-of-way by a driveway. A "pad" that is not physically connected to a driveway extending from the right-of-way is not an allowable parking pad. 
Parking lot means an improved parking surface used for the off-street parking of vehicles required to serve a property that is zoned and/or used for multi-family or non-residential purposes, and which parking lot is connected to the right-of-way by a driveway. 
Restricted parking area means that area of a lot required to be an open unoccupied space which is situated outside of the driveway, loop driveway or loop driveway with extension and any attached parking pad, carport or garage that is specifically allowed or permitted by section 71-168 or the approved site plan or concept plan for the property in question. 
Side walk area means the area of the right-of-way, parkway or lot that is between five feet and ten feet wide situated between the back of the curbline or edge of pavement, when a curb is not present, and the structure on the lot and extending from property line to property line upon and across that portion of the lot. 
Side yard means an open unoccupied space or spaces on one side or two sides of the same lot with any structure on the property, and being situated between the building and the nearest side line of the lot extending through from the front yard to the rear yard with the minimum distance between the side building line and the closest side line of the lot as specified for the zoning district in which the property is located. Any lot line, not the rear line or a front line, shall be deemed as a side line. (See appendix illustration 3 and 4 on file in the city secretary's office.) 
Through lot or double-frontage lot means a residential lot, other than a corner lot, abutting more than one street and having access to more than one street. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported, drawn or moved upon a street, highway, waterway or airway. The term "vehicle" includes, but is not necessarily limited to, any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Automobile; 
(2)  Bus; 
(3)  Truck; 
(4)  Tractor; 
(5)  Motor home; 
(6)  Farm machinery; 
(7)  Motorcycles; 
(8)  Scooters; 
(9)  Mopeds; 
(10)  All-terrain vehicles; 
(11)  Boats; 
(12)  Aircraft; 
(13)  Recreational vehicles; 
(14)  Golf carts; 
(15)  Go-carts; 
(16)  Trailers; 
(17)  Fifth-wheel trailers; 
(18)  Campers; 
(19)  Camper shells; 
(20)  Wheeled towing frames; 
(21)  Semi-tractor trailers; 
(22)  Truck beds mounted on chassis; 
(23)  Commercial equipment whether self-propelled or mounted on a trailer or skid; 
(24)  Roll-off dumpsters; 
(25)  Storage containers of any style, size or nature including, but not limited to, "ReloCubes" and "PODS"; and 
(26)  Mobile homes. 
This definition of vehicle does not include: 
(1)  Non-motorized bicycles; 
(2)  Small engine lawn mowers; and 
(3)  Devices of similar scale. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 2, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 71-168. - Front yard, side yard and limits on improved parking surfaces. 
(a)  The open space in a required front yard and side yard in the A, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, 2F, MF-1, MF-2, P, O, NS, GR, C, HC, I-1, I-2, or PD zoning classifications shall not be diminished by constructing or installing improved parking surfaces in, upon, about, over and across the front yard and side yard, except in compliance with the following conditions. Improved parking surfaces and other impervious surfaces will be allowed in, upon, about, over and across the front yard and side yard for: 
(1)  One sidewalk not more than four feet in width, or such width as is otherwise required by the city's ordinances to serve the lot on which it is placed, extending from the curb or edge of pavement of the right-of-way abutting the frontage of the lot to the front door or front porch of the primary residence or primary structure on the lot and a second sidewalk of similar width and purpose extending from the driveway to a door or porch of the primary residence or primary structure on the lot; and 
(2)  One single-driveway per lot to serve a property that is zoned and/or used for single-family residential purposes which has a one-car parking pad, carport or garage constructed on the said lot; or 
(3)  One single-driveway per unit to serve each residential unit on a lot that is zoned and/or used for duplex, triplex or quadplex residential purposes where each unit on said lot has a separate one-car parking pad, carport or garage — or otherwise to be treated as a multi-family use; or 
(4)  One double-driveway per lot or one single-driveway per lot to serve a property that is zoned and/or used for single-family residential purposes which has one two-car or three-car parking pad, carport or garage on the said lot; or 
(5)  One double-driveway or one single-driveway per unit to serve a lot that is zoned and/or used for duplex, triplex or quadplex residential purposes where each unit on said lot has a separate two-car parking pad, carport or garage — or otherwise to be treated as a multi-family use; or 
(6)  One loop driveway per lot that is situated upon and across the front yard of a lot to serve a property that is zoned and/or used for single-family residential purposes; or 
(7)  One loop driveway with extension per lot that is situated upon and across the front yard of a lot to serve a property that is zoned and/or used for single-family residential purposes; or 
(8)  Driveways on corner lots to accommodate up to: 
a.  One single-driveway or one double-driveway or one loop driveway or one loop driveway with extension providing ingress and egress to the public street on which the lot is addressed plus one single-driveway providing ingress and egress to the public street on the adjacent side of the lot, provided that all of such drives shall conform to the regulations set forth herein-above; or 
b.  One loop driveway providing ingress and egress between the corner lot and the adjacent public streets on both sides of the lot provided that such loop driveway shall conform to the regulations set forth herein-above and does not loop around any structures on the lot plus one additional single-driveway providing ingress and egress to the public street on which the lot is not addressed; or 
(9)  Through lots to accommodate either one-single driveway or one double-driveway or one loop driveway (with or without extension) providing ingress and egress to the public street on which the lot is addressed and one single-driveway providing ingress and egress to the public street on the other side of the lot fronting onto a public street, all of which drives shall conform to the regulations set forth herein-above and which driveways shall not be allowed to intersect or otherwise connect to a connecting parking pad, carport or garage; or 
(10)  A driveway comprised of a combination of single-driveways and double-driveways, adjacent and abutting or separated by islands, up to a combined maximum width of 45 feet at its widest point measured from outside edge to outside edge of such driveway(s) near, or at, the property line to providing ingress and egress to a parking lot to serve a property that is zoned and/or used for multi-family or non-residential purposes, it being understood that multi-family or non-residential uses may require more than one driveway per lot as set forth in the city's ordinances in which event such city ordinances shall control; or 
(11)  A parking lot to provide the minimum required number of parking spaces necessary to serve a property that is zoned and/or used for multi-family or non-residential purposes. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the ability to waive one or more of the foregoing provisions to allow the construction or installation of additional or alternative improved parking surfaces based on the conditions and circumstances presented on a case by case basis. 
(c)  The total area of improved parking surfaces and other impervious surfaces on a lot specifically including the driveway, regardless of combination and configuration, parking pad, parking lot and any other impervious surfaces shall not exceed 75 percent of the area of the required front yard and side yard for any single-family residential use. The amount of impervious surface attributable to a sidewalk that is situated in the sidewalk area and is intended to provide the public access across the lot will not be included in the calculation of the 75 percent maximum coverage of the required front yard and side yard. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 3, 2-10-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 3, adopted February 10, 2015, repealed and replaced § 71-168 in its entirety. Former § 71-168 pertained to regulations and was derived from original Code.  
Sec. 71-169. - Stopping, standing, storing, or parking in restricted parking area. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand, store, or park any vehicle within the restricted parking area of any improved or unimproved residential single-family or duplex lot or tract. 
(b)  It shall be a defense to prosecution hereunder if said vehicle is concealed from view from all public street rights-of-way by: 
(1)  A solid, opaque screening fence or wall at least six feet in height; 
(2)  Permanently planted vegetation consisting of a solid hedgerow of evergreen shrubs, or trees and shrubs, providing full screening from the ground to a minimum height of six feet; or 
(3)  Any combination of subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) that effectively conceals the vehicle from view and accomplishes the required screening height. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 4, 2-10-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 4, adopted February 10, 2015, repealed and replaced § 71-169 in its entirety. Former § 71-169 pertained to maintenance and was derived from original Code.  
Sec. 71-170. - Stopping, standing or parking on sidewalk. 
No person shall stop, stand, park, or drive a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, on a sidewalk or any part of the sidewalk area, irrespective of whether such area has been improved by concrete, gravel or other walkways. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 5, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 71-171. - Parking prohibited generally. 
No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle in violation of any official sign, curb marking or street marking erected as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 5, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 71-172. - Unattended vehicles in public places. 
(a)  No person shall allow a vehicle to remain unattended in any place maintained by any governmental entity for a period of time in excess of 48 hours. After such a period of time, if the owner thereof cannot be located by reasonable effort, such vehicle may be impounded. The occasional movement of a vehicle within the same public area for the purpose or effect of evading the restriction imposed by this section shall not stop the running of the 48-hour period prescribed herein. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle in any place maintained by any governmental entity unless such vehicle is currently in operable condition and in a state of good repair. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section: 
(1)  Currently in operable condition means presently capable of being lawfully operated on the streets and highways of the state, being currently registered with proper license plates displayed, having a current safety inspection and being in running condition without the necessity of first being repaired such as, but not limited to, the inflating of tires or charging of the battery. 
(2)  Place maintained by any governmental entity means, but is not limited to, a street, alley, highway, park or public parking area including the grounds of a public school. 
(3)  State of good repair means the absence of such items as broken glass, substantial body damage (including, but not limited to, crushed or missing fenders, body panels, doors, hoods, or truck deck) or missing parts otherwise necessary for operable condition. 
(d)  The affixing of a legible notice to the vehicle regarding the prohibition of this section shall be deemed to be a reasonable effort to locate the owner. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to storage or repair facilities owned, operated or maintained by a governmental entity. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to restrict or prevent the immediate removal of a vehicle in such cases otherwise allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 5, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 71-173. - Parking for sale, washing and repairing vehicles prohibited. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any public street, shopping center parking lot, park, playground or athletic field for the principal purpose of displaying it for sale. No person shall wash, grease or repair any vehicle upon any public street, playground, or athletic field, except for such repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 5, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 71-174. - Ten feet of roadway to be left available for traffic. 
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of either lane of a roadway for free movement of the vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals of a police officer. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 5, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 71-175. - Stopping, standing, parking or driving upon or across curbs. 
No person shall stop, stand, park or drive a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, upon, over or across a curb or any part of the curb area, which area is hereby defined as the concrete edging built along a street to form part of a gutter. Gutter means a low area at the edge of a street designed with the intent to carry off surface water. A gutter shall only be crossed at a location having a properly constructed driveway approach permitted by the city and installed for such purpose in accordance with all applicable city regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 5, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 71-176. - Prohibition against overnight parking; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle with a rated capacity of one and one-half tons or more, or with more than six wheels, any truck, truck-tractor, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or any combination thereof on any street during the hours from sundown to sunup. 
(b)  Temporarily disabled vehicles which are protected by flares or other approved signal devices may be parked on the street during the hours from sundown to sunup. 
(c)  The city manager shall have the ability to grant a temporary waiver of the foregoing requirements based on the conditions and circumstances presented on a case by case basis. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 5, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 71-177. - Presumption regarding illegally parked vehicles. 
In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where and for the time during which such violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 5, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 71-178. - Loading or unloading tractor/trailers. 
No person shall cause, suffer or permit a road tractor, trailer or semitrailer to be unloaded or loaded on a roadway, except for delivery of goods, wares and merchandise permitted by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 5, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 71-179. - Parallel and angle parking. 
(a)  At any place where official signs do not prohibit stopping or parking, except as otherwise provided by the city council and so indicated by signs or markings, every vehicle stopped or parked shall be so stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs so that the right-hand wheels of such vehicle are parallel and within 18 inches of the right-hand curb or edge of roadway, except where head-in parking is allowed. 
(b)  The department of public works, with the approval of the city council, shall determine upon which streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal aid or state highway within this city unless the state engineer director for highways and public transportation has determined that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street. 
(c)  Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(d)  Whenever parking spaces are marked by lines on the pavement, whether for parallel or angle parking, a vehicle must be parked entirely within the lines of the parking space. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 5, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 71-180. - Prohibitions against stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specific areas. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or directions of a police officer or traffic control device in any of the following spaces: 
(1)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(2)  Within an intersection; 
(3)  On a crosswalk or within 15 feet of a crosswalk or intersection, unless the traffic authorities indicate a different length by signs or markings; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, unless otherwise marked; 
(5)  Within 30 feet of a stop sign or marking of a roadway where vehicles would normally stop; 
(6)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the zone has been indicated a different length by signs or markings; 
(7)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station; 
(8)  Alongside or opposite any excavation or street obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(9)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; and 
(10)  Where signs are erected or curbs are painted indicating that such is not allowed. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 5, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 71-181. - Maintenance. 
All improved parking surfaces shall be maintained in a good and safe condition and be free of holes, cracks or other failures that may affect the use, safety, appearance or drainage of the surface or of the adjoining property, at no cost to the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 5, 2-10-2015)  
Sec. 71-182. - Delayed enforcement of certain provisions. 
Driveways and parking pads and parking lots that are attached by a driveway to the right(s)-of-way adjacent to the lot on which they are situated and which are in existence at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, will not be required to be upgraded or modified from gravel or decomposed granite to an acceptable improved parking surface, as defined herein-above, until such time as any part or portion of the driveway, parking pad or parking lot is in need of and requires replacement or repair of any kind or nature. Any driveway, parking pad, or parking lot that is currently constructed of material other than gravel, decomposed granite or an acceptable improved parking surface, as set forth herein-above, shall be required to be upgraded to comply with the provisions of this article on its effective date. 
Areas of trampled weeds and grass or dirt are not and do not qualify for treatment as a driveway, parking pad or parking lot. Similarly, a gravel pathway that extends from an area of the adjacent right-of-way that does not have a curb cut to accommodate a driveway is not and does not qualify for treatment as a driveway, parking pad or parking lot. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0210-001, § 5, 2-10-2015)  
Secs. 71-183—71-195. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SCHOOL ZONES ESTABLISHED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-0927-003, § 2, adopted September 27, 2011 replaced art. VI, §§ 71-196, and 71-197 in its entirety. Former art. VI pertained to similar information. 
 
Sec. 71-196. - Vehicle speed and operation—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any vehicle at a speed greater than the speed designated or posted, or to overtake or pass any other vehicle in any school zone as it may be marked or designated within the city during the hours indicated upon signs erected in such school zone, or whenever children are present in such school zones, or when such school zones have an alternating flashing light in operation. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-0927-003, § 2, 9-27-2011)  
Sec. 71-197. - School zone time. 
The school zone time during which school zone speed limits, one-way traffic patterns, and no parking regulations contained in this article shall be in effect is during the hours indicated upon signs erected in such school zone, or whenever children are present in such school zones, or when such school zones have an alternating flashing light in operation. The normal posted speed limit, traffic patterns and parking regulations shall apply outside the school zone time. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-0927-003, § 2, 9-27-2011)  
Sec. 71-198. - Speed limits. 
The following prima facie maximum speed limits hereinafter designated for motor vehicles are hereby determined and declared to be reasonable and safe. Such maximum speed limits are hereby fixed as the rate of speed for motor vehicles traveling upon the main street or highway, or parts of the main street or highway, and no motor vehicle shall be operated upon or along such portions of the named streets and highways identified below in excess of the speeds set forth as follows during school zone times: 
Street or Highway 	Approximate 
Start Limit 	Approximate 
End Limit 	Normal 
Speed Limit 	School Zone 
Speed Limit 
High School and Junior High School 
SH 78 	200 Feet South of Pendleton 	200 Feet North of Sycamore 	50 	35 
Pendleton 	275 Feet East of SH 78 	SH 78 	30 	20 
Westgate 	240 Feet West of SH 78 	SH 78 	30 	20 
Gaddy 	90 Feet East of Wilcoxson 	SH 78 	30 	20 
Gaddy 	230 Feet East of SH 78 	SH 78 	30 	20 
Sycamore 	200 Feet East of SH 78 	SH 78 	30 	20 
Intermediate School 
Business 78 (N. Main) 	290 Feet South of Sycamore 	90 Feet North of FM 2194 	30 	20 
FM 2194 	Business 78 (N. Main) 	270 Feet East of Business 78 (N. Main) 	55 	20 
Tatum Elementary School 
7th 	Windom 	200 Feet East of Washington 	30 	20 
6th 	Washington 	200 Feet East of Washington 	30 	20 
5th 	Washington 	200 Feet East of Washington 	30 	20 
Gaddy 	Windom 	270 Feet West of Windom 	30 	20 
Pendleton 	300 Feet West of Windom 	250 Feet East of Washington 	30 	20 
Windom 	335 Feet South of Pendleton 	200 Feet North of 7 th 	30 	20 
Washington 	300 Feet South of Pendleton 	200 Feet North of 7 th 	30 	20 
 
Note 1: Start limit and end limit locations are approximate locations. 
Note 2: Speed limit zones apply to both directions of traffic. 
Note 3: Speed limits are measured in miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-0927-003, § 2, 9-27-2011)  
Sec. 71-199. - Tatum Elementary—One-way traffic pattern. 
A one-way traffic pattern shall be established during the school zone time for the following streets around Tatum Elementary School: 
Street 	Start Limit 	End Limit 	Direction 
7 th 	Windom 	Washington 	Eastbound 
Pendleton 	Washington 	Windom 	Westbound 
Washington 	7th 	Pendleton 	Southbound 
Windom 	Pendleton 	Gaddy 	Northbound 
 
;hn0; (Ord. No. O-2011-0927-003, § 2, 9-27-2011)  
Sec. 71-200. - Tatum Elementary—No parking zones. 
The following no parking zones shall be established for the following streets around Tatum Elementary School: 
Street 	Start Limit 	End Limit 	Side of Street 
Pendleton 	Windom 	Business SH 78 (Main Street) 	South 
Pendleton 	Windom 	70 Feet East of Windom 	North 
Pendleton 	Washington 	20 Feet West of Washington 	North 
Windom 	Pendleton 	25 Feet North of Pendleton 	East 
Windom 	Pendleton 	280 Feet North of Pendleton 	West 
Windom 	Pendleton 	50 Feet South of Pendleton 	East 
Washington 	30 Feet South of Pendleton 	70 Feet North of 6 th 	East 
Washington 	Pendleton 	30 Feet South of Pendleton 	West 
Washington 	Pendleton 	25 Feet North of Pendleton 	West 
Pendleton 	Washington 	25 Feet East of Washington 	North 
 
Note 1: Start limit and end limit locations are approximate locations. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-0927-003, § 2, 9-27-2011)  
Sec. 71-201. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2018-0814-001, § 3, adopted Aug. 14, 2018, repealed § 71-201, which pertained to school zone signage and derived from Ord. No. O-2011-0927-003, § 2, adopted Sept. 27, 2011.  
Secs. 71-202—71-217. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS 
 
Sec. 71-218. - Traffic control devices. 
The following locations shall be controlled by a traffic control device, as provided by state law, as indicated: 
(1)  Stop signs shall be erected and shall require the northbound and southbound traffic on Washington Street to stop for the traffic on Neathery Street. 
(2)  Stop signs shall be erected and shall require the northbound and southbound traffic on Washington Street to stop for the traffic on Gotcher Street. 
(3)  A yield sign shall be erected and shall require traffic turning from Gotcher Street onto Washington Street to yield to traffic turning off Neathery Street. 
(4)  A stop sign shall be erected and shall require the southbound traffic at the intersection of Main Street at Old Josephine Road to stop. 
(5)  Stop signs shall be erected and shall require the northbound, southbound, eastbound and westbound traffic at the intersection of Pendleton and Windom to stop. 
(6)  Stop signs shall be erected and shall require the northbound, southbound, eastbound and westbound traffic at the intersection of Hill Street and Rike Street to stop. 
(7)  Stop signs shall be erected and shall require the northbound, southbound, eastbound and westbound traffic at the intersection of Farmersville Parkway and South Washington Street to stop. 
(8)  Stop signs shall be erected and shall require the northbound and, southbound traffic at the intersection of Farmersville Parkway and South Johnson Street to stop. 
(9)  Stop signs shall be erected and shall require the northbound and southbound traffic at the intersection of Farmersville Parkway and South Hamilton Street to stop. 
(10)  Stop signs shall be erected and shall require the eastbound traffic at the intersection of Farmersville Parkway and South Main Street to stop. 
(11)  Stop signs shall be erected and shall require the northbound, southbound, eastbound and westbound traffic at the intersection of Woodard Street and Houston Street to stop. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0626-003, § 2, 6-26-2012)  
Sec. 71-219. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2018-0814-001, § 3, adopted Aug. 14, 2018, repealed § 71-219, which pertained to authority to post traffic control devices and derived from the Original Code.  
Secs. 71-220—71-246. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - ONE-WAY STREETS 
 
Sec. 71-247. - Designated. 
(a)  Vehicle traffic traveling eastbound on Farmersville Parkway from South Washington to South Main Street shall be limited to traveling eastbound only on the south side of the Best Community Meeting Center. 
(b)  Vehicle traffic traveling westbound on Farmersville Parkway from South Main Street to South Washington Street shall be limited to traveling westbound only on the north side of the Best Community Meeting Center. 
(c)  No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle on King Street from Park Street to Pendleton Street at any time except in a southbound direction. 
(d)  No person shall leave, stand or park a motor vehicle at any time on the east side of King Street from a point beginning approximately 165 feet south of its intersection with Park Street and continuing south from that location a distance of 95 feet.  
Sec. 71-248. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2018-0814-001, § 3, adopted Aug. 14, 2018, repealed § 71-248, which pertained to authority to post one-way traffic signs and derived from the Original Code.  
Secs. 71-249—71-274. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SPEED LIMITS 
 
Sec. 71-275. - Highway 78 E. 
No motor vehicle shall be operated along and upon Highway 78 E. within the corporate city limits in excess of the speeds set forth in the following limits: 
(1)  Beginning at said point (station 901+00) being the north city limits on Highway 78 E., thence continuing in a southerly and westerly direction for a distance of 1.419 miles, said point (station 975+93) being the intersection of State Highway 78 (SH 78), a maximum speed of 30 miles per hour, northbound and southbound. 
(2)  School speed limit 20 miles per hour when signed from the north city limits (station 901+00) in a southerly direction for a distance of 730 feet, or 0.138 miles.  
Sec. 71-276. - Audie Murphy Parkway (formerly U.S. Highway 380). 
No motor vehicle shall be operated along and upon Audie Murphy Parkway in either an eastbound or westbound direction within the corporate city limits in excess of the speeds set forth in the following limits: 
(1)  From the west city limits to mile post 8400, a maximum of 60 miles per hour; 
(2)  From mile post 8400 to South Hamilton Street, a maximum of 50 miles per hour; 
(3)  From South Hamilton Street to Floyd Street, a maximum of 55 miles per hour; 
(4)  From Floyd Street to the east city limits a maximum of 65 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-1122-001; § 2, 12-13-2011; Ord. No. O-2012-0424-003, § 1, 4-24-2012; Ord. No. O-2013-0122-001, § 1, 1-22-2013; Ord. No. O-2013-0212-005, § 1, 2-12-2013; Ord. No. O-2016-0112-002, § 2, 1-12-2016)  
Sec. 71-277. - State Highway 78 (SH 78). 
No motor vehicle shall be operated along and upon State Highway 78 in either a northbound or southbound direction within the corporate city limits in excess of the speeds set forth in the following limits: 
(1)  Beginning at the north city limit line and continuing along SH 78 in a southerly direction to said point (MP15.439), being approximately 0.047 miles north of the northern connection between SH 78 and Highway 78 E., a maximum speed of 65 miles per hour on SH 78 northbound and southbound. 
(2)  Then from said point (MP15.439) continuing along SH 78 in a southerly direction for a distance of 0.684 miles, approximately, to said point (MP16.123) a maximum speed of 55 miles per hour on SH 78 northbound and southbound. 
(3)  Then from said point (MP16.123) continuing along SH 78 in a southerly direction for a distance of 0.801 miles, approximately, to said point (MP16.924), being approximately 0.045 miles south of the southern connection between SH 78 and Highway 78 E., a maximum speed of 50 miles per hour on SH 78 northbound and southbound and including a school speed limit of 35 miles per hour from said point (MP16.190), being approximately 200 feet north of West Sycamore Street, to said point (MP16.660), being approximately 200 feet south of Pendleton, on SH 78 northbound and southbound. 
(4)  Then continuing along SH 78 in a southerly direction for a distance of 0.500 mile, approximately, a maximum speed of 50 miles per hour on SH 78 northbound and southbound. 
(5)  Then continuing along SH 78 in a southerly direction to the southern city limits line a maximum speed of 55 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-0823-001, § 2, 8-23-2016)  
Sec. 71-278. - Farmersville Parkway. 
The vehicle speed limit will be set at 30 miles per hour for traffic traveling eastbound and westbound on Farmersville Parkway.  
Sec. 71-279. - Sycamore Street. 
The vehicle speed limit will be set at 30 miles per hour for traffic traveling eastbound and westbound on Sycamore Street between SH 78 and North Main Street. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-0814-001, § 4, 8-14-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2018-0814-001, §§ 3, 4, adopted Aug. 14, 2018, repealed § 71-279, and enacted a new § 71-279 as set out herein. The former § 71-279 pertained to authority to post speed limit signs and derived from the Original Code.  
Chapter 74 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal water and utilities generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 551.001 et seq.; municipal utility systems, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 552.001 et seq.; agreement with conservation and reclamation districts, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 552.903; Texas Water Quality Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 21.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 74-1—74-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER, SEWER AND ELECTRICAL CHARGES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2014-0408-001, § 2, adopted April 8, 2014, amended the title of art. II to read as set out herein. Previously art. II was titled water and sewer charges. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 74-19—74-39. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTION CHARGES 
 
Sec. 74-40. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  The intent and purpose of these rules and regulations is to provide an equitable charge for water and sewer connections in the city on a front foot basis as a proportional distribution of the cost of water and sewer main extensions to serve property not previously served with standard mains and provide a contribution to be uniformly enforced against all property. 
(b)  It is recognized that each property has its individual problems and that no fixed rules will apply to all cases; therefore, final approval of all or any part of any plans rests with the city. In all cases, the main sizes shall be determined by the city manager for adequate service, or by his delegated authority, and his decision will be final. 
(c)  No person shall acquire any vested rights under the terms and provisions of these rules and regulations. 
(Code 2004, § 11.101.1)  
Sec. 74-41. - Extensions and charges for individual owners. 
(a)  Upon request by an eligible applicant and following receipt of payment of charges due, the city may, at its option, extend or cause to be extended water and sewer mains in the streets, alleys, or easements to permit connection by individual property owners. 
(b)  Charges shall be made against the owner of the property whose water and sewer lines are to be connected to the city's mains in accordance with the city's current comprehensive rate and fee schedule. 
(c)  In addition to the fees outlined in this section, a pro rata charge shall be paid when a person desires to connect to utilities where the water and/or sewer main was constructed entirely at the expense of another developer or individual. The purpose of the pro rata charge shall be for refunding a portion of the original construction cost to the original developer. 
(d)  Such pro rata charge shall apply only in instances where the city council has adopted a resolution declaring the pro rata charges appropriate for a specified project, defining the affected project in detail, providing complete cost information on the project, and establishing a schedule for pro rata refunds. 
(e)  No pro rata refund will be paid to any person as a result of the city connecting additional water or sewer mains onto the subject main. 
(f)  The following steps shall be used to calculate the pro rata refund rate: 
(1)  Calculate the actual cost per linear foot to the original developer for constructing the subject mains, which is contained in the enacting resolutions. 
(2)  Multiply the original cost per linear foot times the number of front feet (as defined in Chapter 77, Zoning), of the property to be connected to utilities. This will yield the total pro rata charge to be refunded to the original developer, minus the amount found on the following discount schedule. 
(3)  Based upon the number of years since the date construction was approved and accepted by the city, the following discount multiplier should be used to determine the actual pro rata charge to be refunded to the original developer: 
Year 	Multiplier 
(percentage) 
1 	100 
2 	90 
3 	80 
4 	70 
5 	60 
6 	50 
7 	40 
8 	30 
9 	20 
10 	10 
11* 	0 
 
*From year 11 onward, no pro rata charge or refund will apply. 
(g)  Where a front foot calculation is not possible or practical, the lesser of $200.00 per connection or $200.00 per acre (one acre minimum) shall be substituted for the pro rata charge calculated in subsection (f) of this section, and discounted accordingly. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to provide water and sewerage service to any lot, tract or plot of land, or any part thereof unless and until such plan, plat or replat of such lot or tract of land has conformed to the platting requirements of the city, has been approved by the city and has been filed for record with the county. Pro rata charges must be paid before the plat, replat or plan will be reviewed by the city. 
(Code 2004, § 11.101.2)  
Sec. 74-42. - Refunds. 
(a)  In no event shall the city be obligated to proceed under the terms of this article if funds are not available for the administration of the refunds as set forth in this article. 
(b)  Refunds, when due in accordance with this article, will be made upon acceptance of the system by the city and receipt of an itemization of the refunds for which the application was made. 
(c)  When any property for which an applicant has advanced the cost of water and sewer main extensions is connected to the main extension, then the pro rata charges collected for the frontage of the connecting property shall be refunded by the city to the applicant who originally advanced the cost of the main extension. After ten years from the date the main extension was made, no further refunds will be made to the original applicant and any funds deposited by the applicant and any subsequent pro rata refunds shall be placed in the city's general operating fund. 
(Code 2004, § 11.101.3; Ord. No. 86-20-A, 7-22-1986)  
Secs. 74-43—74-72. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SERVICE CHARGES 
 
Sec. 74-73. - Service initiation fees. 
There shall be charged and collected a service initiation fee from every customer establishing a new utility account or service location in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Nonrefundable service fee. A nonrefundable service initiation fee, as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code, shall be charged and must be paid before service is initiated. 
(2)  Transfer of service address. Where the customer has utility service with the city but desires to relocate to another service address, a nonrefundable service transfer fee, as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code, shall be charged and included on the initial utility bill. All meter deposits must be brought into accordance with current requirements at the time of the service transfer. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.1; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004)  
Sec. 74-74. - Water and electric meter deposits. 
(a)  Meter deposits are nontransferable. Deposits cannot be transferred from one party to another. Amounts remaining after applying a deposit to the payment of a final bill and deposits refunded for any other reason shall be refunded after the receipt of payment for all outstanding amounts following the next regular billing cycle after the account has been closed. The addition of a meter at a location where a meter already exists shall not require an additional deposit if the customer has not had service disconnected for non-payment in the last five years. 
(b)  Residential water and electric deposits. 
(1)  Before any person shall receive permanent utility services from the city, such customer must have on deposit with the city amounts as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(2)  Any renter or mobile home occupant who presents a satisfactory letter of reference with 12 continuous months of service with another electric company and water company, and has had no delinquencies, shall be permitted to post the homeowner's deposit. Any homeowner having continuous utility service for a period of three years without having been disconnected for nonpayment shall have his deposit refunded in full. 
(3)  If a residential customer cannot provide a letter of reference, the deposit may be paid in installments, as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(c)  Commercial deposits. 
(1)  Commercial deposits shall be equivalent to one-sixth the annual electric/water billing for each location. If no billing information is available, the amount of the deposit shall be based on the best information available to the city and may be adjusted after 12 months of billing history has been established. 
(2)  If a commercial customer is able to provide a commercial letter of reference from electric and water utility companies reflecting 12 continuous months of service with no delinquencies, the deposit shall be waived. If letters of reference cannot be provided, the deposit may be paid in installments over a period of four months, with a minimum initial payment of 25 percent. 
(3)  If a deposit is waived for a customer and the customer's account becomes delinquent and subject to disconnection, a deposit equivalent to 1/12 the annual billing shall be posted before utilities will be reconnected. If the account becomes subject to disconnection again within 12 months, an additional deposit in the amount of 1/12 the annual billing shall be posted before utilities will be reconnected. 
(4)  Commercial deposits shall be refunded after five years if the account does not become delinquent an average of more than one time per year. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.2; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004)  
Sec. 74-75. - Fully metered operations. 
All city utilities shall be operated on a fully metered basis, to be in accordance with contractual agreements and bond indentures and, therefore, no free services shall be allowed. To the extent the city or any of its agencies or instrumentalities avail themselves of the services and facilities provided by the electric, waterworks, and sanitary sewer systems and refuse collection services, they shall pay the actual cost of service based upon current commercial rates. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.3)  
Sec. 74-76. - Water service charges. 
(a)  Single-family residential customers. There shall be charged and collected each month by the city from the consumers of water service, the fees and charges, including tap fees, as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  Other customers. There shall be charged and collected each month by the city from the consumers of water service, other than single-family residential customers, the fees and charges, as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.4; Ord. No. 2003-33, 8-12-2003)  
Sec. 74-77. - Adjustment to water service charges for water leaks. 
(a)  In the event of a water leak, there may be an adjustment to the customer's water bill, provided: 
(1)  The volume of the leak is 10,000 gallons or greater than the customer's normal consumption for that time of year for residential customers; 
(2)  The volume of the leak is the greater of 10,000 gallons or 50 percent of the customer's normal consumption for that time of year for commercial customers; 
(3)  There is verifiable proof of a leak; 
(4)  The customer can provide evidence that the leak was repaired within a reasonable time; and 
(5)  The leak did not occur because a previous leak (for which a customer had been given an adjustment) had not been correctly repaired. 
(b)  If there is no reliable water consumption history for the same time period of the previous year, the city shall determine an estimate based upon available history. The adjustment shall not exceed billing periods covering more than two months. All applicable water metered above the normal monthly consumption shall be billed at the current rate which the city pays the North Texas Municipal Water District for water. 
(c)  In the event a water leak occurs during the three-month averaging period for sewer billing, all applicable water consumption in the customer's account history shall be adjusted to equal that of the same month of the previous year. If there is no history for the previous year, an estimate based on available history may be used as the adjusted consumption. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.5)  
Sec. 74-78. - Sewer service charges. 
There shall be charged and collected each month by the city for sanitary sewer service the amounts of money hereinafter set out, based on the following rates: 
(1)  Single-family residential customers. 
a.  Monthly sewer usage shall be based upon average winter water usage. Average winter water usage is defined as the average water usage for the months of December, January, and February (as reported on the bills sent on January 1, February 1 and March 1). In March of each year, average winter water usage will be computed for each residence, up to a maximum of 15,000 gallons, and these new usage values will take effect for the next 12 months, starting with the bills sent on April 1. If a resident has no history for these three months, then his sewer usage for each month shall be based upon the actual water usage for the month, up to a maximum of 7,000 gallons. 
b.  A minimum monthly charge as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code shall be charged for the first 1,000 gallons of that month's water usage. 
c.  All usage over 1,000 gallons shall be charged a fee as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code per 1,000 gallons. 
(2)  Residential customers with evidence of water leak. Charges for sewer service may also be adjusted for sewer service and will be available to residential customers who can provide evidence of a water leak during the three-month period for sewer averaging as well as to customers who qualify for adjustments to water service charges due to water leaks as described in section 74-77. 
(3)  Commercial customers. 
a.  A minimum monthly charge as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code shall be charged for the first 1,000 gallons of that month's water usage. 
b.  All usage over 1,000 gallons shall be charged as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code per 1,000 gallons up to 50,000 gallons. 
c.  All usage over 50,000 gallons shall be charged as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code per 1,000 gallons. 
d.  Agricultural operations, including nurseries or greenhouses, shall have a ceiling on sewer charges based upon 20,000 gallons of water usage. 
(4)  Nonresident customers. Any customer receiving sewer service from the city at a location not within the city limits shall be charged a rate equal to 200 percent of the applicable rate in subsection (1) of this section, except that residential customers on the city system prior to January 1, 1985, shall be charged a rate equal to 150 percent of the rate in subsection (1) of this section. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.6; Ord. No. 98-33, 9-22-1998; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004)  
Sec. 74-79. - Electric service. 
Each month the city shall charge and collect for residential and commercial electric service the amounts hereinafter set out, based on the following rates: 
(1)  Residential rate (Schedule R). 
a.  Applicable. Applies to all residential customers billed through one meter. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to the established rules and regulations of the city covering this type of service. 
b.  Character of service. Alternating current, 60 cycles per second, single-phase, 120/240 volts. 
c.  Rate. 
Customer charge. A minimum monthly charge as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A shall be charged. 
Energy charge. Charges as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A shall be charged. 
d.  Power cost adjustment. The monthly charges under this rate schedule shall be increased or decreased as necessary to reflect the application of a power cost adjustment calculated in accordance with Schedule PCA. 
e.  Tax adjustment. The above rate shall be subject to an increase or decrease in proportion to the amount of new taxes or increased taxes, required payments to governmental entities or for governmental or municipal purposes which are levied or imposed or otherwise required by law or articles which were not in effect on the effective date of the ordinance from which this schedule is derived. 
f.  Curtailment. The city shall have the right at any and all times to immediately adjust, in whole or part, the supply of electricity to customers in order to adjust to fuel suppliers for generation of electricity or to adjust to other factors affecting delivered capacity. 
(2)  Small commercial rate (Schedule SC). 
a.  Applicable. Applies to all non-residential customers billed through one meter whose monthly peak demand is less than or equal to 25 kW. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to the established rules and regulations of the city covering this type of service. 
b.  Character of service. A.C., 60 cycles per second, single-phase, 120/240 volts; three-phase, 120/240, 120/208, 240/480, 277/480 volts, as available at point of service. Three-phase customers served via underground primary to pad-mounted transformers are offered only 120/208 or 277/480 volt service. 
c.  Rate. 
Customer charge. A minimum monthly charge as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A shall be charged. 
Energy charge. Charges as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A shall be charged. 
d.  Billing demand. Demand meters will be installed on all such customers if the: 
1.  Installed load indicates that demands over 25 kW will be experienced; or 
2.  Monthly load exceeds 9,000 kilowatt hours. A customer on this schedule whose demand exceeds 25 kW for any billing period shall be billed under Schedule MC for the next 12-month period beginning with the current month. 
The billing demand shall be the maximum 15-minute kW measured in the month unless otherwise specified in a firm electric service contract agreement, but it shall not be less than 50 percent of the peak demand measured in the 12-month period ending with the current month. 
e.  Power factor. Should the power factor be lower than 0.97 lagging, the city may adjust the measured demand by multiplying by the ratio of 0.97 to the actual power factor. 
f.  Power cost adjustment. The monthly charges under this rate schedule shall be increased or decreased as necessary to reflect the application of a power cost adjustment calculated in accordance with Schedule PCA. 
g.  Tax adjustment. The above rate shall be subject to an increase or decrease in proportion to the amount of new taxes or increased taxes, levied or imposed or increased or decreased by law or articles which were not in effect on the effective date of the ordinance from which this schedule is derived, which the city may hereafter have to pay. 
h.  Curtailment. The city shall have the right at any and all times to immediately adjust, in whole or part, the supply of electricity to customers in order to adjust to fuel suppliers for generation of electricity or to adjust to other factors affecting delivered capacity. 
(3)  Medium commercial rate (Schedule MC). 
a.  Applicable. Applies to all non-residential Customers billed through one meter whose monthly peak demand is greater than 25 kW and less than or equal to 100 kW. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to the established rules and regulations of the city covering this type of service. 
b.  Character of service. A.C., 60 cycles per second, single-phase, 120/240 volts; three-phase, 120/240, 120/208, 240/480, 277/480 volts, as available at point of service. Three-phase customers served via underground primary to pad-mounted transformers are offered only 120/208 or 277/480 volt service. 
c.  Rate. 
Customer charge. A customer charge as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A shall be charged. 
Minimum energy charge. A minimum energy charge as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A shall be charged. 
Demand charge. Charges as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A shall be charged. 
Energy charge. Charges as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A shall be charged. 
d.  Billing demand. The billing demand shall be the maximum 15-minute measured kW in the month unless otherwise specified in a firm electric service contract agreement. If at any time the customer billed under this schedule continues for a period of 12 consecutive months without a demand in excess of 25 kW, Schedule SC shall apply with the first month succeeding such 12-month period. Likewise, a customer on this schedule whose demand exceeds 100 kW for any billing period shall be billed under Schedule LC for the next 12-month period beginning with the current month. 
e.  Power factor. Should the power factor be lower than 0.97 lagging, the city may adjust the measured demand by multiplying by the ratio of 0.97 to the actual power factor. 
f.  Power cost adjustment. The monthly charges under this rate schedule shall be increased or decreased, as necessary, to reflect the application of a power cost adjustment calculated in accordance with Schedule PCA. 
g.  Tax adjustment. The above rate shall be subject to an increase or decrease in proportion to the amount of new taxes or increased taxes, levied or imposed or increased or decreased by law or ordinances which were not in effect on the effective date of the ordinance from which this schedule is derived, which the city may hereafter have to pay. 
h.  Curtailment. The city shall have the right at any and all times to immediately adjust, in whole or part, the supply of electricity to customers in order to adjust to fuel suppliers for generation of electricity or to adjust to other factors affecting delivered capacity. 
(4)  Large commercial rate (Schedule LC). 
a.  Applicable. To all commercial and industrial customers where service is taken through one meter at one point of delivery and where the peak monthly kilowatt demand is greater than 100 kW. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to the established rules and regulations of the city covering this type of service. Before service is furnished, however, an individual service agreement contract between the customer and the city may be required outlining all details of the service to be supplied, the terms of the contract, and the obligations of each party. 
b.  Character of service. A.C., 60 cycles per second, single-phase, 120/240 volts, three-phase, 120/240, 120/208, 240/480, 277/480, 2400/4160, 7200/12,470 volts, as available at point of service. Three-phase customers served via underground primary to pad-mounted transformers are offered only 120/208, 277/480, or 2400/4160 volt service. 
c.  Rate. 
Customer charge. A customer charge as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A shall be charged. 
Minimum energy charge. A minimum energy charge as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A shall be charged. 
Demand charge. Charges as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A shall be charged. 
Energy charge. Charges as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A shall be charged. 
d.  Rate adjustments. Rates under this rate schedule may be adjusted to reflect the customer's service contract with the city. 
e.  Billing demand. The billing demand shall be the maximum 15-minute measured kilowatt demand in the billing period, but not less than 50 percent of the peak demand measured in the 12-month period ending with the current month. If at any time a customer billed under this schedule continues for a period of 12 consecutive months without a demand in excess of 100 kW, unless otherwise specified in a firm electric service contract agreement, Schedule MC shall apply beginning with the first month succeeding such 12-month period. 
f.  Power factor. Should the power factor be lower than 0.97 lagging, the City may adjust the measured demand by multiplying by the ratio of 0.97 to the actual power factor. 
g.  Primary service. Where service is taken by the customer at the city's available primary voltage, and where the customer owns, operates, and maintains all service facilities, except metering equipment required to take service at such voltage, a credit of two percent of the base rate charges will be allowed. Metering may be primary or secondary (corrected for the transformer losses) at the city's option. 
h.  Power cost adjustment. The monthly charges under this rate schedule shall be increased or decreased, as necessary, to reflect the application of a power cost adjustment calculated in accordance with Schedule PCA. 
i.  Tax adjustment. The above rate shall be subject to an increase or decrease in proportion to the amount of new taxes or increased taxes, levied or imposed or increased or decreased by law or ordinances which were not in effect on the effective date of the ordinance from which this schedule is derived which the city may hereafter have to pay. 
j.  Curtailment. The city shall have the right at any and all times to immediately adjust, in whole or part, the supply of electricity to customers in order to adjust to fuel suppliers for generation of electricity or to adjust to other factors affecting delivered capacity. 
(5)  Security lights. Security lights, defined as any street light installed within a public right of way or public space, may be installed as approved by public works director or their designee. Installation and monthly service charges shall be assessed as follows: 
a.  Customer charge. A minimum monthly charge as established, from time to time, by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A shall be charged. 
b.  Tax adjustment. The above rate shall be subject to an increase or decrease in proportion to the amount of new taxes or increased taxes, levied or imposed or increased or decreased by law or articles which were not in effect on the effective date of the ordinance from which this schedule is derived, which the city may hereafter have to pay. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.9; Ord. No. 95-26, 9-12-1995; Ord. No. 2001-36, 8-28-2001; Ord. No. O-2014-0408-001, § 3, 4-8-2014; Ord. No. O-2014-0527-001, § 2, 5-27-2014)  
Sec. 74-80. - Power cost adjustment (PCA) for electric service. 
(a)  Calculation. Electric service billed under all applicable rate schedules shall be subject to the application of a power cost adjustment (PCA). The PCA shall be calculated on an annualized basis as follows: 
PCA = (WC - (P * K) - CF) / S 
(b)  Definitions. 
PCA = Power cost adjustment factor rounded to the nearest $0.0001 ($per kWh) 
WC = Total estimated wholesale purchased power cost on an annualized basis. ($) 
P = Total estimated wholesale energy purchases on an annualized basis. (KWh) 
K = Base energy rate. ($/KWh) 
S = Total estimated kWh energy sales to city customers on an annualized basis. (KWh) 
CF = Correction factor adjustment to be applied to correct for any variance between actual PCA costs and revenues. The calculation of CF shall be performed on a periodic basis, but not less than quarterly, with the results of this reconciliation applied to the PCA on an as-needed basis to maintain PCA revenues and costs in close proximity. ($) 
The formula for the calculation of the CF shall be as follows: 
CF = (A) - (B) 
Where: 
(A)  = the actual power cost adjustment revenues received from the application of the power cost adjustment for the subject reconciliation period. ($) 
(B)  = The actual power cost adjustment costs which should have been recovered from the application of the power cost adjustment for the subject reconciliation period. ($) 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.11; Ord. No. 95-26, 9-12-1995; Ord. No. O-2014-0408-001, § 3, 4-8-2014)  
Sec. 74-81. - Line extension policy. 
(a)  General policy. Farmersville Electric (FE) shall extend its distribution facilities to the customer/developer in accordance with the following line extension provisions. Each provision classifies the predominant type of electric service/use anticipated on the customer's/developer's premises and specifies conditions under which a line extension may be made. For each location where electric service is desired, the customer's/developer's classification involves an evaluation of the type of installation and its use. The customer's/developer's classification shall be determined by FE. In the event that the classification assigned by FE is incorrect, based upon the customer's/developer's subsequent actual use of the installation, then FE may alter the customer's/developer's classification and apply the correct line extension classification. Appropriate adjustments shall be made to the customer's/developer's account or billing. 
Service will not be provided, and no work to extend service to the customer's/developer's delivery point shall be performed until the customer/developer has paid any and all fees or charges associated with the provision of service. This includes engineering fees, Aid-in-construction (AIC) charges, deposits, and/or other system fees. 
FE shall extend its electric facilities only to the point of delivery. customer/developer shall install and be solely responsible for wiring of the installation on the customer's/developer's side of the point of delivery. The point of delivery shall be the point at which the lines of FE connect to the lines of the customer/developer. This will normally be at the service entrance which contains the meter base for the building or other structure. 
(b)  Residential line extensions. FE will construct a new distribution extension consistent with FE's current specifications to serve a residential installation: 
(1)  Applicability. To qualify as an extension to a single-family residential installation, the location where customer/developer is requesting service shall comply with the following provisions: 
a.  Location must be a permanent installation. To qualify as a permanent location the customer/developer will either have a definite plan for, or will have begun the construction of the building or other permanent facility. 
b.  Location must be a single-family residence. 
c.  If located within a residential subdivision development the customer/developer must have complied with the residential subdivision development policies and paid all costs required therein. 
(2)  Aid-in-construction. 
a.  FE shall estimate the amount of engineering required to perform a cost estimate for any new line extension. The customer/developer shall pay this amount to FE as a retainage prior to any engineering design being performed. 
b.  FE shall estimate the cost for the line extension based on current unit material and labor costs according to FE's current standards and specifications. The estimated cost is the total cost of all construction which shall include, but is not limited to; the labor and materials used in constructing the extension, engineering, right-of-way acquisition and clearing, and all other costs directly attributable to the extension. This total cost shall be paid up-front as an AIC prior to any material ordered, or construction done on the line extension. 
c.  There will be a refundable construction allowance to the customer/developer of $1,800.00 per meter. This amount shall be FE's obligation. The refundable construction allowance shall be refunded only after the permanent meter has been installed and the customer/developer provides FE a certificate of occupancy for the location connected. In no case shall the refundable construction allowance be greater than the costs paid to FE. 
d.  All expenses shall be trued-up after the installation of the permanent meter for the line extension and any additional costs shall be invoiced to the customer/developer, or any over payments made by the customer/developer shall be reimbursed from FE to the customer/developer. 
(3)  Routing. 
a.  The line extension shall be constructed along the most direct route. Any deviation from the most direct route shall be at FE's sole discretion. 
b.  In all cases, the line extension shall be constructed on dedicated right-of-way or on a route covered by an easement. 
c.  Any and all right-of-way clearing shall be performed to FE's specifications. At the option of the customer/developer and with the agreement of FE, the applicant may perform the clearing or hire a contractor separately to perform the clearing, provided it is performed in a timely manner and to FE's specifications. 
(c)  Commercial development less than ten kW line extensions. FE will construct a new extension of its distribution system to provide service to non-residential domestic and commercial developments less than ten kW where the customer/developer requests electric infrastructure to be installed in advance of development of a site or lot by a customer/developer, under the following provisions: 
(1)  Applicability. The following applies to all platted, commercial development with sites or lots for multiple customers/developers to be primarily used or developed for permanent non-residential, commercial, retail, and/or office use: 
a.  The customer/developer shall comply with all applicable provisions of the rules and regulations of FE; 
b.  The customer/developer will provide, at no cost, to FE: 
1.  Right-of-way easements and covenants on owner's property that are satisfactory to FE; 
2.  Site plans (streets, wet utilities, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and landscaping plans, etc.), notice of construction start dates and construction schedules that are reasonable and industry typical for the type of work to be performed. 
3.  Survey points for grades, lot corners, street right-of-way, and other locations reasonably necessary for installation of the electric system. 
c.  Line extensions to each customer/developer within the development will be according to the terms and conditions of the appropriate line extension classification. 
(2)  Aid-in-construction. 
a.  FE shall estimate the amount of engineering required to perform a cost estimate for any new line extension. The customer/developer shall pay this amount to FE as a retainage prior to any engineering design being performed. 
b.  FE shall estimate the cost of the electric infrastructure adequate to serve all prospective customers/developers within the development. This will be determined in advance of development of a site or lot by a customer/developer based on current unit material and labor costs for the same type of construction. The estimated cost is the total cost of all construction which shall include, but is not limited to. The labor and materials used in constructing the extension, engineering, right-of-way acquisition and clearing, and all other costs directly attributable to the extension. This total cost shall be paid up-front as an AIC prior to any material ordered, or construction done on the line extension. 
c.  There will be a refundable construction allowance to the customer/developer of $1,300.00 per meter. This amount shall be FE's obligation. The refundable construction allowance shall be refunded only after the permanent meter has been installed and the customer/developer provides FE a certificate of occupancy for the location connected. In no case shall the refundable construction allowance be greater than the costs paid to FE. 
d.  All expenses shall be trued-up after the installation of the permanent meter for the line extension and any additional costs shall be invoiced to the customer/developer, or any over payments made by the customer/developer shall be reimbursed from FE to the customer/developer. 
(3)  Routing. 
a.  The line extension shall be constructed along the most direct route. Any deviation from the most direct route shall be at FE's sole discretion. 
b.  In all cases, the line extension shall be constructed on dedicated right-of-way or on a route covered by an easement. 
c.  Any and all right-of-way clearing shall be performed to FE's specifications. At the option of the customer/developer and with the agreement of FE, the applicant may perform the clearing, or hire a contractor separately to perform the clearing, provided it is performed in a timely manner and to FE's specifications. 
(d)  Commercial development greater than ten kW line extensions. FE will construct a new extension of its distribution system to provide service to commercial/industrial developments greater than ten kW where the customer/developer requests electric infrastructure to be installed in advance of development of a site or lot by a customer/developer, under the following provisions: 
(1)  Applicability. The following applies to all platted, commercial development with sites or lots for multiple customers/developers to be primarily used or developed for permanent commercial, industrial, retail, and/or office use; 
a.  The customer/developer shall comply with all applicable provisions of the rules and regulations of FE. 
b.  The customer/developer will provide at no cost to FE: 
1.  Right-of-way easements and covenants on owner's property that are satisfactory to FE; 
2.  Site plans (streets, wet utilities, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and landscaping plans, etc.), notice of construction start dates and construction schedules that are reasonable and industry typical for the type of work to be performed. 
3.  Survey points for grades, lot corners, street right-of-way, and other locations reasonably necessary for installation of the electric system. 
c.  Line extensions to each customer/developer within the development will be according to the terms and conditions of the appropriate line extension classification. 
(2)  Aid-in-construction. 
a.  FE shall estimate the amount of engineering required to perform a cost estimate for any new line extension. The customer/developer shall pay this amount to FE as a retainage prior to any engineering design being performed. 
b.  FE shall estimate the cost of the electric infrastructure adequate to serve all prospective customers within the development. This will be determined in advance of development of a site or lot by a customer/developer based on current unit material and labor costs for the same type of construction. The estimated cost is the total cost of all construction which shall include, but is not limited to. The labor and materials used in constructing the extension, engineering, right-of-way acquisition and clearing, and all other costs directly attributable to the extension. This total cost shall be paid up-front as an AIC prior to any material ordered, or construction done on the line extension. 
c.  There will be a refundable construction allowance to the customer/developer of $3,400.00 per meter of estimated cost for making the extension. This amount shall be FE's obligation. The refundable construction allowance shall be refunded only after the permanent meter has been installed and the customer/developer provides FE a certificate of occupancy for the location connected. In no case shall the refundable construction allowance be greater than the costs paid to FE. 
d.  All expenses shall be trued-up after the installation of the permanent meter for the line extension and any additional costs shall be invoiced to the customer/developer, or any over payments made by the customer/developer shall be reimbursed from FE to the customer/developer. 
(3)  Routing. 
a.  The line extension shall be constructed along the most direct route. Any deviation from the most direct route shall be at FE's sole discretion. 
b.  In all cases, the line extension shall be constructed on dedicated right-of-way or on a route covered by an easement on FE's standard form. 
c.  Any and all right-of-way clearing shall be performed to FE's specifications. At the option of the customer/developer and with the agreement of FE, the applicant may perform the clearing, or hire a contractor separately to perform the clearing, provided it is performed in a timely manner and to FE's specifications. 
(4)  Large power agreement for electric service. The customer/developer and FE have the option to enter into a large power agreement for electric service when the customers/developers peak demand is expected to exceed a diversified load of 150 kW. Both the customer/developer and FE have to agree to the large power agreement prior to implementation. This large power agreement is subject to the following provisions: 
a.  The customer/developer shall remain on the rate schedule as provided in the electric service agreement. The electric rates are subject to change. 
b.  The character of service shall be three-phase, 60 Hertz alternating current, supplied at the voltages available at the point of service. 
c.  The customer/developer shall comply with all applicable provisions of the rules and regulations of FE. 
d.  FE requires a minimum term agreement of five years. Longer term agreements can be negotiated between the customer/developer and FE. 
e.  The line extension fees are negotiable under the large power agreement. 
(e)  Primary service line extensions. FE will construct a new extension of its distribution system to provide service to commercial/industrial developments requesting primary voltage (14.4/25 kV) service when the customer/developer requests electric infrastructure to be installed in advance of development of a site or lot by a customer/developer under the following provisions: 
(1)  Applicability. The following applies to all platted, commercial development with sites or lots for multiple customers/developers to be primarily used or developed for permanent commercial, industrial, retail, and/or office use; 
a.  The customer/developer shall comply with all applicable provisions of the rules and regulations of FE; 
b.  The customer/developer will provide at no cost to FE: 
1.  Right-of-way easements and covenants on owner's property that are satisfactory to FE; 
2.  Site plans (streets, wet utilities, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and landscaping plans, etc.), notice of construction start dates and construction schedules that are reasonable and industry typical for the type of work to be performed. 
3.  Survey points for grades, lot corners, street right-of-way, and other locations reasonably necessary for installation of the electric system. 
c.  Line extensions to each customer/developer within the development will be according to the terms and conditions of the appropriate line extension classification. 
(2)  Aid-in-construction. 
a.  FE shall estimate the amount of engineering required to perform a cost estimate for any new line extension. The customer/developer shall pay this amount to FE as a retainage prior to any engineering design being performed. 
b.  FE shall estimate the cost of the electric infrastructure adequate to serve all prospective customers/developers within the development. This will be determined in advance of development of a site or lot by a customer/developer based on current unit material and labor costs for the same type of construction. The estimated cost is the total cost of all construction which shall include. The labor and materials used in constructing the extension, engineering, right-of-way acquisition and clearing, and all other costs directly attributable to the extension. This total cost shall be paid up-front as an AIC prior to any material ordered, or construction done on the line extension. 
c.  There will be a refundable construction allowance to the customer/developer of $5,800.00 per primary meter of estimated cost for making the extension. This amount shall be FE's obligation. The refundable construction allowance shall be refunded only after the permanent primary meter has been installed and the customer/developer provides FE a certificate of occupancy for the location connected. In no case shall the refundable construction allowance be greater than the costs paid to FE. 
d.  All expenses shall be trued-up after the installation of the permanent meter for the line extension and any additional costs shall be invoiced to the customer/developer, or any over payments made by the customer/developer shall be reimbursed from FE to the customer/developer. 
(3)  Routing. 
a.  The line extension shall be constructed along the most direct route. Any deviation from the most direct route shall be at FE's sole discretion. 
b.  In all cases, the line extension shall be constructed on dedicated right-of-way or on a route covered by an easement. 
c.  Any and all right-of-way clearing shall be performed to FE's specifications. At the option of the customer/developer and with the agreement of FE, the applicant may perform the clearing, or hire a contractor separately to perform the clearing, provided it is performed in a timely manner and to FE's specifications. 
(4)  Large power agreement for electric service. The customer/developer and FE have the option to enter into a large power agreement for electric service when the customers/developers peak demand is expected to exceed a diversified load of 150 kW. Both the customer/developer and FE have to agree to the large power agreement prior to implementation. This large power agreement is subject to the following provisions: 
a.  The customer/developer shall remain on the rate schedule as provided in the electric service agreement. The electric rates are subject to change. 
b.  The character of service shall be three-phase, 60 Hertz alternating current, supplied at the voltages available at the point of service. 
c.  The customer/developer shall comply with all applicable provisions of the service rules and regulations of FE. 
d.  FE requires a minimum term agreement of five years. Longer term agreements can be negotiated between the customer/developer and FE. 
e.  The line extension fees are negotiable under the large power agreement. 
(f)  Temporary service line extensions. FE will construct a new extension of its distribution system to serve temporary facilities under the following provisions: 
(1)  Applicability. To qualify as an extension to temporary service installation, the location where the customer/developer is requesting service shall: 
a.  Be a residence or dwelling unit not qualifying as a permanent installation, or 
b.  Be a barn, shop, water well, gate opener, or other service classified by FE as a temporary facility. 
(2)  Aid-in-construction (AIC). 
a.  FE shall estimate the cost for the line extension based on current unit material and labor costs for the same type of construction. The estimated cost is the total cost of all construction which shall include, but is not limited to; the labor and materials used in constructing the extension, engineering, right-of-way acquisition and clearing, and all other costs directly attributable to the extension. 
b.  The customer/developer shall be required to pay 100 percent of the estimated cost of AIC for the extension and retirement of the extension (if applicable) prior to any temporary facilities being installed. 
c.  All amounts paid to FE as AIC for temporary service shall be non-refundable. 
(g)  New electric service. 
(1)  The following provisions shall be followed for the extension of a new electric service to individual customers, residential developments, commercial developments, or industrial developments: 
a.  All new electric utility services for residential and commercial developments in the city limits shall be installed underground. 
b.  New industrial customers may be allowed overhead service pending written approval from FE. 
c.  All upgraded electric utility services shall be installed underground wherever such is sound and practical from an engineering standpoint as reasonably determined by the city. 
(2)  All street lighting and site lighting equipment shall be placed underground, except for the poles on which the lights are to be affixed. 
(3)  The customer/developer may furnish and install the conduit, pull boxes, and pad-mounted equipment pads for the installation of all on-site underground development feeder, lateral and service lines utilized to provide electric utility service to the building plot pending all of the following provisions: 
a.  The customer/developer is responsible for all expenses related thereto. 
b.  The specifications for the material used shall be approved by FE prior to installation. 
c.  The installation of the conduit shall be inspected and approved by FE at the time of installation. 
d.  Once approved by FE, the infrastructure shall be owned and operated by FE. 
e.  The customer/developer has obtained written approval from FE to install the conduit, pullboxes, and pad-mounted equipment pads. 
(4)  The customer/developer will bear the cost of the pad-mounted switchgear where the design of the development is such that switchgear is/are required for proper and safe operation of the distribution system. FE shall bear the cost of the pad-mounted switchgear where pad-mounted switchgear is/are installed solely for the convenience of FE such as to provide flexibility in serving load outside of the development. 
(5)  In all cases, underground secondary service lines from a meter to the customer's/developer's main disconnect switch or service center shall be installed and maintained by the customer/developer. FE shall have no responsibility or liability in connection therewith. 
(6)  Overhead FE feeder lines may be installed if they meet the following criteria: 
a.  The overhead feeder line is located along the perimeter of the platted building plot, or 
b.  The overhead feeder line is adjacent to or within the right-of-way of thoroughfares or alleys, and 
c.  FE considers the overhead feeder line to be necessary and appropriate. 
(7)  All the customers/developers shall dedicate easements for the installation of utilities, including electric, prior to the electric facilities being installed. All liens and other ownership interests shall be subordinated to the easement use. 
(8)  Temporary utility service may be provided via an overhead line extension, pending written approval by FE. 
(h)  Area lighting. Customer/developer will pay 100 percent of the estimated cost of construction for all lighting related facilities in advance. 
(i)  Ownership of distribution facilities. FE shall retain ownership of all material and facilities installed by FE or the customer/developer for the distribution of electric energy, whether or not the same have been paid for by the customer. All lines and facilities constructed or installed by FE or the customer/developer are the property of FE if on the source side of the electric meter. The customer/developer will install and own all facilities on the load side of the electric meter. 
(j)  Relocation of facilities. 
(1)  FE will relocate its facilities on customers/developers premises at customers/developers request provided the customer/developer has: 
a.  Provided a satisfactory easement for the new facilities, 
b.  Paid the estimated engineering cost to review the relocation in advance, 
c.  Paid the estimated total project cost for removal and construction cost of the electric facilities in advance. 
(2)  If FE determines it is necessary to move its facilities because the customer/developer fails or refuses to allow FE access to its electric facilities at any time, then the customer/developer may be billed the estimated total cost of the relocation. 
(3)  FE will replace an existing overhead electric line with an underground line upon request by a customer/developer, landowner, or other party, provided FE has: 
a.  Determined, in its sole discretion, that such replacement does not adversely impact electric service reliability or FE's operating efficiencies, 
b.  Received an adequate easement(s) in a form acceptable to FE for the construction, installation, maintenance, operation, replacement and/or repair of the underground facilities, at no cost to FE, 
c.  Received payment of the estimated total cost prior to commencement of such relocation for the retirement and construction of electric facilities required, and for the relocation of electric facilities. The requestor must pay FE a retainage prior to any engineering being looked at for any proposed relocation. 
(k)  Refundable construction allowance for line extensions summary. 
(1)  Aid-in-construction (AIC). Customers/developers required to provide an AIC may be entitled to a construction allowance after extending the electrical facilities to a customer's point of delivery as shown in the table below. FE will install, own, operate and control all facilities necessary to provide electrical service to the point of delivery, except as previously noted in this section. The project investment will include all standard facilities, meters, services and transformers. Facilities not included in the project investment are those necessary to accommodate future growth considerations or company initiated reliability enhancement projects. 
(2)  Refundable construction allowances (summary table). 
SERVICE 	APPLICATION 	REFUNDABLE 
CONSTRUCTION 
ALLOWANCE 
Temporary Service 	All Temporary Services 	No refundable construction allowance applies, customer pays 100 percent of estimated construction and retirement costs of electric facilities. 
Residential 	All Residential 	$1,800.00 per meter. 
Commercial 	Less than 10 kW 	$1,300.00 per meter. 
Commercial/Industrial 	Greater than 10 kW 	$3,400.00 per meter. 
Primary Voltage Service 	Primary Voltage Service 	$5,800.00 per meter. 
Security Lights 	All Security Lights 	No refundable construction allowance applies, customer pays 100 percent of estimated construction costs. 
Underground Primary Line 	All Primary Underground Line Extensions 	Customer/developer may be allowed to install the civil work including. All trench and associated backfill, concrete work associated with pad-mounted equipment, and all conduit and its installation. Refundable construction allowance will apply to customer/developer as stated above. 
 
The customer-owned equipment, load data, and electric service requirements supplied by the customer/developer will be used in the determination of the costs. 
The refundable construction allowance shall only be refunded to the customer/developer once the permanent meter has been installed and FE is provided with a notice of certificate of occupancy. If it is determined to be different than service classification applied for, the refundable construction allowance may be adjusted based on customer's/developer's actual service classification. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.10; Ord. No. 95-26, 9-12-1995; Ord. No. O-2014-0408-001, § 3, 4-8-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2014-0408-001, § 3, adopted April 8, 2014, amended the title of § 74-81 to read as set out herein. Previously § 74-81 was titled aid-in-construction for electric service.  
Sec. 74-82. - Civic organization rates. 
Civic organizations, non-profit organizations that are readily recognizable as either local or national civic clubs, excluding churches and schools, shall be charged rates equal to 60 percent of the current commercial electric, water, and sewer rates, 60 percent of the current residential garbage rate, and 100 percent of the current ambulance fee. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.12; Ord. No. 95-26, 9-12-1995)  
Sec. 74-83. - Temporary electric service for construction. 
Temporary service, such as saw service, shall be provided for a fee as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code, plus all consumption according to applicable rate schedules. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.1; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004)  
Sec. 74-84. - Temporary electric service for rental clean-up. 
Temporary water or electric service for the purposes of cleaning rental property and for similar circumstances shall be provided for a nonrefundable service fee as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code, plus usage. The temporary service fee includes garbage pickup. Temporary service will be provided for a period of seven days. At the end of seven days the service will automatically be terminated. The customer who desires temporary service after this time will need to pay another nonrefundable fee to have utilities reconnected. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.14; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004)  
Sec. 74-85. - Meter checks. 
Electric or water meters may be pulled and checked for accuracy by an independent firm at the customer's request. Any time a customer requests that a meter be changed, such meter shall be tested. If the meter test results are within the allowable acceptable limits, a fee, as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code, for the service shall be placed on the customer's next bill. If the meter tests results indicate that the meter does not run within allowable acceptable limits, all appropriate bills shall be credited and/or adjusted according to the percentage above or below normal that the meter operated at the time of the test. Water meters may be tested in place by city employees with a portable testing device at a fee, as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code, under the same conditions outlined above. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.15; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004)  
Sec. 74-86. - Utility billing corrections. 
(a)  Corrections made to any utility bill shall not exceed a period of more than six months, prior to the detection of the billing error, when the error is made by the customer. 
(b)  Billing errors created by the city and which have been in existence for six months or less shall be corrected by the utility billing clerk with the city manager's approval for the number of months that the error existed. Billing errors created by the city which have existed for more than six months shall be corrected for the time period decided upon by the city council after evaluation of each individual billing error. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.16)  
Sec. 74-87. - Minimum usage charges. 
Any person with an active account for five or more days during an initial or final billing period shall be charged the minimum bill for all services regardless of whether or not any utilities or services were actually consumed or used. If there are less than five days from the date of the last regular meter reading to the final meter reading, and no utilities or services are consumed or used, the minimum charges may be waived. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.17)  
Sec. 74-88. - Date of statements for usage and penalties. 
(a)  There may be two billing cycles each month. All customers shall be in cycle 1 except those customers 60 years of age or older and those customers whose only source of income is a monthly social security or disability check, who request delay of the penalty until 25 days after the date on which the statement is issued. These customers shall be in cycle 2. 
(b)  Such rates and charges detailed in this division shall be mailed by the city no later than the first day of the month for which the statement is due. The due date for cycle 1 customers shall be the tenth day of the month, and the due date for cycle 2 customers shall be the 25th day of the month. Statements for each cycle shall be due and payable on the respective due dates. 
(c)  Should the amount due on the due date of each cycle not be paid in full on that day, the unpaid balance shall be considered delinquent and a ten percent penalty shall be added to the total amount past due and unpaid. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.18; Ord. No. 2006-58, 10-10-2006)  
Sec. 74-89. - Discontinuation of service. 
(a)  Should any account remain past due as of its due date, a notice shall be mailed to the customer stating that service shall be discontinued if all charges have not been paid in full. Cycle 1 customers shall have all charges paid in full by the 20th day of the month, and cycle 2 customers shall have all charges paid in full by the fifth day of the month following the month the bills were mailed. 
(b)  All accounts in cycle 1 which are not paid by 5:00 p.m. on the 20th day of the month or received in the night deposit by 8:00 a.m. on the 21st day of the month will be subject to disconnection and shall be assessed a service fee as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. Service shall be disconnected as soon as possible on the 21st day of the month. 
(c)  All accounts in cycle 2 which are not paid by 5:00 p.m. on the fifth day of the month following the month the bills were mailed, or received in the night deposit by 8:00 a.m. on the sixth day of the month, will be subject to disconnection and shall be assessed a service fee as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. Service shall be disconnected as soon as possible on the sixth day of the month following the month the bills were mailed. 
(d)  Service shall be resumed after the customer has paid the amount past due and delinquent, including all penalties and service fees. The service fee shall be as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code for reconnection to city utilities after regular business hours. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.19; Ord. No. 97-17, 9-23-1997; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004)  
Sec. 74-90. - Meter tampering; disconnection for tampering. 
(a)  The city manager or his authorized representative may order and direct that services be discontinued at any location, by the disconnection of service at the weather head, on the electric pole, or at the water meter, when physical evidence shows that the meter has been subjected to tampering or when any service has been consumed in an unauthorized manner, in violation of this article, or in violation of any of the city building, electrical, plumbing or fire codes. 
(b)  The phrase "when physical evidence shows that the meter has been subjected to tampering" shall include, but not be limited to, the following meanings: 
(1)  Electric or water meter is found to have been removed; 
(2)  The cover or any part or portion of any such meter or terminal box is found to have been loosened; 
(3)  Any part or portion thereof is found to have been loosened; 
(4)  Any foreign object is found to have been inserted; 
(5)  Any foreign substance is found to have been injected into any such meter or terminal box; 
(6)  Any adjustment is found to have been made in the mechanism of any such meter; or 
(7)  Any wire has been found to have been tapped onto or connected to the supply conductor of any such terminal box. 
(c)  The finding at any time of any fact, circumstance or condition on or about any such water meter or electrical meter, terminal box or conductor that tends to show or evidence that any act or acts have been committed or performed in violation of any portion or portions of this section, shall be and constitute prima facie evidence and create an evidentiary presumption of knowledge on the part of the person having subscribed for utility service through any such meter, or the person having the custody or management of the building, room, or place for which such subscription for service is made, or the performance or commission of any such act prohibited under this Code. Such subscribed or other person shall be deemed to have or caused or occasioned the performance or commission of any such prohibited act. 
(d)  Penalty and charges for tampering. 
(1)  The service charge for reconnecting services in this instance shall be as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code and shall be reconnected only during regular working hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. during the days of Monday through Friday and not on holidays observed by the personnel and employees of the utility office. The service charge provided herein shall not be construed as an assessment of a fine as provided by section 74-93. 
(2)  The utility office manager or his authorized representative shall be entitled to bill and collect from the customer, under the proper rate schedule, for all electrical and/or water usage not recorded on the meter by reason of such tampering or interference with such meter, for a period of the service up to six months, the amount of which may be estimated by the city from the best available data; the customer shall also reimburse the city for repair or replacement of the meter or other equipment that may have been damaged by the tampering. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.20; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004)  
Sec. 74-91. - Alternate utility suppliers. 
In the event a current city utility customer requests the same service from a utility company other than the city, the following policy shall apply: 
(1)  Eligible alternate utility companies. The company desiring to provide utility service to the customer must be officially certified as eligible to serve the customer at the desired location under applicable state and local law. Furthermore, the company must have on record an executed current and valid franchise agreement with the city establishing the terms and conditions under which the company may operate within the city. 
(2)  Construction of additional service lines. 
a.  The alternate utility company shall be required to submit for city approval the engineer's plan for the desired facility locations, right-of-way and easement requirements and proposed construction documents prior to approval or commencement of any construction. Such proposal concerning the construction of additional power lines, water and sewer mains, other utility service lines or appurtenances shall be reviewed by the city's consulting engineer for compliance with all applicable regulatory standards, current industry standards, and all other applicable city codes and standards as well as general concerns for public health, safety and welfare. 
b.  The engineering review shall be at the sole expense of the customer requesting service from the alternate company. 
(3)  Dedicated costs. 
a.  The customer desiring to receive service from an alternate utility company shall reimburse the city for all dedicated costs prior to changing utility service companies. Dedicated costs are defined as those costs which are directly and indirectly attributable to the cost of serving the customer including, but not limited to, transformer banks, service lines, meters and power poles. 
b.  The actual dollar amount of the dedicated costs shall be determined by the city's consulting engineer. Such engineering review shall be at the sole expense of the customer requesting service from the alternate company. 
(4)  Overhead costs. 
a.  The customer desiring to receive service from an alternate utility company shall be charged a flat fee as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code to change over to another utility service company. Such flat fee shall cover all overhead costs to the city including, but not limited to, staff time, telephone expense, computer time, office supplies, disconnection of service, and equipment time. 
b.  The flat fee shall be in addition to all engineering costs and reimbursement of all dedicated costs, both of which must be paid in full by the customer. 
(5)  Violations. Any customer receiving utility service from an alternate company, or any alternate utility company providing service, without fully complying with the provisions of this section, shall be in violation of this article as detailed in section 74-93. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.21; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004)  
Sec. 74-92. - Water and sewer tap fees. 
There shall be charged and collected by the city the fees and charges for tap fees as established from time to time by the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.22; Ord. No. 2003-33, 8-12-2003)  
Sec. 74-93. - Violations. 
Any unauthorized consumption of city utilities or any person knowingly consuming city utilities without paying just compensation to the city as outlined in this division shall be in violation of this article. Theft of service charges may be filed at the discretion of the city manager, in addition to any other charges for violation of applicable state and local law. 
(Code 2004, § 11.122.29; Ord. No. 95-26, 9-26-1995)  
Sec. 74-94. - Electric—Distributed generation. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Intent. This section is intended to provide for the orderly, safe and effective interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation facilities within the city electric system by customers of Farmersville Electric (FE). 
(2)  Authority. FE is authorized to enact this section by the Texas Utility Code Annotated § 31.005, which authorizes and encourages electric utilities to establish customer option programs that encourage the reduction of air contaminant emissions including distributed energy generation technology. Also, Texas Utility Code Annotated § 39.101 (b)(3) entitles all state electric customers access to on-site distributed generation. Finally, Texas Utility Code Annotated § 39.916 authorizes electric utilities to establish requirements for and allow the interconnection and parallel operation of distributed renewable generation, and requires the Public Utility Commission of Texas (PUCT) to promulgate rules and regulations for the implementation of interconnection and parallel operation of distributed renewable generation. 
(3)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings as set forth below: 
Commission means the Public Utility Commission of Texas (PUCT). 
Customer means a person or entity interconnected to FE's electric system for the purpose of receiving or exporting electric power from or to FE's electric system. 
Distributed generation means an electrical generating facility located at a customer's point of delivery (point of common coupling) of ten megawatts (MW) or less and connected at a voltage less than 60 kilovolts (kV) which may be connected in parallel operation to FE's electric system. 
Interconnection means the physical connection of distributed generation to the utility system in accordance with the requirements of this section so that parallel operation can occur. 
Networked secondary means two or more utility primary distribution feeder sources electrically tied together on the secondary (low voltage) side to form one power source for one or more customers. Networked secondary service is designed to maintain service to the customers even after the loss of one of these primary distribution feeder sources. 
Parallel operation means the operation of distributed generation by a customer while the customer is connected to FE's electric system. 
Point of interconnection (point of service; point of common coupling) means the point where the electrical conductors of FE's utility system are connected to the customer's conductors and where any transfer of electric power between the customer and the utility system takes place, such as switchgear near the meter. 
Pre-certified equipment means s specific generating and protective equipment system or systems that have been certified as meeting the applicable parts of this section relating to safety and reliability by an entity approved by the commission. 
Stabilized means the FE electric system shall be considered stabilized when, following a disturbance, the system returns to the normal range of voltage and frequency for a duration of two minutes. 
(4)  Applicability shall mean this sections applies to all persons or entities that desire to interconnect or operate in parallel with a distributed generation system within FE's electric system. 
(5)  Application and agreement required means: 
a.  Before a person or entity may interconnect or operate in parallel with a distributed generation system within FE's electric system, that person or entity must complete and submit the "Application for the Interconnection and Parallel Operation of Distributed Generation with the Farmersville Electric Utility System" provided by FE. This form establishes the terms and conditions for the interconnection and parallel operation of the distributed generation system. 
b.  Agreements with customers for the interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation within FE's electric system shall be in accordance with this section, the PUCT rules and regulations, and all applicable state and federal laws. 
c.  The interconnection shall not be energized prior to the execution of the agreement and FE inspection as required herein. 
d.  The application form may be modified from time to time by FE as is required for appropriate processing of applications. 
(b)  Technical requirements. 
(1)  General requirements. 
a.  All interconnections shall comply with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations, including without limitation, PUCT SUBST.R.25.212. 
b.  All interconnections shall comply with local building and electric codes as adopted and amended by FE. Installation of all interconnections shall be inspected by FE. Inspection and approval of the installation by FE is a condition of interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation. 
c.  Variations from the technical requirements herein must be reviewed and approved by FE prior to implementation. Variations in the point of interconnection must be approved by FE and included in the application form prior to approval. 
(2)  Manual disconnect. The customer shall provide and install a manual load break switch that provides a clear indication of the switch position at the point of interconnection to provide separation between FE electrical system and the customer's electrical generation system. The location of the disconnect switch must be approved by FE. 
The disconnect switch shall be easily visible, mounted separately from metering equipment, readily accessible to FE personnel at all times, and capable of being locked in the open position with a FE padlock. FE reserves the right to open the disconnect switch isolating the customer's distributed generating system (which may or may not include the customer's load) from FE's electrical system for the following reasons: 
a.  To facilitate maintenance or repair of FE's electrical system. 
b.  When emergency conditions exist on FE's electrical system. 
c.  When the customer's distributed generating system is determined to be operating in a hazardous or unsafe manner or unduly affecting FE's electrical system. 
d.  When the customer's distributed generating system is determined to be adversely affecting other electric consumers on FE's electrical system. 
e.  Failure of the customer to comply with applicable codes, regulations and standards in effect at the time. 
f.  Failure of the customer to abide by any contractual arrangement or operating agreement with FE's. 
(3)  Power quality. 
a.  Voltage. FE shall endeavor to maintain the distribution voltages on the electrical system, but shall not be responsible for factors or circumstances beyond its control. The customer shall provide an automatic method of disconnecting generation equipment from FE's electrical system within ten cycles should a voltage deviation greater than plus five percent or minus ten percent from normal be sustained for more than 30 seconds (1,800 cycles), or in the event of a voltage deviation greater than plus ten percent or minus 30 percent from normal be sustained for more than ten cycles. If high or low voltage complaints or flicker complaints result from the operation of the customer's distributed generation, the customer's generating system shall be disconnected until the problem is resolved to the satisfaction of FE. 
b.  Frequency. FE shall endeavor to maintain a 60-hertz nominal frequency on the electrical system. The customer shall provide an automatic method of disconnecting generation equipment from FE's electrical system within 15 cycles should a deviation in frequency of plus one-half Hz or minus seven-tenths Hz from normal occur. 
c.  Harmonics. In accordance with IEEE 519, the total harmonic distortion (THO) of voltage shall not exceed five percent of a pure sine wave of 60-hertz frequency or three percent of the 60-hertz frequency for any individual harmonic when measured at the point of interconnection with FE's electrical system. Also, the total current distortion shall not exceed five percent of the fundamental frequency sine wave. If harmonics beyond the allowable range result from the operation of the customer's distributed generation, the customer's distributed generating system shall be disconnected until the problem is resolved. 
d.  Flicker. The distributed generation facility shall not cause excessive voltage flicker on FE's electrical system. This flicker shall not exceed three percent voltage dip, in accordance with IEEE 519 (Section 10.5), as measured at the point of interconnection. 
e.  Power factor. The customer's distributed generation system shall be designed, operated and controlled at all times to provide reactive power requirements at the point of interconnection from 97 percent lagging to 97 percent leading power factor. Induction generators shall have static capacitors that provide at least 95 percent of the magnetizing current requirements of the induction generator field. FE may, in the interest of safety, authorize the omission of capacitors. However, where capacitors are used for power factor correction, additional protective devices may be required to guard against self-excitation of the customer's generator field. 
(4)  Loss of source. The customer shall provide approved protective equipment necessary to immediately, completely and automatically disconnect the customer's distributed generation equipment from FE's electrical system in the event of a fault on the customer's system, a fault on FE's system or loss of source on FE's electric system. Such protective equipment shall conform to the criteria specified in UL 1741 and IEEE 1547. The customer's distributed generating system shall automatically disconnect from the grid within ten cycles if the voltage on one or more phases falls and stays below 70 percent of nominal voltage for at least ten cycles. The automatic disconnecting device may be of the manual or automatic reclose type and shall not be capable of reclosing until after FE's service voltage and frequency are restored to within the normal operating range and the system is stabilized. 
(5)  Coordination and synchronization. The customer shall be solely responsible for coordination and synchronization of the customer's distributed generating system with all aspects of FE's electrical system. The customer also assumes all responsibility for any damage or loss that may occur from improper coordination and synchronization of its distributed generating system with FE's electrical system. 
(6)  Metering. The actual metering equipment required, its voltage rating, number of phases and wires, size, current transformers, and number of input and associated memory are dependent upon the type, size and location of the electric service provided. In situations where power may flow both in and out of the customer's electrical system, power flowing into the customer's electrical system may be measured separately from power flowing out of the customer's electrical system. FE will provide the metering equipment necessary to measure capacity and energy delivered to and from the customer. The customer shall reimburse FE for any costs of the metering including engineering, material and labor. 
(7)  Interconnection study. If FE determines that an interconnection study is necessary, FE shall perform the study under reasonable terms and conditions agreed upon by both the customer and FE, and at the customer's sole expense. No study fee will be charged if the proposed generation site is not on a networked secondary and if all of the following apply: 
a.  Proposed distributed generation equipment is pre-certified. Generation equipment that is less than 20 kW AC shall be considered pre-certified if a UL 1741 listed inverter that also meets IEEE 1547 specifications is used as well as UL 1703 listed photovoltaic (PV) modules. 
b.  Proposed distributed generation system does not expect to export more than 15 percent of total load on the feeder. 
c.  Proposed distributed generation system does not contribute more than 25 percent of the maximum possible short circuit current of the feeder. 
(8)  Protection. The distributed generation facility must have interrupting devices capable of interrupting the maximum available fault current, an interconnection disconnect device, a generator disconnect device, an over-voltage trip, an under-voltage trip, an over/under frequency trip and a manual or automatic synchronizing check (for facilities with standalone capability). Facilities rated over ten kW, three-phase, must also have reverse power sensing and either a ground over-voltage or a ground over-current trip depending on the grounding system. Grounding shall be done in accordance with UL 1741, IEEE 1547 and NEC Article 250. 
(9)  Three-phase generators. 
a.  Synchronous machines. 
1.  The distributed generation facility's circuit breakers shall be three-phase devices with electronic or electromechanical control. 
2.  The customer is solely responsible for proper synchronization of its generator with FE's electric system. 
3.  The excitation system response ratio shall not be less than one-half. 
4.  The generator's excitation system shall conform to the field voltage versus time criteria specified in ANSI Standard C50. 13-1989. 
b.  Induction machines. The induction machines used for generation may be brought up to synchronous speed if it can be demonstrated that the initial voltage drop at the point of interconnection is within the flicker limits specified in this document. 
c.  Inverters. 
1.  Line-commutated inverters do not require synchronizing equipment. 
2.  Self-commutated inverters require synchronizing equipment. 
(10)  Standards. The distributed generation equipment shall be designed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with, but not limited to, ANSI standards, UL standards, IEEE standards, the National Electrical Code, ERCOT Operating Guides and any other applicable local, state or federal codes, statutes, and regulations. In the case of a conflict between the requirements in this section and any of the aforementioned standards, regulations, or codes, this section shall prevail. All distributed generation equipment and their installation plans must be approved by FE prior to installation. 
(c)  Purchases from customer. FE will pay a customer for all the metered kwh output from the customer to the extent such output exceeds the amount of electricity that is consumed by the customer on a monthly basis at the then current distributed generation buy back rate as established in the master fee schedule by, and modified from time to time by, the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0408-001, § 4, 4-8-2014; Ord. No. O-2017-0328-001, § 2, 3-28-2017)  
Sec. 74-95. - Average billing and payment plan for city utilities. 
(a)  Farmersville's average billing and payment plan for city utilities ("program") is available to qualifying residential customers who desire to avoid monthly fluctuations in their utility billings due to seasonal changes; and, who desire to pay the average cost of their annual usage of utilities over a one-year period in 12 equal monthly payments. 
(b)  To participate in the program, all of the following conditions shall be met: 
(1)  The program is available to residential customers for residential consumption only. 
(2)  Residential customers shall submit an application to be considered for participation in the program. 
(3)  Residential customers must have at least 12 months of billing history on their residential account to participate in the program. 
(4)  Current account balance(s) must be zero. 
(5)  No more than two delinquent payments may have occurred during the previous 12-month period. 
(6)  No cut-off notices may have been issued during the previous 12-month period. 
(7)  Residential customers who have not previously had their deposits for city utilities released and all new residential customers shall be required to maintain utility deposits with the city, in such amounts as determined to be sufficient by the city, at all times during their participation in the program. 
(c)  The average monthly billing and payment shall be determined by averaging the total cost of all utilities used by the residential customer during the most recent 12 months of billing history up to and including the date of application. This calculation establishes the amount of the average fixed billing statement ("program billing statement") that will be issued to the residential customer for 12 months (the "program period"). 
(d)  The calculation described in subsection (c) shall be repeated at the end of each program period for each residential customer participating in the program and the program billing statement attributed to the residential customer shall be adjusted up or down to reflect the residential customer's actual usage during the immediately preceding program period. 
(e)  If a residential customer participating in the program uses more or less utility services than reflected in the program billing statement during the program period, the residential customer shall not be obligated to pay the amount of any underpayment or entitled to reimbursement of any overpayment at the end of the then current program period. 
(f)  At the end of each program period, the amount of any residential customer overpayment or underpayment in an expiring program period shall be applied to the calculation of the program billing statement for that residential customer for the following program period. 
(g)  The city shall monitor the balances in each residential customer's account as the program period progresses. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (e), the city manager or designee shall have the authority to request customer payment, administer customer refunds, and/or change the average billing and payment amount in cases where the program billing statement was incorrectly calculated and/or if correctly calculated the customer reserve account balance is improperly funded due to some spike in utility usage by the residential customer. 
(h)  Terms of the program require that all payments shall be made on time. If payments are not received on or before the due date, the residential customer's participation in the program shall be subject to termination. If a residential customer's participation in the program is terminated by the city, the residential customer shall immediately return to an actual usage billing and payment basis for all utilities. The residential customer's utility meters will be read at or about the time of such termination. The residential customer shall be billed for the difference between the actual amount of utilities used during that portion of the program period successfully completed and the estimated average utility usage under the program for which the residential customer was billed prior to termination to the extent that such actual usage exceeds the program's estimated average usage of city utilities for which the residential customer paid during that portion of the program period successfully completed. Any amount of underpayment shall be immediately due and payable and billed to the residential customer during the residential customer's next billing cycle. 
(i)  If a residential customer voluntarily ends their participation in the program or closes one or more of their utility accounts with the city, the residential customer's utility meters will be promptly read and the residential customer shall be billed for the difference between the actual amount of utilities used during that portion of the program period successfully completed and the estimated average utility usage under the program for which the residential customer was billed prior to termination or closure to the extent that such actual usage exceeds the program's estimated average usage of city utilities for which the residential customer paid during that portion of the program period successfully completed. Any amount of underpayment shall be immediately due and payable by the residential customer upon receipt of the city's billing statement. 
(j)  The program shall automatically renew as to any residential customer participating in the program unless the residential customer requests removal from the program at least 30 days prior to the conclusion of the then current program period. 
(k)  The program shall cover and include billing and payments for all of the following utilities: 
(1)  Electric; 
(2)  Water; 
(3)  Sewer; and 
(4)  Refuse. 
(l)  Special one-time fees shall not be included in the program and shall be paid by the residential user in addition to the program billing statement. 
(m)  Program balances are not transferrable between residential customer accounts. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0408-001, § 4, 4-8-2014; Ord. No. 2016-0426-004, § 2, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. O-2016-0510-001, § 2, 5-10-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2016-0510-001, § 2, adopted May 10, 2016, amended § 74-95, to read as set out herein. Previously § 74-95 was titled "Average payment plan."  
Sec. 74-96. - Liens for delinquent utility bills. 
The city manager or his or her designee ("city manager") is hereby authorized to impose a lien against an owner's property for one or more delinquent bills for municipal utility services to the property, unless such property is a protected homestead as described by the Texas Constitution or the property owner(s) notifies the city that the property is used as a rental property prior to the accrual of the delinquent utility bill(s). A lien for delinquent bills for municipal utility services shall be perfected by recording in the real property records of Collin County or Hunt County, as appropriate, a notice of lien that contains (1) a legal description of the property by metes and bounds, by city lot and block description, or by any other adequate description; and (2) the utility account number for the delinquent utility services bill(s). The lien imposed shall include penalties, ten percent per annum interest, and filing fees. Any imposed lien does not satisfy the delinquent utility bills, and the city reserves the right and is authorized to file suit to seek recovery of charges and costs related to the delinquent utility bills in a foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0523-002, § 2, 6-13-2017)  
Sec. 74-97. - Exemption from lien for homestead and rental property; declaration of rental property. 
A lien shall not be imposed against an owner's property if such property is a protected homestead or the property owner(s) provides the city with notice that the property is a rental property through a declaration filed with the city prior to the accrual of the delinquent utility bills. 
The property owner(s) must provide the city with a declaration of rental property identifying the location of the property, indicating that the property is being used as a rental property, the tenant is responsible for payment of utility services provided at the property during the period covered by the lease, and the utility services account has been established in the tenant's name. The declaration must be provided to the city before the tenant begins to receive utility services at the property. Upon payment of the applicable deposit, a property owner(s) can file a declaration of rental property in connection with a tenant already receiving services at a particular property. The declaration of rental property is valid if the tenant has opened a utility account for the water and/or garbage collection services being provided to the property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0523-002, § 2, 6-13-2017)  
Sec. 74-98. - Appeal of lien for delinquent utility bills. 
After the filing of a lien pursuant to the ordinance from which this section is derived, the city manager shall within 30 days of the filing of that lien give the property owner(s) notice in writing that a lien has been filed on the property and inform the owner(s) and account holder of the right to appeal. The property owner(s) or account holder may appeal the decision to impose the lien on that property to the city manager by filing a written appeal within 30 calendar days from the date notice was sent to the property owner(s) or account holder. The city manager shall release the lien if the property owner(s) or account holder provides documentation that the property is a homestead as defined by the Texas Constitution, the property is used as a rental property and the property owner(s) has provided the city with a declaration of rental property prior to the accrual of the delinquent utility bills, or the delinquent utility bill has been paid. The city manager may modify or release the lien to reflect the true amount of the delinquency in payment for services to the property if the owner or account holder provides documentation of the correct amount due to the city. The individual or entity listed on the Collin Central Appraisal District tax records or the Hunt Central Appraisal District tax records, as appropriate, as the owner of the property is presumed to be the owner for purposes of the ordinance from which this section is derived, and the address listed for the owner on the Collin Central Appraisal District tax records or the Hunt Central Appraisal District tax records, as appropriate, shall be presumed to be the address of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0523-002, § 2, 6-13-2017)  
Sec. 74-99. - Release of lien for delinquent utility bills. 
When an individual or entity pays all principal, interest, penalties, and the filing fee of a lien validly filed pursuant to the ordinance from which this section is derived, the city manager shall execute a release of that lien and provide it to the property owner(s). The city manager is not responsible for filing that release with the Collin County property records or the Hunt County property records, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2017-0523-002, § 2, 6-13-2017)  
Secs. 74-100—74-114. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WATER CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-115. - Adoption of water management plan. 
The city council hereby approves and adopts the water management plan, revision c (the "plan"), containing the guidelines and requirements governing the development of water conservation and drought contingency plans for public water suppliers. The plan is attached hereto as exhibit A and is incorporated herein by reference for all purposes allowed by law. A copy of the plan shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 2004, § 11.104; Ord. No. 2016-0209-001, § 2, 2-9-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-0209-001, § 2, adopted February 9, 2016, amended § 74-115 to read as set out herein. Previously § 74-115 was titled "Water conservation plan."  
Sec. 74-116. - Illegal water connections and/or theft of water. 
(a)  A person may not knowingly tamper, connect to, or alter any component of the district's water system including valves, meters, meter boxes, lids, hydrants, lines, pump stations, ground storage tanks, and elevated storage tanks. This shall include direct or indirect efforts to initiate or restore water service without the approval of the district. 
(b)  If, without the written consent of the district, the person knowingly causes, suffers or allows the initiation or restoration of water service to the property after termination of service. For purposes of this section, it shall be assumed that the owner, occupant, or person in control of the property caused, suffered, or allowed the unlawful initiation or restoration of service. 
(c)  A person may not knowingly make or cause a false report to be made to the district of a reading of a water meter installed for metered billing. 
(Code 2004, § 11.104.1)  
Secs. 74-117—74-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION 
 
Sec. 74-146. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air gap means a complete physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel. 
Atmospheric vacuum breaker means an assembly containing an air inlet valve, a check seat, and an air inlet port. The flow of water into the body causes the air inlet valve to close the air inlet port. When the flow of water stops the air inlet valve falls and forms a check against back-siphonage. At the same time, it opens the air inlet port allowing air to enter and satisfy the vacuum. Also known as an atmospheric vacuum breaker back-siphonage prevention assembly. 
Backflow prevention means the mechanical prevention of reverse flow, or back-siphonage, of nonpotable water from an irrigation system into the potable water source. 
Backflow prevention assembly means any assembly used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of assembly used is based on the existing or potential degree of health hazard and backflow condition. 
Completion of irrigation system installation means when the landscape irrigation system has been installed, all minimum standards met, all tests performed, and the irrigator is satisfied that the system is operating correctly. 
Consulting means the act of providing advice, guidance, review or recommendations related to landscape irrigation systems. 
Cross-connection means an actual or potential connection between a potable water source and an irrigation system that may contain contaminates or pollutants or any source of water that has been treated to a lesser degree in the treatment process. 
Design means the act of determining the various elements of a landscape irrigation system that will include, but not be limited to, elements such as collecting site-specific information, defining the scope of the project, defining plant watering needs, selecting and laying out emission devices, locating system components, conducting hydraulics calculations, identifying any local regulatory requirements, or scheduling irrigation work at a site. Completion of the various components will result in an irrigation plan. 
Design pressure means the pressure that is required for an emission device to operate properly. Design pressure is calculated by adding the operating pressure necessary at an emission device to the total of all pressure losses accumulated from an emission device to the water source. 
Double check valve means an assembly that is composed of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closed resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. Also known as a double check valve backflow prevention assembly. 
Emission device means any device that is contained within an irrigation system and that is used to apply water. Common emission devices in an irrigation system include, but are not limited to, spray and rotary sprinkler heads, and drip irrigation emitters. 
Employed means engaged or hired to provide consulting services or perform any activity relating to the sale, design, installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service to irrigation systems. A person is employed if that person is in an employer-employee relationship as defined by Internal Revenue Code, 26 United States Code Service § 3212(d) based on the behavioral control, financial control, and the type of relationship involved in performing employment related tasks. 
Head-to-head spacing means the spacing of spray or rotary heads equal to the manufacturer's published radius of the head. 
Health hazard means a cross-connection or potential cross-connection with an irrigation system that involves any substance that may, if introduced into the potable water supply, cause death or illness, spread disease, or have a high probability of causing such effects. 
Hydraulics means the science of dynamic and static water; the mathematical computation of determining pressure losses and pressure requirements of an irrigation system. 
Installer means a person who actually connects an irrigation system to a private or public raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, who is licensed according to 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations). 
Irrigation inspector means a person who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor and is required to be licensed under 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations). 
Irrigation plan means a scaled drawing of a landscape irrigation system which lists required information, the scope of the project, and represents the changes made in the installation of the irrigation system. 
Irrigation services means selling, designing, installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, servicing, permitting, providing consulting services regarding, or connecting an irrigation system to a water supply. 
Irrigation system means an assembly of component parts that is permanently installed for the controlled distribution and conservation of water to irrigate any type of landscape vegetation in any location, and/or to reduce dust or control erosion. This term does not include a system that is used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 251.002, or connected to a groundwater well used by a property owner for domestic use as defined by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 401.006(e). 
Irrigation technician means a person who works under the supervision of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair, service or supervise installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system in or to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations). 
Irrigation zone means a subdivision of an irrigation system with a matched precipitation rate based on plant material type (such as turf, shrubs, or trees), microclimate factors (such as sun/shade ratio), topographic features (such as slope) and soil conditions (such as sand, loam, clay, or combination) or for hydrological control. 
Irrigator means a person who sells, designs, offers consultations regarding, installs, maintains, alters, repairs, services or supervises the installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations). 
Irrigator-in-charge means the irrigator responsible for all irrigation work performed by an exempt business owner, including, but not limited to obtaining permits, developing design plans, supervising the work of other irrigators or irrigation technicians, and installing, selling, maintaining, altering, repairing, or servicing a landscape irrigation system. 
Landscape irrigation means the science of applying the necessary amount of water to promote or sustain healthy growth of plant material or turf. 
License means an occupational license that is issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) under 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations) to an individual that authorizes the individual to engage in an activity that is covered by 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 30. 
Mainline means a pipe within an irrigation system that delivers water from the water source to the individual zone valves. 
Maintenance checklist means a document made available to the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative that contains information regarding the operation and maintenance of the irrigation system, including, but not limited to: checking and repairing the irrigation system, setting the automatic controller, checking the rain or moisture sensor, cleaning filters, pruning grass and plants away from irrigation emitters, using and operating the irrigation system, the precipitation rates of each irrigation zone within the system, any water conservation measures currently in effect from the water purveyor, the name of the water purveyor, a suggested seasonal or monthly watering schedule based on current evapotranspiration data for the geographic region, and the minimum water requirements for the plant material in each zone based on the soil type and plant material where the system is installed. 
Major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service means any activity that involves opening to the atmosphere the irrigation main line at any point prior to the discharge side of any irrigation zone control valve. This includes, but is not limited to, repairing or connecting into a main supply pipe, replacing a zone control valve, or repairing a zone control valve in a manner that opens the system to the atmosphere. 
Master valve means a remote control valve located after the backflow prevention device that controls the flow of water to the irrigation system mainline. 
Matched precipitation rate means the condition in which all sprinkler heads within an irrigation zone apply water at the same rate. 
New installation means an irrigation system installed at a location where one did not previously exist. 
Non-health hazard means a cross-connection or potential cross-connection from a landscape irrigation system that involves any substance that generally would not be a health hazard but would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable if introduced into the potable water supply. 
Non-potable water means water that is not suitable for human consumption. Non-potable water sources include, but are not limited to, irrigation systems, lakes, ponds, streams, gray water that is discharged from washing machines, dishwashers or other appliances, water vapor condensate from cooling towers, reclaimed water, and harvested rainwater. 
Pass-through contract means a written contract between a contractor or builder and a licensed irrigator or exempt business owner to perform part or all of the irrigation services relating to an irrigation system. 
Potable water means a water that is suitable for human consumption. 
Pressure vacuum breaker means an assembly containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. Also known as a pressure vacuum breaker back-siphonage prevention assembly. 
Reclaimed water means domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated to a quality suitable for beneficial use, such as landscape irrigation. 
Records of landscape irrigation activities means the irrigation plans, contracts, warranty information, invoices, copies of permits, and other documents that relate to the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of a landscape irrigation system. 
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly means an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves and below the first check valve. 
Static water pressure means the pressure of water when it is not moving. 
Supervision means the on-the-job oversight and direction by a licensed irrigator who is fulfilling his or her professional responsibility to the client and/or employer in compliance with local or state requirements. Also a licensed installer working under the direction of a licensed irrigator or, beginning January 1, 2009, an irrigation technician who is working under the direction of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair or service an irrigation system. 
Water conservation means the design, installation, service, and operation of an irrigation system in a manner that prevents the waste of water, promotes the most efficient use of water, and applies the least amount of water that is required to maintain healthy individual plant material or turf, reduce dust, and control erosion. 
Zone flow means a measurement, in gallons per minute or gallons per hour, of the actual flow of water through a zone valve, calculated by individually opening each zone valve and obtaining a valid reading after the pressure has stabilized. For design purposes, the zone flow is the total flow of all nozzles in the zone at a specific pressure. 
Zone valve means an automatic valve that controls a single zone of a landscape irrigation system.  
Sec. 74-147. - Valid license required. 
(a)  Any person who connects an irrigation system to the water supply within the city must hold a valid license, as defined by 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 30, and required by V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1903. 
(b)  Exception. A property owner is not required to be licensed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1903.002(c)(1), if he or she is performing irrigation work in a building or on a premises owned or occupied by the person as the person's own residence. A home or property owner who installs an irrigation system must meet the standards contained in 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 344 regarding spacing, water pressure, spraying water over impervious materials, rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology, and isolation valves. The city may, at any point, adopt more stringent requirements for a home or property owner who installs an irrigation system.  
Sec. 74-148. - Permit required. 
Any person installing an irrigation system connected to the city's water system is required to obtain a permit from the city, which permit will remain valid for six months from the date of issuance. If completion and written request for city inspection of irrigation system installation, as provided in this division, are not both performed within six months, then permit renewal will be required. Any plan approved for a permit must be in compliance with the requirements of this division. If the permit includes installation of a new water meter, then a utility impact and other fees may be required under this chapter. Such permits and approvals as are required under this division may be obtained from the city manager, or his designated representative.  
Sec. 74-149. - Backflow prevention methods and devices. 
(a)  Any irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply must be connected through a backflow prevention method approved by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). The backflow prevention device must be approved by the American Society of Sanitary Engineers; or the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California; or the city plumbing code; or any other laboratory that has equivalent capabilities for both the laboratory and field evaluation of backflow prevention assemblies, as determined by the building official. The backflow prevention device must be installed in accordance with the laboratory-approved standards or, if the laboratory does not include specific installation information, the manufacturer's current published recommendations. 
(b)  If conditions exist that present a health hazard, one of the following methods must be used to prevent backflow: 
(1)  An air gap may be used if: 
a.  There is an unobstructed physical separation; and 
b.  The distance from the lowest point of the water supply outlet to the flood rim of the fixture or assembly into which the outlet discharges is at least one inch or twice the diameter of the water supply outlet, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies may be used if: 
a.  The device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above ground in a location that will ensure that the assembly will not be submerged; and 
b.  Drainage is provided for any water that may be discharged through the assembly relief valve. 
(3)  Pressure vacuum breakers may be used if: 
a.  No back-pressure condition will occur; and 
b.  The device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above any downstream piping and the highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the top of the sprinkler. 
(4)  Atmospheric vacuum breakers may be used if: 
a.  No back-pressure will be present; 
b.  There are no shutoff valves downstream from the atmospheric vacuum breaker; 
c.  The device is installed at a minimum of six inches above any downstream piping and the highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the top of the sprinkler; 
d.  There is no continuous pressure on the supply side of the atmospheric vacuum breaker for more than 12 hours in any 24-hour period; and 
e.  A separate atmospheric vacuum breaker is installed on the discharge side of each irrigation control valve, between the valve and all the emission devices that the valve controls. 
(c)  Backflow prevention devices used in applications designated as health hazards must be tested upon installation and annually thereafter. 
(d)  If there are no conditions that present a health hazard, double check valve backflow prevention assemblies may be used to prevent backflow if the device is tested upon installation, and: 
(1)  Backpressure caused by an elevation of pressure in the discharge piping by pump, or elevation of piping above the supply pressure which could cause a reversal of the normal flow of water or back-siphonage conditions caused by a reduced or negative pressure in the irrigation system, exist; and 
(2)  Test cocks are used for testing only. 
(e)  If a double check valve is installed below ground: 
(1)  Test cocks must be plugged, except when the double check valve is being tested; 
(2)  Test cock plugs must be threaded, water-tight, and made of non-ferrous material; 
(3)  A Y-type strainer is installed on the inlet side of the double check valve; 
(4)  There must be a clearance between any fill material and the bottom of the double check valve to allow space for testing and repair; and 
(5)  There must be space on the side of the double check valve to test and repair the double check valve. 
(f)  If an irrigation system is connected to a potable water supply through a double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, or reduced pressure principle backflow assembly and includes an automatic master valve on the system, the automatic master valve must be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention assembly. 
(g)  The irrigator shall ensure the backflow prevention device is tested prior to being placed in service, and the test results shall be provided to the city and to the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative within ten business days of testing of the backflow prevention device.  
Sec. 74-150. - Specific conditions and cross-connection control. 
(a)  Before any chemical is added to an irrigation system connected to the potable water supply, the irrigation system must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or air gap. 
(b)  Connection of any additional water source to an irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply can only be done if the irrigation system is connected to the potable water supply through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or an air gap. 
(c)  Irrigation system components with chemical additives induced by aspiration, injection, or emission system connected to any potable water supply must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow device. 
(d)  If an irrigation system is designed or installed on a property that is served by an on-site sewage facility, as defined in 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 285, then: 
(1)  All irrigation piping and valves must meet the separation distances from the on-site sewage facility system as required for a private water line in 30 Tex. Admin. Code § 285.91(10); 
(2)  Any connections using a private or public potable water source that is not the city's potable water system must be connected to the water source through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly as defined in 30 Tex. Admin. Code § 344.50; and 
(3)  Any water from the irrigation system that is applied to the surface of the area utilized by the on-site sewage facility system must be controlled on a separate irrigation zone or zones so as to allow complete control of any irrigation to that area so that there will not be excess water that would prevent the on-site sewage facility system from operating effectively.  
Sec. 74-151. - Water conservation. 
All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, altered, repaired, serviced, and operated in a manner that will promote water conservation as defined in this chapter.  
Sec. 74-152. - Irrigation plan design: minimum standards. 
(a)  A licensed irrigator shall prepare an irrigation plan for each site where a new irrigation system will be installed. A paper or electronic copy of the irrigation plan must be on the job site at all times during the installation of the irrigation system. A drawing showing the actual installation of the system is to be provided to each irrigation system owner after all new irrigation system installations. During the installation of the irrigation system, variances from the original irrigation plan may be authorized by the licensed irrigator if the variance from the irrigation plan does not: 
(1)  Diminish the operational integrity of the irrigation system; 
(2)  Violate any requirements of this division; and 
(3)  Go unnoted in red on the irrigation plan. 
(b)  The irrigation plan must include 100 percent coverage of the area to be irrigated. If a system does not provide 100 percent coverage of the area to be irrigated, it must be noted on the irrigation plan. 
(c)  All irrigation plans used for construction must be drawn to scale. The plan must include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The irrigator's seal, signature, and date of signing; 
(2)  All major physical features and the boundaries of the areas to be watered; 
(3)  A north arrow; 
(4)  A legend; 
(5)  The zone flow measurement for each zone; 
(6)  Location and type of each: 
a.  Controller; 
b.  Sensor (for example, but not limited to, rain, moisture, wind, flow, or freeze); 
(7)  Location, type, and size of each: 
a.  Water source, such as, but not limited to a water meter and points of connection; 
b.  Backflow prevention device; 
c.  Water emission device, including, but not limited to, spray heads, rotary sprinkler heads, quick-couplers, bubblers, drip, or micro-sprays; 
d.  Valve, including but not limited to, zone valves, master valves, and isolation valves; 
e.  Pressure regulation component; and 
f.  Main line and lateral piping; 
(8)  The scale used; and 
(9)  The design pressure.  
Sec. 74-153. - Design and installation: minimum requirements. 
(a)  No irrigation design or installation shall require the use of any component, including the water meter, in a way which exceeds the manufacturer's published performance limitations for the component. 
(b)  Spacing. 
(1)  The maximum spacing between emission devices must not exceed the manufacturer's published radius or spacing of the devices. The radius or spacing is determined by referring to the manufacturer's published specifications for a specific emission device at a specific operating pressure allowing for 100 percent coverage. 
(2)  New irrigation systems shall not utilize above-ground spray emission devices in landscapes that are less than 48 inches, not including the impervious surfaces, in either length or width and which contain impervious pedestrian or vehicular traffic surfaces along two or more perimeters. If pop-up sprays or rotary sprinkler heads are used in a new irrigation system, the sprinkler heads must direct flow away from any adjacent surface and shall not be installed closer than four inches from a hardscape, such as, but not limited to, a building foundation, fence, concrete, asphalt, pavers, or stones set with mortar. 
(3)  Narrow paved walkways, jogging paths, golf cart paths or other small areas located in cemeteries, parks, golf courses or other public areas may be exempted from this requirement by the irrigation inspector if the runoff drains into a landscaped area. 
(c)  Water pressure. Emission devices must be installed to operate at the minimum and not above the maximum sprinkler head pressure as published by the manufacturer for the nozzle and head spacing that is used. Methods to achieve the water pressure requirements include, but are not limited to, flow control valves, a pressure regulator, or pressure compensating spray heads. 
(d)  Piping. Piping in irrigation systems must be designed and installed so that the flow of water in the pipe will not exceed a velocity of five feet per second for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe. 
(e)  Irrigation zones. Irrigation systems shall have separate zones based on plant material type, microclimate factors, topographic features, soil conditions, and hydrological requirements. 
(f)  Matched precipitation rate. Zones must be designed and installed so that all of the emission devices in that zone irrigate at the same precipitation rate. 
(g)  Irrigation systems shall not spray water over surfaces made of concrete, asphalt, brick, wood, stones set with mortar, or any other impervious material, such as, but not limited to, walls, fences, sidewalks, streets, etc. 
(h)  A master valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention device on all new installations. 
(i)  PVC pipe primer solvent. All new irrigation systems that are installed using PVC pipe and fittings shall be primed with a colored primer prior to applying the PVC cement in accordance with the city plumbing code. 
(j)  Isolation valve. All new irrigation systems must include a lockable isolation valve between the water meter and the backflow prevention device. 
(k)  Depth coverage of piping. Piping in all irrigation systems must be installed according to the manufacturer's published specifications for depth coverage of piping. 
(1)  If the manufacturer has not published specifications for depth coverage of piping, the piping must be installed to provide minimum depth coverage of six inches of select backfill, between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil. All portions of the irrigation system that fail to meet this standard must be noted on the irrigation plan. If the area being irrigated has rock at a depth of six inches or less, select backfill may be mounded over the pipe. Mounding must be noted on the irrigation plan and discussed with the irrigation system owner or owner's representative to address any safety issues. 
(2)  If a utility, man-made structure or roots create an unavoidable obstacle, which makes the six-inch depth coverage requirement impractical, the piping shall be installed to provide a minimum of two inches of select backfill between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil. 
(3)  All trenches and holes created during installation of an irrigation system must be backfilled and compacted to the original grade. 
(l)  Wiring irrigation systems. 
(1)  Underground electrical wiring used to connect an automatic controller to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be listed by Underwriters Laboratories as acceptable for burial underground; 
(2)  Electrical wiring that connects any electrical components of an irrigation system must be sized according to the manufacturer's recommendation; 
(3)  Electrical wire splices which may be exposed to moisture must be waterproof as certified by the wire splice manufacturer; and 
(4)  Underground electrical wiring that connects an automatic controller to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be buried with a minimum of six inches of select backfill. 
(m)  Water contained within the piping of an irrigation system is deemed to be non-potable. No drinking or domestic water usage, such as, but not limited to, filling swimming pools or decorative fountains, shall be connected to an irrigation system. If a hose bib (an outdoor water faucet that has hose threads on the spout) is connected to an irrigation system for the purpose of providing supplemental water to an area, the hose bib must be installed using a quick coupler key on a quick coupler installed in a covered purple valve box and the hose bib and any hoses connected to the bib must be labeled "non-potable, not safe for drinking." An isolation valve must be installed upstream of a quick coupler connecting a hose bib to an irrigation system. 
(n)  Either a licensed irrigator or a licensed irrigation technician shall be on site at all times while the landscape irrigation system is being installed. When an irrigator is not on site, the irrigator shall be responsible for ensuring that a licensed irrigation technician is on site to supervise the installation of the irrigation system.  
Sec. 74-154. - Completion of irrigation system installation. 
Upon completion of the irrigation system, the irrigator or irrigation technician who provided supervision for the on-site installation shall be required to complete four items: 
(1)  A final "walk through" with the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative to explain the operation of the system; 
(2)  A maintenance checklist on which the irrigator or irrigation technician shall obtain the signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative and who shall sign, date, and seal the checklist. If the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative is unwilling or unable to sign the maintenance checklist, the irrigator shall note the time and date of the refusal on the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative's signature line. The irrigation system owner or owner's representative will be given the original maintenance checklist and a duplicate copy of the maintenance checklist shall be maintained by the irrigator. The items on the maintenance checklist shall include but are not limited to: 
a.  The manufacturer's manual for the automatic controller, if the system is automatic; 
b.  The number and labeling of all zones shall be listed, and a copy of this list shall be placed within the controller; 
c.  A seasonal (spring, summer, fall, winter) watering schedule based on either current/real time evapotranspiration or monthly historical reference evapotranspiration (historical ET) data, monthly effective rainfall estimates, plant landscape coefficient factors, and site factors; 
d.  A list of components, such as the nozzle, or pump filters, and other such components that require maintenance and the recommended frequency for the service; and 
e.  The statement, "This irrigation system has been installed in accordance with all applicable state and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders. I have tested the system and determined that it has been installed according to the Irrigation Plan and is properly adjusted for the most efficient application of water at this time." 
(3)  A permanent sticker which contains the irrigator's name, license number, company name, telephone number and the dates of the warranty period shall be affixed to each automatic controller installed by the irrigator or irrigation technician. If the irrigation system is manual, the sticker shall be affixed to the original maintenance checklist. The information contained on the sticker must be printed with waterproof ink and include the irrigation plan indicating the actual installation of the system; and 
(4)  The irrigation plan indicating the actual installation of the system must be provided to the irrigation system's owner or owner representative.  
Sec. 74-155. - Maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of irrigation systems. 
(a)  The irrigator is responsible for all work that the irrigator performed during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system during the warranty period. The irrigator or business owner is not responsible for the professional negligence of any other irrigator who subsequently conducts any irrigation service on the same irrigation system. 
(b)  All trenches and holes created during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system must be returned to the original grade with compacted select backfill. 
(c)  Colored PVC pipe primer solvent must be used on all pipes and fittings used in the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system in accordance with the city plumbing code. 
(d)  When maintenance, alteration, repair or service of an irrigation system involves excavation work at the water meter or backflow prevention device, an isolation valve shall be installed, if an isolation valve is not present.  
Sec. 74-156. - Reclaimed water. 
Reclaimed water may be utilized in landscape irrigation systems if: 
(1)  There is no direct contact with edible crops, unless the crop is pasteurized before consumption; 
(2)  The irrigation system does not spray water across property lines that do not belong to the irrigation system's owner; 
(3)  The irrigation system is installed using purple components; 
(4)  The domestic potable water line is connected using an air gap or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, in accordance with 30 Tex. Admin. Code § 290.47(i). 
(5)  A minimum of an eight-inch by eight-inch sign, in English and Spanish, is prominently posted on/in the area that is being irrigated, that reads, "RECLAIMED WATER—DO NOT DRINK" and "AGUA DE RECUPERACIÓN—NO BEBER"; and 
(6)  Backflow prevention on the reclaimed water supply line shall be in accordance with the city's plumbing code.  
Sec. 74-157. - Duties and responsibilities of city irrigation inspectors. 
A licensed irrigation inspector shall enforce this division, and shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Verifying that the appropriate permits have been obtained for an irrigation system and that the irrigator and installer or irrigation technician, if applicable, are licensed; 
(2)  Inspecting the irrigation system; 
(3)  Determining that the irrigation system complies with the requirements of this division; 
(4)  Determining that the appropriate backflow prevention device was installed, tested, and test results provided to the city; 
(5)  Investigating complaints related to irrigation system installation, maintenance, alteration, repairs, or service of an irrigation system and advertisement of irrigation services; and 
(6)  Maintaining records according to this division.  
Sec. 74-158. - Items not covered by this division. 
Any irrigation item not covered by this division and required by law shall be governed by the Texas Occupations Code, the Texas Water Code, 30 Tex. Admin. Code, and any other applicable state statute or Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) rule.  
Sec. 74-159. - Fees. 
A schedule of fees for obtaining and renewing an irrigation permit, in amounts sufficient to cover the city's costs in issuing and renewing said permits, including, but not limited to, staff time and other overhead costs, will be maintained by the chief building official. Notwithstanding the above, a plan review fee for residential irrigation plans and a fee for commercial irrigation plans, as set forth in the master fee schedule in appendix A of this Code, shall be paid upon the initial submission and upon any re-submission of said plans to the city in accordance with this division.  
Sec. 74-160. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this division. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this division, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of this division is declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this division shall, upon conviction, be subject to a misdemeanor fine. Each day that a provision of this division is violated shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under this division is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine up to $2,000.00. 
(c)  Nothing in this division shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this division and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates this division or to require specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with this division; and 
(2)  Other available relief.  
Secs. 74-161—74-174. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RETAIL WATER PURCHASERS 
 
Sec. 74-175. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aesthetic water use means water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools and water gardens. 
Commercial and institutional water use means water use which is integral to the operations of commercial and non-profit establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants and office buildings. 
Conservation means those practices, techniques and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses. 
Customer means any person, company or organization using retail water supplied by the city. 
Domestic water use means water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, or sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry or institution. 
Even-numbered address means street addresses, box numbers or rural postal route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8 and locations without addresses. 
Industrial water use means the use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms having greater usability and value. 
Landscape irrigation use means water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, rights-of-way, and medians. 
Nonessential water use means water uses that are not essential or required for the protection of public health, safety and welfare, including: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic fields and golf courses, except as otherwise provided under this plan; 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane, or other vehicle; 
(3)  Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas; 
(4)  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(5)  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; 
(6)  Use of water to fill, refill or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or jacuzzi-type pools; 
(7)  Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to support aquatic life; 
(8)  Failure to repair a controllable leak within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak, and use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than firefighting. 
Odd-numbered address means street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7 or 9. 
(Code 2004, § 11.105.8)  
Sec. 74-176. - Purpose. 
(a)  The city council recognizes that the amount of water available to the city and its retail water customers is limited and subject to depletion during periods of extended drought; 
(b)  The city council recognizes that natural limitations due to drought conditions and other acts of God cannot guarantee an uninterrupted water supply for all purposes; 
(c)  The state water code and the regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) require that the city adopt a drought contingency plan; 
(d)  The city has determined an urgent need in the best interest of the public to adopt a drought contingency plan; 
(e)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54, the city is authorized to adopt such ordinances as are necessary to preserve and conserve its water resources. 
(Code 2004, § 11.105.1)  
Sec. 74-177. - Adoption of water management plan. 
The city council hereby approves and adopts the water management plan (the "plan"), as if recited verbatim herein. The city commits to implement the requirements and procedures set forth in the adopted plan. 
(Code 2004, § 11.105.2; Ord. No. 2004-41, 10-12-2004; Ord. No. 2009-15, § 2, 8-25-2009; Ord. No. O-2012-0508-001, § 2, 5-8-2012; Ord. No. O-2012-0626-001, § 2, 6-26-2012; Ord. No. O-2013-0709-001, § 2, 7-9-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2013-0709-001, § 2, adopted July 9, 2013, amended § 74-177 to read as set out herein. Previously § 74-177 was titled adoption of drought contingency and water emergency response plan.  
Sec. 74-178. - Declaration of policy, purpose and intent. 
(a)  In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, fire protection and to protect and preserve public health, welfare and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the city adopts the regulations and restrictions described in subsection (b) of this section on the delivery and consumption of water by retail customers. 
(b)  Water uses regulated or prohibited under the drought contingency plan (the "plan") are considered to be nonessential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply conditions is deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender to penalties as defined in section 74-188. 
(Code 2004, § 11.105.3)  
Sec. 74-179. - Public education. 
The city will periodically provide the public with information about the plan, including information about the conditions under which each plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by means of press releases or utility bill inserts. 
(Code 2004, § 11.105.4)  
Sec. 74-180. - Coordination with regional water planning groups. 
The city's service area is located within region C and the city will provide a copy of this plan to the region C water planning group. 
(Code 2004, § 11.105.5)  
Sec. 74-181. - Authorization. 
Upon approval of the governing body, the city manager, or his designee, is authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The city manager, or his designee, shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply emergency response measures described in this plan. 
(Code 2004, § 11.105.6)  
Sec. 74-182. - Application. 
The provisions of this plan shall apply to all city retail water purchasers. 
(Code 2004, § 11.105.7)  
Sec. 74-183. - Implementation. 
(a)  When conditions defined by the drought contingency plan are present, the city council, in consultation with the city manager, may authorize drought condition operations to commence for all its residential retail water customers. 
(b)  Public notification of the initiation or termination of drought response stages shall be by means of signs posted in public places and publication in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(c)  Once the authorization has been given, operations shall continue under the plan, with progression from one stage to another as determined by the city manager or his designee according to the appropriate trigger conditions. Operations may be returned to normal procedures once the trigger conditions have dissipated and by authorization of the city manager or his designee. 
(d)  Wholesale water contracts entered into or renewed, including contract extensions, after adoption of the plan shall include the following verbiage: "In case of a shortage of water resulting from drought, the water to be distributed shall be divided in accordance with V.T.C.A., Water Code § 11.039. 
(Code 2004, § 11.105.9; Ord. No. 2005-49, 10-11-2005)  
Sec. 74-184. - Stages of rationing. 
(a)  Drought conditions will be monitored by the city's wholesale supplier, which will keep the city informed and advise it when each stage of drought conditions occur and should be implemented. 
(b)  Unless there is an immediate extreme reduction in water production, to declare an emergency or severe condition, the utility must initially declare stage I rationing. If, after a reasonable period of time, demand is not reduced enough to alleviate outages, stage II may be declared with stages III, IV and V following if necessary. These stages of rationing are described as follows: 
(1)  Stage I: Mild drought conditions. Hours of use are restricted. Outside watering is allowed daily only during periods described in the notices posted or published. 
(2)  Stage II: Moderate rationing conditions. All outdoor water usage is prohibited except by handheld hoses with manual turn-on/off nozzles. Livestock watering is exempt. 
(3)  Stage III: Severe rationing conditions. All outdoor water usage is prohibited; livestock may be exempted by the utility. All consumption may also be limited to each customer by determining an average of the customer's winter months' average to be uniformly applied on a system-wide basis, each customer being notified of this average amount. 
(4)  Stage IV: Critical water shortage conditions. Customers will be required to comply with the requirements and restriction on certain nonessential water uses as described in Section V of this plan. 
(5)  Stage V: Emergency water shortage conditions. Customers will be required to comply with requirements and restrictions when the city manager, or his designee, determines that a water supply emergency exists based on: 
a.  Major water line breaks or pump or system failures occur which cause unprecedented loss of capability to provide water service; or 
b.  Natural or manmade contamination of the water supply. 
(Code 2004, § 11.105.10)  
Sec. 74-185. - Rationing for master-metered multifamily residential customers. 
Under rationing stages III, IV and V, the allocation to a customer billed from a master meter which supplies water to multiple permanent residential dwellings (e.g., apartments, mobile homes) shall be allocated 3,000 gallons per month for each dwelling unit. A dwelling unit may be claimed under this provision whether or not it is occupied. 
(Code 2004, § 11.105.11)  
Sec. 74-186. - Rationing for commercial customers. 
A monthly water usage allocation shall be established by the city manager, or his designee, for each nonresidential commercial customer other than an industrial customer who uses water for processing purposes. The nonresidential customer's allocation shall be based on the average monthly consumption for the past 12 months. If 12 months' history is not available, the average will be based on an average of the monthly history available. The city manager, or his designee, shall give his best effort to see that notice of each nonresidential customer's allocation is mailed to such customer. If, however, a customer does not receive such notice, it shall be the customer's responsibility to contact the city to determine the allocation. Upon request of the customer or the initiative of the city manager, or his designee, the allocation may be reduced or increased if the designated period does not accurately reflect the customer's normal water usage. A customer may appeal an allocation established under this section to the city council. 
(Code 2004, § 11.105.12)  
Sec. 74-187. - Rationing for industrial customers. 
A monthly water usage allocation shall be established by the city manager, or his designee, for each industrial customer who uses water for processing purposes. The industrial customer's water usage baseline will be computed on the average water usage for the 12-month period ending prior to the date of implementation of stage II of the plan. If the industrial water customer's billing history is shorter than 12 months, the monthly average for the period for which there is a record shall be used for computing an average usage. The city manager, or his designee, shall give his best effort to see that notice of each industrial customer's allocation is mailed to such customer. If, however, a customer does not receive such notice, it shall be the customer's responsibility to contact the city to determine the allocation, and the allocation shall be fully effective, notwithstanding the lack of receipt of written notice. Upon request of the customer or at the initiative of the city manager, or his designee, the allocation may be reduced or increased. A customer may appeal an allocation established under this section to the city council. 
(Code 2004, § 11.105.13)  
Sec. 74-188. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly allow the use of water from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, public, wholesale or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this plan, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the water emergency response stage in effect at the time, pursuant to action taken by the city manager, or his designee, in accordance with provisions of this plan. In addition to all other penalties authorized by this chapter, the city manager is specifically hereby authorized to issue civil penalties to those persons using water in violation of the plan. 
(b)  Mandatory water use restrictions shall be imposed in stage 2, stage 3 and stage 4 drought contingency and water emergency response stages as defined in the water management plan. The civil penalties associated with the mandatory water use restrictions are stated below: 
1 st Issue 	Warning 
1 st Offense per calendar year 	$50.00 
2 nd Offense per calendar year 	$100.00 
3 rd Offense per calendar year 	$200.00 
4 th Offense per calendar year 	$400.00 
 
Civil penalties will be applied to the next occurring water bill and made part of the water bill which will include late fees and can require service to be disconnected. 
Watering with an irrigation system or sprinkler is allowed twice a week on Mondays and Thursdays from 6:00 p.m. to 10:00 a.m. as designated watering dates. Any other days of the week used for watering landscaping by an irrigation system or sprinkler is not consistent with the water management plan and thereby constitutes the process of violation of the water management plan. 
(c)  When water emergency response stage 4 has been implemented, irrigation of new landscaping using treated water is prohibited. As such, new construction where a landscape plan has been approved will be placed on hold until such time that stage 4 restrictions have been lifted. The city shall agree to accept escrow deposits in lieu of landscaping construction due to stage 4 drought conditions. The property owner or developer shall deposit in escrow with the city an amount equal to 120 percent of the costs of design, construction, permits, reviews and approvals, inspections, insurance, and any additional costs incurred for the installation of landscaping. The escrow deposit shall be a non-interest bearing line item within the city's accounting. Once the escrow has been successfully arranged, the property owner/developer may proceed with attaining the certificate of occupancy. Once water emergency response stage 4 has been lifted, landscaping that was placed on hold may then be installed. Any remaining funds after the landscaping has been installed and inspected shall be returned to the property owner/developer. 
(d)  Any person who violates this plan is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 and not more than $2,000.00. Each day that one or more of the provisions in this plan is violated shall constitute a separate offence. If a person is convicted of three or more distinct violations of this plan, the city manager, or his designee, shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a reconnection charge as established from time to time in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A, plus any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given the city that the same action shall not be repeated while the plan is in effect. Compliance with this plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in the district court. 
(e)  Any person, including a person classified as a city water customer, in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the violation occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in apparent control of the property committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that he did not commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor children, and proof that a violation committed by a child occurred on property within the parents' control shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation, but any such parent may be excused if he proves that he had previously directed the child not to use the water as it was used in violation of this plan, and that the parent could not have reasonably known of the violation. 
(Code 2004, § 11.105.14; Ord. No. 2004-25, 8-10-2004; Ord. No. O-2012-0626-001, § 4, 6-26-2012)  
Sec. 74-189. - Variances. 
(a)  The city manager, or his designee, may grant temporary variances for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this plan if it is determined that failure to grant such a variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or person requesting such variance, and if one or more of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect. 
(2)  Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use. 
(b)  Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this plan shall file a petition for variance with the city within five days after the plan or a particular drought response stage has been invoked. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the city manager, or his designee, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the petitioner. 
(2)  Purpose of water use. 
(3)  Specific provisions of the plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief. 
(4)  Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this plan. 
(5)  Description of the relief requested. 
(6)  Period of time for which the variance is sought. 
(7)  Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date. 
(8)  Other pertinent information. 
(c)  Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the following conditions unless waived or modified by the city manager, or his designee: 
(1)  Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance. 
(2)  Variances granted shall expire when the plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirements. 
(d)  No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring prior to the issuance of a variance. 
(Code 2004, § 11.105.15; Res. No. 99-23, 11-16-1999)  
Secs. 74-190—74-216. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISCHARGES 
 
Sec. 74-217. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approving authority means the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20 degrees centigrade. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called house lateral and house connection). 
COD (chemical oxygen demand) means measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
Control manhole means a manhole providing access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Control point means a point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, processing, storage, and sale of food products and produce. 
Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater. 
Industrial waste charge means the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewerage system. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio. The milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 0.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Normal domestic wastewater means wastewater, excluding industrial wastewater, discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 300 mg/l and BOD is not more than 250 mg/l. 
Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
pH means the reciprocal of the logarithm (base-10) of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in grams per liter. 
Public sewer means pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the city. 
Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of time longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Storm sewer means a public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Stormwater means rainfall or any other form of precipitation. 
Superintendent means the city's water and wastewater superintendent or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
Suspended solids means solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
To discharge means to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
Trap means a device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
Unpolluted wastewater means water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease or oil; 
(2)  No acids or alkalis; 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution; 
(5)  No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous solids and paces; 
(6)  Not more than ten (7.0) mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD; and 
(7)  Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the Platinum-Cobalt method of determination as specified in the Standard Methods. 
Waste means rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural, or industrial activities. 
Wastewater means a combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with any ground, surface, and storm water that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
Wastewater service charge means the charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater. 
Wastewater treatment plant means any city-owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludge from the sanitary sewers. 
Watercourse means a natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.1)  
Sec. 74-218. - Penalty. 
(a)  A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine of not more than provided in section 1-3 for each act of violation and for each day of violation. 
(b)  In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other Code provisions against a person continuing prohibited discharges. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.26)  
Sec. 74-219. - Regulating the discharge of industrial wastes into the sanitary sewers. 
The city has provided facilities for the collection and treatment of wastewater to promote the health, safety, and convenience of its people and for the safeguarding of water resources common to all, and provision has been made in the design, construction and operation of such facilities to accommodate certain types and quantities of industrial wastes in addition to normal wastewater, and it is the obligation of the producers of industrial waste to defray the costs of the wastewater treatment services rendered by the city in an equitable manner and, insofar as it is practicable, in proportion to benefits derived, and protection of the quality of the effluent and proper operation of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities and quality of effluent may require either the exclusion, pretreatment, or controlled discharge at the point of origin of certain types or quantities of industrial wastes. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108)  
Sec. 74-220. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  All discharges shall conform to the requirements of this article. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.2)  
Sec. 74-221. - Chemical discharges. 
(a)  No discharge to public sewers may contain: 
(1)  Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l; 
(2)  Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply; 
(3)  Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l; 
(4)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or 
(5)  Substances causing excessive chemical oxygen demand (COD). 
(b)  No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain: 
(1)  Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(2)  Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Centigrade); 
(3)  Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials; or 
(4)  Noxious, toxic, or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of section 74-220(a). 
(c)  No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel at the wastewater facilities. 
(d)  All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste- and odor-producing substances shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.3)  
Sec. 74-222. - Heavy metals and toxic materials. 
(a)  No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than the amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals stated in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with standard methods, are: 
Arsenic 	0.05 mg/l 
Barium 	5.0 mg/l 
Boron 	1.0 mg/l 
Cadmium 	1.0 mg/l 
Chromium (total) 	5.0 mg/l 
Copper 	1.0 mg/l 
Lead 	0.1 mg/l 
Manganese 	1.0 mg/l 
Mercury 	0.005 mg/l 
Nickel 	1.0 mg/l 
Selenium 	0.02 mg/l 
Silver 	0.1 mg/l 
Zinc 	5.0 mg/l 
 
(c)  No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable provisions. 
(d)  Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Antimony; 
(2)  Beryllium; 
(3)  Bismuth; 
(4)  Cobalt; 
(5)  Molybdenum; 
(6)  Tin; 
(7)  Uranium; 
(8)  Rhenium; 
(9)  Strontium; 
(10)  Tellurium; 
(11)  Herbicides; 
(12)  Fungicides; and 
(13)  Pesticides. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.4)  
Sec. 74-223. - Discharge of garbage prohibited. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half inch in dimension are prohibited. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-quarters horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.5)  
Sec. 74-224. - Discharge of stormwater and other unpolluted drainage prohibited. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers: 
(1)  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage; 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water; 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process waters; and 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage. 
(b)  In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act and other statutes, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.6)  
Sec. 74-225. - Maximum discharge temperature. 
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Centigrade), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.7)  
Sec. 74-226. - Discharge of radioactive wastes prohibited. 
(a)  No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving authority. 
(b)  The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for the discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.8)  
Sec. 74-227. - Impairment of facilities; prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstruction to the flow in sewers; 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities; or 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited by this section include, but are not limited to, materials which exert or cause concentrations of: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l including, but not limited to: 
a.  Fuller's earth; 
b.  Lime slurries; and 
c.  Lime residues; 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than 7.0 mg/l including, but not limited to: 
a.  Sodium chloride; and 
b.  Sodium sulfate; 
(3)  Excessive discoloration including, but not limited to: 
a.  Dye wastes; and 
b.  Vegetable tanning solutions; or 
(4)  BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(c)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease handling equipment; 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes, due to the nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action; or 
(4)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which is: 
(1)  Not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or 
(2)  Amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or 
(4)  Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
(f)  No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size. These include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Ashes; 
(2)  Cinders; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Mud; 
(5)  Straw; 
(6)  Shavings; 
(7)  Metal; 
(8)  Glass; 
(9)  Rags; 
(10)  Feathers; 
(11)  Tar; 
(12)  Plastics; 
(13)  Wood; 
(14)  Unground garbage; 
(15)  Whole blood; 
(16)  Paunch manure; 
(17)  Hair and fleshing; 
(18)  Entrails; 
(19)  Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(20)  Slops; 
(21)  Chemical residues; 
(22)  Paint residues; or 
(23)  Bulk solids. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.9)  
Sec. 74-228. - Compliance with existing authority. 
(a)  Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging: 
(1)  Wastewater; 
(2)  Industrial waste; 
(3)  Polluted liquids; or 
(4)  Unpolluted waters or liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the Texas Water Quality Board, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property in or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet; 
(2)  Watercourse; 
(3)  Storm sewer; or 
(4)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  The approving authority shall verify, prior to discharge, that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, articles, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.10)  
Sec. 74-229. - Approving authority requirements. 
(a)  If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, create a hazard to life or health, or create a public nuisance, the approving authority shall require: 
(1)  Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(2)  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and 
(3)  Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The approving authority shall reject wastes when: 
(1)  It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  The discharger does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.11)  
Sec. 74-230. - Approving authority review and approval. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and installation of equipment and processes. 
(b)  The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, articles and other laws. 
(c)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalization, or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.12)  
Sec. 74-231. - Requirements for traps. 
(a)  Discharges requiring a trap include: 
(1)  Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts; 
(2)  Oil; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Flammable wastes; and 
(5)  Other harmful ingredients. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority; 
(2)  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and 
(3)  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.13)  
Sec. 74-232. - Requirements for building sewers. 
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible and safely located control manhole; 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste; and 
(3)  Maintain the equipment and facilities. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.14)  
Sec. 74-233. - Sampling and testing. 
(a)  Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property. 
(b)  Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this article shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods; and 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority. 
(c)  BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling. 
(d)  The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD, and suspended solids. 
(e)  The city is entitled to select the time of sampling at its sole discretion so long as at least annual samples are taken. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.15)  
Sec. 74-234. - Payment and agreement required. 
(a)  Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to cover the cost of collection and treatment. 
(b)  When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving authority, the city or its authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing: 
(1)  Terms of acceptance by the city; and 
(2)  Payment by the person making the discharge. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.16)  
Sec. 74-235. - Industrial waste charge and added costs. 
(a)  If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city does not cause overloading of the city's sewage collection, treatment, or disposal facilities then, prior to approval, the city and the person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay an industrial waste charge, to be determined from the schedule of charges in the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city requires that city wastewater collection, treatment, or other disposal facilities be improved, expanded, or enlarged in order to treat the waste then, prior to approval, the city and the person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay in full all added costs the city may incur due to acceptance of the waste. 
(c)  The agreement entered into pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Amortization of all capital outlay for collecting and treating the waste, including new capital outlay and the proportionate part of the value of the existing system used in handling and treating the waste; and 
(2)  Operation and maintenance costs, including salaries and wages, power costs, costs of chemicals and supplies, proper allowances for maintenance, depreciation, overhead, and office expense. 
(d)  Amortization shall be complete in a 25-year period and payment shall include all debt service costs. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.17)  
Sec. 74-236. - Schedule of charges. 
Industrial waste charges shall be calculated by the formula set forth within the master fee schedule as contained in appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.18)  
Sec. 74-237. - Adjustment of charges. 
(a)  The city shall adjust charges at least annually to reflect changes in the characteristics of wastewater based on the results of sampling and testing. 
(b)  Increases in charges shall be retroactive for two billing periods and shall continue for six billing periods, unless subsequent tests determine that the charge should be further increased. 
(c)  The city shall review, at least annually, the basis for determining charges and shall adjust the unit treatment cost in the formula to reflect increases or decreases in wastewater treatment costs based on the previous year's experience. 
(d)  The city shall bill the discharger by the month and shall show industrial waste charges as a separate item on the regular bill for water and sewer charges. The discharger shall pay monthly in accordance with practices existing for payment of sewer charges. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.19)  
Sec. 74-238. - Savings clause. 
A person discharging industrial wastes into public sewers prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may continue without penalty as long as he: 
(1)  Does not increase the quantity or quality of discharge without permission of the approving authority; 
(2)  Has discharged the industrial waste at least six months prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; and 
(3)  Applies for and is granted a permit no later than 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.20)  
Sec. 74-239. - Conditions of permits. 
(a)  The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all of the requirements of the savings clause provided that the person: 
(1)  Submits an application within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived on forms supplied by the approving authority; 
(2)  Secures approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for pretreatment facilities when required; 
(3)  Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements including, but not limited to, provisions for: 
a.  Payment of charges; 
b.  Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities; 
c.  Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength; and 
(4)  Provides a sampling point subject to the provisions of this article and approval of the approving authority. 
(b)  A person applying for a new discharge shall: 
(1)  Meet all conditions of this section; and 
(2)  Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.21)  
Sec. 74-240. - Power to enter property. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(b)  Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire protection. 
(c)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the sampling operation. 
(d)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, are entitled to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for purposes of: 
(1)  Inspection, observations, measurement, and sampling; 
(2)  Maintenance or repair of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements; and 
(3)  Conducting any other authorized activity. All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(e)  No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.22)  
Sec. 74-241. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect an industrial customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)  The industrial customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers. 
(b)  If service is disconnected pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the city shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer; 
(2)  Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from its industrial wastes. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.23)  
Sec. 74-242. - Notice. 
The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this article with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.24)  
Sec. 74-243. - Continuing prohibited discharges. 
No person may continue discharging in violation of this article beyond the time limit provided in the notice. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.25)  
Sec. 74-244. - Failure to pay. 
In addition to sanctions provided for by this article, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by other Code provisions for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
(Code 2004, § 11.108.27; Ord. No. 76-3, 8-9-1976)  
Secs. 74-245—74-266. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-267. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air gap means a physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply piping and/or appurtenance and an open or nonpressure receiving vessel, plumbing fixture or other device. An approved air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, plumbing fixture or other device in no case less than one inch. 
Atmospheric vacuum breaker backflow prevention device or atmospheric vacuum breaker or AVB means a device used to prevent backsiphonage in nonhealth hazard conditions. This device cannot be tested and cannot prevent backpressure backflow. 
Auxiliary supply means any water source or system, other than the public water system, that may be available in the building or on the property, including ground water or surface waters used for industrial, irrigation, or any other purpose. 
Backflow means the flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases, or substances into the water system of the city's water. 
Backflow prevention assembly or assembly means an assembly to counteract back pressure or prevent backsiphonage. 
Backpressure means any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by any means) above the supply pressure at the point of connection which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow and the introduction of fluids, mixtures or substances from any source other than the intended source. 
Backsiphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixture, or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by a sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
Boresight or boresight to daylight means providing adequate drainage for backflow prevention assemblies installed in vaults through the use of an unobstructed drain pipe. 
Commercial establishment means property or location which is used primarily for manufacture, production, storage, wholesaling or retailing of services which is or may be placed in the flow of commerce or any property or location which is used primarily for the provision of any service. 
Commission means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
Contaminants means any foreign material, solid or liquid, not common to the potable water supply which makes the water unfit or undesirable for human or animal consumption. 
Contamination means the admission of contaminants into the potable water. 
Cross connection means any connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, through which it is possible for any nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted and contaminated water, or other substances, to enter into any part of such potable water system under any condition or set of conditions. 
Cross connection control device means any nationally approved or recognized device placed upon any connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, which is designed to prevent nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted and contaminated water, or other substances, from entering into any part of such potable water system under any condition or set of conditions. 
Customer service inspection means an inspection designed to inspect and detect any actual or potential cross connection hazards, and/or exceed the lead action level in solder or flux, pipe or pipe fittings. 
Degree of hazard means the low or high hazard classification that shall be attached to all actual or potential cross connections: 
(1)  Health hazard: an actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system that would be a danger to health. 
(2)  High hazard: the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross-connection with the possibility of allowing a substance that may cause illness or death to backflow into the potable water supply. 
(3)  Low hazard: the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross connections with the possibility of allowing a substance that may be objectionable, but not hazardous, to one's health to backflow into the potable water supply. 
(4)  Pollution hazard: an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of the public's or consumer's potable water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined in this section. Maximum degree of intensity of pollution which the potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance, or be aesthetically objectionable, or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances. 
(5)  System hazard: an actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the public or consumer's potable water supply or of a pollution or contamination that would have a detrimental effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
Director means the water utilities manager or his designee who is vested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
Double check detector backflow prevention assembly or double check detector or DCDA means an assembly composed of a line-size approved double check assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow. 
Double check valve backflow prevention assembly or double check assembly or double check or DC means an assembly which consists of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. 
Fireline tester means a tester who is employed by a state approved fireline contractor and is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on firelines only. 
General tester means a tester who is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on any domestic, commercial, industrial, or irrigation service except firelines. 
Mobile unit means any operation which may have the potential to introduce contaminants into a potable water system from a mobile source. These include, but are not limited to, carpet cleaning vehicles, water hauling vehicles, street cleaning vehicles, liquid waste vehicles, power wash operations and pest control vehicles. 
Nonresidential use means water used by any person other than a residential customer of the water supply and includes all uses not specifically included in residential uses. 
Point-of-use isolation means the appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer's water system at the point at which the actual or potential cross connection exists. 
Potable water supply means any water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use. 
Premises means any piece of property to which water is furnished for all improvements, mobile structures, and structures located on it. 
Premises isolation means the appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water system and the water user. 
Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assembly, pressure vacuum breaker or PVB means an assembly which provides protection against backsiphonage, but does not provide adequate protection against backpressure backflow. The assembly is a combination of a single check valve with an AVB and can be used with downstream resilient seated shutoff valves. In addition, the assembly has suction and discharge gate valves and resilient seated test cocks which allow the full testing of the assembly. 
Public water system or system means any public or privately owned water system which supplies water for public domestic use. The system will include all services, reservoirs, facilities, and any equipment used in the process of producing, treating, storing, or conveying water for public consumption. 
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, reduced pressure principle assembly, RP assembly or RP means an assembly containing two independently acting approved checkvalves together with a hydraulically-operated, mechanically-independent pressure differential relief valve located between the checkvalves and at the same time below the first checkvalve. The assembly shall include properly located resilient seated test cocks and a tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valve at the end of the assembly. 
Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assembly, reduced pressure detector or RPDA means an assembly composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principle assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow. 
Regulatory authority means any municipal officer or city department appointed by the city manager to administer this article. 
Representative of the water system means a person designated by the city to perform cross-connection control duties that shall include, but are not limited to, cross-connection inspections and water use surveys. 
Residential use means water used by any residential customer of the water supply and includes single-family dwellings, duplexes, multiplex housing and apartments where the individual units are each on a separate meter, or in cases where two or more units are served by one meter, the units are fulltime dwellings. 
Service connection means the point of delivery at which the water purveyor loses control of the water. 
Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker or SVB means an assembly containing an independently operating, internally loaded check valve and independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. This assembly is to be equipped with a properly located resilient seated test cock and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly. 
TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
Tester means a person that is a certified backflow prevention assembly technician approved by and registered with the city and the TCEQ. 
Thermal expansion means heated water that does not have the space to expand. 
Used water means water supplied by a public water system to a water user's system after it has passed through the service connection. 
Water use survey means a survey conducted or caused to be conducted by the local authority designed to identify any possible source of contamination to the potable water supply. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.2)  
Sec. 74-268. - Purpose. 
Every source of contamination or possible contamination from any contaminant which originates from or is located at a residential or commercial establishment, which is connected to any public water supply or which provides water to the public, shall be equipped with the protection required under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.1)  
Sec. 74-269. - Right-of-way encroachment. 
No person shall install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly upon or within any city right-of-way except as provided in this section. 
(1)  A backflow prevention assembly required by the city may be installed upon or within any city right-of-way only if the owner proves to the city that there is no other feasible location for installing the assembly, and installing it in the right-of-way will not interfere with traffic or utilities. The city retains the right to approve the location, height, depth, enclosure, and other requisites of the assembly prior to its installation. 
(2)  All permits and inspections required by the city to perform work in the right-of-way shall be obtained. 
(3)  The assembly shall be installed below or flush with the surrounding grade except when it is not practicable to install it in this manner. Any assembly or portion of an assembly which extends above ground shall be located no closer than 18 inches to the face of the curb. 
(4)  The city shall not be liable for any damage done to or caused by an assembly installed in a right-of-way. 
(5)  A property owner shall, at the request of the city and at the owner's expense, relocate a backflow prevention assembly which encroaches upon any city right-of-way when such relocation is necessary for street or utility construction or repairs for purposes of public safety. 
(6)  A person commits an offense if he fails to relocate a backflow prevention assembly located in or upon any city right-of-way after receiving a written order from the regulatory authority. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.3)  
Sec. 74-270. - Multiple connections. 
Any premises requiring multiple service connections for adequacy of supply and/or fire protection will be required to install a backflow assembly on each of the additional service lines to the premises. The type of assembly will be determined by the degree of hazard that could occur in the event of an interconnect between any of the buildings on the premises. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.4)  
Sec. 74-271. - Protection required. 
(a)  The backflow prevention assembly protection which is required under this article shall be any of the duly nationally recognized and authorized backflow prevention assemblies listed in a state-approved plumbing code, or as determined by the regulatory authority. Each backflow prevention assembly must have been approved by the regulatory authority prior to installation. Failure to obtain such approval prior to installation of the backflow prevention assembly may result in the backflow prevention assembly failing to meet final approval by the regulatory authority. The regulatory authority shall determine the type and location of backflow assembly to be installed within the area served by the city. The assembly will be required in each of the following circumstances, but the representative is in no way limited to the following circumstances: 
(1)  The nature and extent of any activity of the premises, or the materials used in connection with any activity of the premises, or materials stored on the premises, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply. 
(2)  Premises having any one or more cross connections, and the cross connection is protected by an atmospheric vacuum breaker device (AVB). 
(3)  Internal cross connections are present which are not correctable. 
(4)  Intricate plumbing arrangements are present which make it impractical to ascertain whether cross connections exist. 
(5)  There is unduly restricted entry so that inspections for cross connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to ensure that cross connections do not exist. 
(6)  Installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed to be necessary to accomplish the purpose of these regulations in the judgment of the city. 
(7)  An appropriate cross connection survey report form has not been filed with the public works/water utilities department upon request of the city. 
(8)  A fire suppression system that is connected to the city's water system. 
(9)  All new construction if deemed necessary in the customer service inspection. The type of assembly required will be determined by the degree of hazard. 
(10)  When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end use of such building is not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly may be installed at the service connection that supplies water for public domestic use. 
(11)  Any used water return system authorized under the Texas Administrative Code. 
(12)  In the event a point-of-use assembly has not had the testing or repair done as required by this article, a premises isolation assembly will be required. 
(13)  If it is determined that additions or alterations have been made to the plumbing system without obtaining proper permits, premises isolation may be required. 
(14)  All multistory buildings or any building with a booster pump or elevated storage tank. 
(15)  Retrofitting will be required on all high-hazard connections and wherever else the city deems necessary to retrofit. 
(b)  All backflow prevention assemblies installed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be installed in a manner designed to facilitate ease of inspection by the regulatory authority of the city manager or his chosen representative. Any currently installed backflow prevention assemblies which are located in inaccessible locations, or where the tester is subject to physical danger, shall be relocated to approved locations following current national guideline standards. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.5)  
Sec. 74-272. - Testing of assemblies. 
(a)  The regulatory authority shall inspect and test, or cause to be inspected and tested, all backflow prevention assemblies in each of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Immediately after installations; 
(2)  Whenever the assembly is moved; 
(3)  A minimum of once a year; 
(4)  Premises that have been vacated and unoccupied for one year, prior to reoccupancy; 
(5)  Immediately after repairs. 
(b)  All assembly testing shall be performed by a state certified backflow prevention assembly tester approved by the regulatory authority. 
(c)  Duly authorized city employees, bearing proper credentials and identification, are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article. Persons and occupants of premises which are provided water service by the city, either directly or indirectly, shall allow the city or its representatives ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, testing, records examination, or in the performance of any of their duties. Where persons or occupants of premises have security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the persons and occupants of the premises shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, city personnel will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(d)  The city is not liable for damage to backflow prevention assembly which may occur during testing. 
(e)  The regulatory authority may cause a water use survey to be conducted at any establishment located in the city which is served by a public water supply or which provides water to the public. Upon determination by the regulatory authority that the establishment falls under the provisions of this article and requires a backflow prevention assembly, the regulatory authority shall issue a notice to abate the condition or order the establishment to install the proper backflow prevention assembly. 
(f)  It is the responsibility of any person who owns or controls property to have all assemblies tested in accordance with this article. Assemblies may be required to be tested more frequently if the regulatory authority deems necessary. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.6)  
Sec. 74-273. - Thermal expansion. 
It is the responsibility of any person who owns or controls property to eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion, if a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow assembly. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.7)  
Sec. 74-274. - Pressure loss. 
Any reduction in water pressure caused by the installation of a backflow assembly is not the responsibility of the city. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.8)  
Sec. 74-275. - Residential service connections. 
(a)  Any person who owns or controls any residential property which has been determined to have an actual or potential cross connection will be required to eliminate the actual or potential cross connection, or have an approved backflow assembly installed in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Any person who owns or controls any residential property is responsible for the installation, testing and repair of all backflow assemblies on his property. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.9)  
Sec. 74-276. - Customer service inspection. 
(a)  Pursuant to TCEQ Water System Regulations, a customer service inspection for cross connection control shall be completed by the regulatory authority prior to providing continuous water service in each of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Water service to a new construction facility or previously nonexisting premises; 
(2)  After any material improvements to buildings or premises; 
(3)  Any correction or addition to the plumbing of any facility or premises; or 
(4)  The regulatory authority deems it necessary. 
(b)  Permanent water service shall not be supplied to a new construction facility until after the customer service inspection is completed by the regulatory authority or representative. 
(c)  Temporary water service which possess a potential cross connection threat to the potable water supply shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.10)  
Secs. 74-277—74-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - INSTALLATION STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 74-301. - Application of guideline requirements. 
To ensure proper operation and accessibility of all backflow prevention assemblies, the following national guideline requirements shall apply to the installation of these assemblies: 
(1)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the current TCEQ rules and these regulations. The assembly installer must obtain the required plumbing permits and have the installation inspected by a representative of the regulatory authority. 
(2)  At those facilities where the regulatory authority requires a backflow prevention assembly to be installed at the point of delivery of the water supply, such installation of the assembly must be before any branch in the line and on private property located just inside the boundary between the city right-of-way and the landowner's property. The regulatory authority may specify other areas for installation of the assembly. Assemblies that must be installed or are located on city rights-of-way are the responsibilities of the business or entity that the water line is serving. 
(3)  The assembly must be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions. 
(4)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of a type and model approved by the regulatory authority. 
(5)  All vertical installations of backflow assemblies must have prior approval by the regulatory authority. 
(6)  Assemblies that are larger than four inches and installed more than five feet above floor level must have a suitable platform for use by testing or maintenance personnel. 
(7)  Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipe fittings which could be used for connecting a bypass line must not be installed. 
(8)  Premises where an uninterrupted water supply is critical should be provided with two assemblies installed in parallel. They should be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the maximum flow required. 
(9)  Lines should be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the assembly. 
(10)  All facilities that require continuous, uninterrupted water service and are required to have a backflow assembly must make provisions for the parallel installation of assemblies of the same type so that testing, repair, and maintenance can be performed. 
(11)  The property owner assumes all responsibility for any damages resulting from installation, operation, and/or maintenance of a backflow assembly. The owner shall be responsible for keeping all backflow prevention assembly vaults reasonably free of silt and debris. 
(12)  Upon completion of installation, the regulatory authority shall be notified and all assemblies must be inspected and tested. All assemblies must be registered with the regulatory authority and shall provide the date of installation, manufacturer, model, type, size, serial number of the backflow assembly, and initial test report. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.11)  
Sec. 74-302. - RPZ assemblies. 
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. The RPZ is normally used in locations where an air gap is impractical. The RPZ is effective against both backsiphonage and backpressure. 
(1)  RPZs must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served. Flow characteristics are not standard. Consult manufacturer's specifications for specific performance data. 
(2)  The assembly must be readily accessible for testing and maintenance and must be located in an area where water damage to building or furnishings would not occur from relief valve discharge. The property owner assumes all responsibility for any damage caused by water discharge from a RPZ assembly. An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice of RPZ assemblies. 
(3)  No part of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be submerged in water or installed in a location subject to flooding. RPZs are typically installed above grade in well-drained areas, but may be installed below grade (ground level) if a boresight drain to daylight is provided. The drain shall be of adequate capacity to carry the flow of the assembly and shall be screened on both ends. 
(4)  Enclosures shall be designed for ready access and sized to allow for the minimum clearances established below. Removable protective enclosures are typically installed on the smaller assemblies. Daylight drain ports must be provided to accommodate full pressure discharge from the assembly. 
(5)  Assemblies two inches and smaller shall have at least a six-inch clearance of both sides and on top of the assembly, and 12 inches below and behind the assembly. All assemblies larger than two inches shall have a minimum of 12 inches on the backside and 24 inches on the test cock side. The relief valve opening shall be at least 12 inches plus nominal size of assembly above the floor or highest possible water level. Headroom of six inches is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of 36 inches is required on all vault lids. 
(6)  All RP assemblies must be tested in accordance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner must notify the regulatory authority upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly. 
(7)  Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviation must have prior written approval by the regulatory authority. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.11)  
Sec. 74-303. - RPDA assemblies. 
Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assemblies may be utilized in all installations requiring a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly and detector metering. 
(1)  RPDAs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for reduced pressure principle backflow assemblies (RPZs). 
(2)  The line-size RPZ assembly and the bypass RPZ assembly must each be tested. A separate test report for each assembly must be completed by the certified tester. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.11)  
Sec. 74-304. - DC assemblies. 
Double check valve assemblies may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. 
(1)  DCs must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for premises being served. Consult manufacturer's specifications for specific performance data. 
(2)  Premises where an uninterrupted water supply is critical should be provided with two assemblies installed in parallel. Assemblies should be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the minimum water requirements while the two together will provide the maximum flow required. 
(3)  The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for testing and maintenance. DCs may be installed below grade, providing all test cocks are fitted with brass pipe plugs. All vaults shall be well drained, constructed of suitable materials, and sized to allow for the minimum clearances established in subsection (4) of this section. 
(4)  Assemblies two inches and smaller shall have at least a six-inch clearance below and on both sides of the assembly and, if located in a vault, the bottom of the assembly shall not be more than 24 inches below grade. All assemblies larger than two inches shall have a minimum clearance of 12 inches on the back side, 24 inches in the test cock side, and 12 inches below the assembly. Headroom of six feet is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of 36 inches is required on all vault lids. Y pattern double check valve assemblies shall be installed so that the checks are horizontal and the test cocks face upward. These clearance standards apply to all assemblies installed in vaults, enclosures, and meter boxes. 
(5)  Vertical installations of DCs are allowed only on sizes up to and including four inches which meet the following requirements: 
a.  Internally spring-loaded check valves; 
b.  Flow is upward through assembly; 
c.  Manufacturer states that their assembly can be used in a vertical position; 
d.  Approved by the director. 
(6)  All DCs must be tested in accordance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner must notify the regulatory authority upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly. 
(7)  Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations must have prior written approval of the regulatory authority. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.11)  
Sec. 74-305. - DCDA assemblies. 
Double check detector backflow prevention assemblies may be utilized in all installations requiring a double check valve assembly and detector metering. 
(1)  DCDAs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for double check valve assemblies (DCs). 
(2)  The line-size DC assembly and the bypass DC assembly must each be tested. A separate test report for each assembly must be completed by the certified tester. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.11)  
Sec. 74-306. - PVB assemblies. 
Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies may be utilized at point-of-use protection only and where a substance is handled that would be objectionable, but not hazardous, to health if introduced into the potable water system. PVBs protect against backsiphonage only and shall not be installed where there is the potential for backpressure. 
(1)  The assembly shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches above the highest downstream piping. 
(2)  PVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage could occur from water discharge. 
(3)  The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance, with a minimum clearance of 12 inches all around the assembly. 
(4)  All PVBs must be tested in compliance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner must notify the regulatory authority of the installation of any backflow prevention assembly. 
(5)  Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations must have prior written approval of the regulatory authority. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.11)  
Sec. 74-307. - SVB assemblies. 
Spill resistant pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies may be utilized in all installations requiring a pressure vacuum breaker. SVBs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.11)  
Sec. 74-308. - Air gap separation. 
Air gaps provide maximum protection from backflow hazards and should be utilized at all locations where high hazardous substances are at risk of entering the potable water system. 
(1)  An air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipeline measured vertically above the top rim of the receiving vessel, and in no case less than one inch. If splashing is a problem, tubular screens may be attached or the supply line may be cut at a 45-degree angle. The air gap distance is measured from the bottom of the angle. Hoses are not allowed. 
(2)  Air gap separations shall not be altered in any way without prior approval from the regulatory authority and must be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
(3)  Side walls, ribs, or similar obstructions do not effect air gaps when spaced from the inside edge of the spout opening a distance greater than three times the effective opening for a single, or a distance greater than four times the effective opening for two intersecting walls. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.12)  
Sec. 74-309. - Fire suppression systems. 
(a)  All new installations of fire suppression systems which utilize the city's potable water supply shall have installed an approved backflow prevention device according to the degree of hazard. 
(b)  An approved double check detector backflow prevention assembly (DCDA) or reduced pressure detector assemblies (RPDA) shall be the minimum protection for fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not approved for potable water use and/or that does not provide for periodic flow-through during each 24-hour period, unless a variance has been issued in writing from the regulatory authority. An RPDA must be installed if any solution other than the potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system. 
(c)  It is the responsibility of all owners and persons in charge of any premises to abide by the conditions of this article. In the event of any changes to the plumbing system, it is the responsibility of the property owners to notify the regulatory authority. All costs associated with this article and the purchase, installation, testing and repair of a DCDA or RPDA device is the responsibility of the property owner and persons in charge of any premises. 
(d)  Upon the approved installation of the DCDA or RPDA device, a cross connection test report completed by a licensed fireline tester must be sent to the attention of the regulatory authority or his representative and included with the information required by this article. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.13)  
Sec. 74-310. - Fire hydrant protection. 
(a)  An approved double check device backflow prevention assembly (DCD) or reduced pressure detector assemblies (RPDA) shall be the minimum protection for fire hydrant water meters which are being used for a temporary water supply during any construction or other use which would pose a potential hazard to the public water supply. An RPDA must be installed if any solution other than the potable water can be introduced into the system. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of all persons engaging in the use and rental of a fire hydrant water meter to abide by the conditions of this article. All fire hydrant water meter rentals shall meet the current requirements as provided for by the utility customer service division. 
(c)  Only city fire hydrant water meters with approved backflow prevention assemblies are allowed for use within the city limits. 
(d)  A deposit is required to ensure the return of all water meter and backflow assemblies to the utility customer service division. Failure to return the assemblies can result in the forfeiture of the deposit and/or enforcement action being taken against the responsible party, as allowed in section 74-315(b). 
(e)  All nonapproved fire hydrant meters which are found to be in use within the city will be confiscated and enforcement action taken against the responsible party, as allowed in section 74-315. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.14)  
Sec. 74-311. - Responsibilities. 
(a)  Property owner. It is the responsibility of all property owners and/or persons in charge of any premises to abide by the conditions of this article and to comply with the following: 
(1)  Payment of all costs associated with this article and the purchase, installation, testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies. 
(2)  To install and maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in accordance with this article and acceptable industry practice. 
(3)  Maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in proper working order at all times, including repair as required. 
(4)  Maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in a manner that allows them to be tested by a method that has been approved by the regulatory authority. 
(5)  All records related to backflow prevention assembly installation, testing and repair shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three years. 
(b)  Certified backflow prevention assembly tester. The certified backflow prevention assembly tester shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Register annually with the regulatory authority and pay the required fee. 
(2)  Maintain testing equipment in proper working condition/calibration. 
(3)  Maintain the design or operation characteristics of an assembly. 
(4)  Ensure that devices are tested according to accepted industry practice and TCEQ regulations. 
(5)  Enter required testing data, including test gauge serial numbers, on cross connection test forms obtained from the regulatory authority. 
(6)  Report test results to the regulatory authority within 30 days of testing. 
(7)  Provide a copy of the completed test report to the property owners and/or persons in charge of any premises. 
(8)  Maintain testing and/or repair records for a minimum of three years. 
(c)  Regulatory authority. The regulatory authority shall inspect and initially test, or cause to be tested, all backflow prevention assemblies installed pursuant to the requirements of this article. For new facilities, permanent water service shall not be provided until all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are operational. Except in cases where the testing of backflow prevention assemblies must be delayed until the installation of internal production or auxiliary equipment, the regulatory authority shall not approve a certificate of occupancy until all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are operational. The city shall not be liable for damage caused to any backflow prevention assembly as a result of the inspection or testing. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.15)  
Sec. 74-312. - Backflow prevention assembly tester certification; registration required. 
Only approved TCEQ licensed backflow prevention assembly testers can test in the city. Testers must register annually with the regulatory authority, provide proof of TCEQ certification and proof that testing equipment is able to maintain a calibration of plus or minus 0.2 psid accuracy, and pay an annual, nonrefundable, tester registration fee. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.16)  
Sec. 74-313. - Compliance for lawn irrigation. 
All lawn irrigation system installations shall obtain a permit issued by the building inspection department for such installations. Installation requirements must comply with the current city plumbing code and/or guidelines for the appropriate device found in this article. Interconnections of the potable water supply with an alternate water source are prohibited unless appropriate backflow protection is installed. High hazard backflow protection devices must be installed if any mechanical injection stations are used with the irrigation system. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.17)  
Sec. 74-314. - Mobile units. 
The connection of a mobile unit to any potable water system is prohibited unless such connection is protected by an air gap or an approved backflow prevention assembly. Prior approval and annual testing of any backflow prevention assembly must be received from the regulatory authority before connecting to any potable water system. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.18)  
Sec. 74-315. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violations. A person commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Fails to maintain backflow prevention assemblies in compliance with this article. 
(2)  Fails to comply with a repair order issued by the regulatory authority. 
(3)  Allows backflow from premises he owns, operates or manages to enter the public water supply system. 
(4)  Fails to pay any fees required by this article. 
(5)  Violates any section of this article. 
(6)  Reinstates water service to premises discontinued or disconnected under this article, except as directed by the regulatory authority. 
(7)  Allows an unregistered tester to perform testing work at any facility he is in charge of. 
(b)  Penalty. 
(1)  A person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-3 for each act of violation and for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. 
(2)  In addition to proceeding under the authority of subsection (c) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other articles against a person committing any violation of this article. 
(c)  Sanction for failure to pay inspection fees. In addition to sanctions provided for by this article, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by other Code provisions. 
(d)  Revocation of certified testers' registration. A certified testers' registration may be reviewed and revoked by the city if the regulatory authority determines that the tester has: 
(1)  Falsely, incompletely, or inaccurately reported assembly reports; 
(2)  Used inaccurate gauges; 
(3)  Used improper testing procedures; or 
(4)  Created a threat to the public health or environment. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.19)  
Sec. 74-316. - Regulations declared governmental. 
All of the regulations provided in this article are declared to be governmental and for the health, safety and welfare of the general public. Any member of the city council or any city official or employee charged with the enforcement of this article, acting for the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and he is relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of such duties. 
(Code 2004, § 11.111.20; Ord. No. 98-09, 3-24-1998)  
Secs. 74-317—74-335. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ON-SITE SEWAGE FACILITIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-0714-001, § 2, adopted July 14, 2015, amended Art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI, §§ 74-336—74-349, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 97-06, adopted May 27, 1997; Code 2004, §§ 11.115.1—11.115.14; and Ord. No. 2004-25, adopted Aug. 10, 2004. 
 
Sec. 74-336. - On-site sewage facility regulation and enforcement. 
The City of Farmersville, Texas clearly understands that there are technical criteria, legal requirements, and administrative procedures and duties associated with regulating on-site sewage facilities, and will fully enforce chapter 366 of the Texas Health and Safety Code and chapters 7 and 37 of the Texas Water Code, and associated rules referenced in section 74-339 of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0714-001, § 2, 7-14-2015)  
Sec. 74-337. - Area of jurisdiction. 
The rules adopted by this article shall apply to all the area lying within the incorporated limits of the City of Farmersville, Texas. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0714-001, § 2, 7-14-2015)  
Sec. 74-338. - On-site sewage facility rules. 
Any permit issued for an on-site sewage facility ("OSSF") within the jurisdictional area of the City of Farmersville, Texas must comply with the rules adopted in section 74-339 of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0714-001, § 2, 7-14-2015)  
Sec. 74-339. - On-site sewage facility rules adopted. 
Chapter 366 of the Texas Health and Safety Code and chapters 7 and 37 of the Texas Water Code together with Title 30 Texas Administrative Code chapter 30, subchapters A and G, and Title 30 Texas Administrative Code chapter 285, promulgated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality ("TCEQ") for on-site sewage facilities (collectively the "rules") are hereby adopted, and all officials and employees of the City of Farmersville, Texas, having duties under said rules are authorized to perform such duties as are required of them under said rules. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0714-001, § 2, 7-14-2015)  
Sec. 74-340. - Incorporation by reference. 
The rules and all future amendments and revisions thereto are hereby incorporated herein by reference and are thus made a part of these rules. A copy of the rules shall be filed and maintained in the office of the city secretary, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated in this section as if the same were copied in their entirety and the provisions of such rules shall be controlling within the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0714-001, § 2, 7-14-2015)  
Sec. 74-341. - Amendments. 
The City of Farmersville, Texas, wishing to adopt more stringent rules for its OSSF Ordinance understands that the more stringent local rule shall take precedence over the corresponding TCEQ requirement. Listed below are the more stringent rules adopted by the City of Farmersville, Texas: 
(1)  No person may cause or allow the installation of an OSSF when any part of the facility is to be within 300 feet in horizontal distance (measured on the closest practicable access route) of an existing public sanitary sewer system, unless one of the following requirements has been met: 
a.  The person has received a written denial of service from the City of Farmersville; or 
b.  The person has received a written determination from the City of Farmersville that it is not feasible for the person to connect to the public sanitary sewer system. 
(2)  Whenever a public sanitary sewer system is developed within 300 feet in horizontal distance (measured on the closest practicable route) from any part of a private sewage facility, that facility shall be connected to the public sanitary sewer system unless one of the requirements set forth above in this section has been met. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0714-001, § 2, 7-14-2015)  
Sec. 74-342. - Duties and powers. 
The city manager or his or her duly appointed representative is hereby declared to be the OSSF designated representative of the City of Farmersville, Texas, for the enforcement of these rules within the jurisdictional area. The appointed individual(s) must be certified by the TCEQ before assuming the duties and responsibilities of the OSSF designated representative. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0714-001, § 2, 7-14-2015)  
Sec. 74-343. - Collection of fees. 
All persons, companies, or other entities applying for permits, inspections, and re-inspections shall pay the permit fees as provided in the fee schedule in appendix A of this Code. A fee of $10.00 will also be collected for each OSSF permit to be paid to the credit of the TCEQ Water Resources Management Account as required by the Texas Health and Safety Code chapter 367. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0714-001, § 2, 7-14-2015)  
Sec. 74-344. - Appeals. 
Persons aggrieved by an action or decision of the OSSF designated representative may appeal such action or decision to the board of adjustment of the city council of the City of Farmersville, Texas, in writing within 15 calendar days of said action or decision. Failure to timely appeal renders the action or decision of the OSSF designated representative final and binding. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0714-001, § 2, 7-14-2015)  
Sec. 74-345. - Enforcement plan and penalties. 
The City of Farmersville, Texas, clearly understands that, at a minimum, it must follow the requirements of Title 30 Texas Administrative Code § 285.71, "Authorized Agent Enforcement of OSSFs." 
This article hereby adopts and specifically incorporates all applicable penalty provisions related to OSSFs including, but not limited to, those provisions found in chapters 341 and 366 of the Texas Health and Safety Code; chapters 7, 26, and 37 of the Texas Water Code; and, Title 30 Texas Administrative Code Chapter 30, subchapters A and G, and chapter 285. Further, an owner may be assessed a fine as provided in section 1-3 of this Code for each day that the OSSF remains un-repaired. 
Allegation and proof of a culpable mental state are not required for evidence of an offense committed under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0714-001, § 2, 7-14-2015)  
Sec. 74-346. - Relinquishment of ordinance. 
If the city council of the City of Farmersville, Texas, decides that it no longer wishes to regulate OSSFs in its area of jurisdiction, the city council shall follow the procedures outlined in the rules or as set forth below: 
(1)  The city council shall inform the TCEQ by certified mail at least 30 days before the published date of the public hearing notice that it wishes to relinquish all powers and authority granted it by the OSSF ordinance. 
(2)  The city shall post public notice in a newspaper regularly published or circulated in the area of jurisdiction not more than 30 days and at least 72 hours prior to the anticipated date of action by the authorized agent, which public notice shall include the time, date and location of the meeting. 
(3)  The city shall on the date of the noticed meeting, or within 30 days after that meeting, adopt an ordinance repealing the OSSF ordinance and shall thereafter send a copy of the public notice, a publisher's affidavit of public notice, and a certified copy of the minutes of the meeting of the city council to the TCEQ. 
(4)  After relinquishing its OSSF authority, the authorized agent understands that it may be subject to charge-back fees in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code § 285.10 (d) (5) and § 285.14 after the date that delegation has been relinquished. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-0714-001, § 2, 7-14-2015)  
Chapter 77 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 2, adopted May 8, 2018, repealed ch. 77, arts. I—VI, §§ 77-1—77-4, 77-25, 77-54—77-58, 77-90—77-103, 77-135—77-139, 77-160—77-173, 77-200, 77-201, 77-222—77-225, 77-244—77-246, 77-271—77-275, 77-299—77-302, 77-323, 77-324, 77-374—77-376, 77-394—77-402, in its entirety; and § 3 enacted a new ch. 77 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 77 pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Code 2004, § 11.122.23; Ord. No. 2004-25, adopted August 10, 2004; Ord. No. 2005-33, adopted July 12, 2005; Comp. Ord. of 3-11-2008; Ord. No. O-2010-1109-002 §§ 2—4, adopted November 9, 2010; Ord. No. O-2011-0208-001, § 2, adopted February 8, 2011; Ord. No. O-2011-0628-003, § 2, adopted December 19, 2011; Ord. No. O-2011-0726-001, §§ 1—3, adopted July 26, 2011; Ord. No. O-2011-0809-001, §§ 2, 3, adopted August 9, 2011; Ord. No. O-2011-0809-001, § 3, adopted August 9, 2011; Ord. No. O-2011-0809-003, § 2, adopted August 9, 2011; Ord. No. O-2011-0809-004, § 2, adopted August 9, 2011; Ord. No. O-2012-0327-002, §§ 2—4, adopted March 27, 2012; Ord. No. O-2012-0522-001, § 2, adopted May 22, 2012; Ord. No. O-2013-0827-001, § 2, adopted August 27, 2013; Ord. No. O-2015-0609-003, §§ 2—5, adopted June 9, 2015; Ord. No. 2017-0627-001, §§ 2, 3, adopted July 25, 2017 and Ord. No. 2017-1010-001, §§ 2, 3, adopted October 10, 2017. 
State Law reference— Municipal zoning authority generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq.; municipal planning and development generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 371.001 et seq.; municipal zoning boards of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008; issuance of local permits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 245.001 et seq.; municipal and county authority to regulate subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 242.001 et seq.; municipal comprehensive plans, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.001 et seq.; authority for municipal regulation of signs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE AND ENACTMENT 
 
Sec. 77-1. - Title. 
That this chapter of the city Code, shall be known as "The Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance," and that it supersedes all previous zoning ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-2. - Purpose. 
The zoning districts and regulations established in this chapter have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the city. They have been designed to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of the lot that may be occupied; the size of the yards, courts and other open spaces; the density of population and the location and use of buildings, structures and land for business, residence and other purposes, and to lessen congestion in streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air, and prevent the overcrowding of land; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewer, schools, parks and other public requirements; and with a view of conserving the value of building and encouraging the most appropriate use of land through the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-3. - Empowerment to zone. 
The Farmersville Zoning Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the powers granted and limitations imposed by laws of the state, including the statutory authority granted in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Chs. 211 and 212, and all other relevant laws of the state. Whenever any provision of this Code refers to or cites a section of the Texas Revised Statutes and that section is later amended or superseded, this Code shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or the section that most nearly corresponds to the superseded section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-4. - Compliance required. 
All land, buildings, structures or appurtenances thereon located within the city which are hereafter occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished or converted shall be used, erected, altered, removed, or placed and demolished in conformance with the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such land or building is located as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-5. - Creation of building site. 
No permit for the construction of a building or buildings upon any tract or plot shall be issued until a building site, building tract, or building lot has been created by compliance with one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The lot or tract is part of a plat of record, properly approved by the planning and zoning commission and/or city council and filed in the county plat records; 
(2)  The site plot or tract is all or part of a site plan officially approved by the city council in a planned development district following recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, which site plan shall provide all utility and drainage easements, alleys, streets, and other public improvements necessary to meet the normal requirements for platting, including the designation of building areas and such easements, alleys, and streets required and properly dedicated and necessary public improvements provided; 
(3)  The plot, tract or lot faced upon a dedicated street and was separately owned prior to January 23, 1998, or prior to the annexation of the property to the city, whichever is applicable, in which event a building permit for only one main building or accessory building may be issued on each such original, separately owned parcel without first complying with subsection (1). 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-6. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  No building or land shall be used or occupied for any use or purpose for which a specific use permit or planned development has been granted nor shall a nonconforming use be changed to another nonconforming use without first obtaining a certificate of occupancy and compliance from the city manager. 
(b)  A record issued shall be maintained by the city manager of all certificates of occupancy issued by the city and copies shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the land or building covered by a specific use permit, planned development or nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-7. - Completion of building approved or under construction. 
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building actually under construction at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, which entire building shall be completed within one year from the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-8. - Location of dwelling and buildings. 
(a)  Number of buildings per lot. 
(1)  Single-family and two-family uses. Only one main building for single-family or two-family use with permitted accessory buildings may be located upon a lot or platted tract. 
(2)  Multifamily and nonresidential uses. Where a lot is used for multifamily, retail, office, commercial, or industrial purposes, or a combination of same, or for a combination of retail and dwelling purposes, more than one main building may be located upon the lot, but only when such buildings conform to all the open space, parking, and density requirements applicable to the uses and districts. No storage area or required open space for one building shall be computed as being the open space for any other dwelling or other use. 
(b)  Street frontage and access. 
(1)  Single-family and two-family uses. Every dwelling shall face or front upon a public street or approved place other than an alley. 
(2)  Multifamily and nonresidential uses. Whenever two or more main buildings or portions thereof, are placed upon a single lot or tract and such buildings will not face upon a public street, the same may be permitted when the site plan for such development is approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(3)  Religious facilities, independent living facilities, assisted living facilities, long-term care facilities, continuing care facilities, community centers, hospitals, colleges, universities, trade schools, and public, private, and parochial schools located in any residential district shall have access to a street with a minimum pavement width of 36 feet. 
(4)  Through lots are hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Secs. 77-9—77-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 77-21. - Procedural steps of zoning petitions and amendments. 
(a)  Process requirements. 
(1)  The city council may from time to time amend, supplement, or change by ordinance the boundaries of the districts or the regulations herein established as provided by the state statutes. 
(2)  Before taking action on any proposed amendments, supplement, or change, the city council shall submit the same to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendation and report. If the commission recommends that an amendment be denied, city council will not hear the request unless the applicant requests council consideration in writing within ten days of the recommendation. 
(3)  Any person or corporation having a proprietary interest in any property may initiate proceedings to consider a change in zoning on such property, or the planning and zoning commission or city council may, on its own motion, initiate proceedings to consider a change in zoning on any property. Any person or corporation may petition the city council for a change or amendment to the provisions of this chapter, or the planning and zoning commission may, on its own motion or on request from the city council, institute a study and propose changes and amendments in the public interest. 
(b)  Two types of zoning amendments. 
(1)  Zoning map amendment (rezoning). A zoning map amendment (rezoning) is a change or modification to the boundaries of any zoning district. 
(2)  Zoning text amendment. A zoning text amendment is a change to the text of this chapter and does not include change or modification to the boundaries of any zoning districts. 
(c)  Planning and zoning commission recommendation requires public hearing. 
(1)  The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for any amendment or change prior to making its recommendation and report to the city council. Written notice of all public hearings before the planning and zoning commission on a proposed amendment or change shall be mailed to all owners of real property as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll, lying within 200 feet of the property on which the change is requested. Such notice shall be given no less than ten days before the date set for hearing. Notice of such hearing shall also be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation, stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than ten days from the date of publication. 
(2)  Following the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission may vote to approve, approve with amendments and conditions, table, or deny in whole or in part the petition. If the petitioner accepts the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, subsequent public notice shall be written as approved. If the petitioner does not accept the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, the petitioner may continue his original request, and subsequent public notice shall be written as originally submitted; however, any part of the request not conforming to the planning and zoning commission's recommendations shall be presumed to have been denied by the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission may table for study any zoning case for up to 90 days. 
(3)  When a petition is denied by the planning and zoning commission, the planning and zoning commission should offer reasons to the petitioner for such denial. 
(d)  City council decision and public hearing required. 
(1)  If the zoning petition is approved, including denials in part, by the planning and zoning commission, the city secretary shall automatically schedule a public hearing regarding the petition to be held before the city council, giving notice as required by the general laws of the state. However, if the petition is denied by the planning and zoning commission, the petitioner may, within 30 days from the date of the commission's action, file a written appeal for a public hearing be scheduled and held before the city council regarding the petition. Upon the planning department's receipt of the written appeal, a public hearing on the petition shall be scheduled before the city council, with notice provided as required by the general laws of the state. 
(2)  A public hearing shall be held by the city council before adopting any proposed amendment, supplement or change. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than 15 days from the date of publication. The city council's hearing must be within 60 days of the planning and zoning commission's recommendation. 
(3)  Prior to the opening of the public hearing, the petitioner may request withdrawal of the petition or tabling of the request to a specified future city council meeting. City council may approve the request for withdrawal or tabling, or open the public hearing and take appropriate action on the petition within the context of the public notice provided. 
(4)  After a public hearing is held before the city council regarding the zoning petition, the city council may approve a change in zoning as appropriate within the context of the public notice provided. City council may deny in whole or in part, table the petition, or refer it back to the planning and zoning commission for further study. In the event the petition has been denied by the planning and zoning commission or in the event a protest against the petition has been filed as more fully described in subsection (e), then the petition shall not be approved except by three-fourths vote of the city council. 
(e)  Three-fourths city council vote requirements. 
(1)  If the planning and zoning commission has wholly or partially denied a proposed amendment, supplement, or change, or if sufficient protest as defined below is submitted against such change, the proposed change must receive the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of all members of the city council. 
(2)  If a protest against such proposed amendment, supplement, or change has been filed with the city secretary, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent or more of the area of the lots or land included in such a proposed change, or those immediately adjoining the area and extending 200 feet therefrom or of those directly opposite thereto extending 200 feet from the area, such amendment shall not become effective except by a three-quarters vote of all the members of the city council. 
(3)  Written protests. 
a.  A protest of a proposed zoning change must be in writing and must be signed by the owner of the property in question or by a person authorized by power of attorney to act on behalf of the owner. For specific ownership types, the following shall apply: 
1.  Corporations. The protest must be signed by the president, vice president, or by an attorney in-fact authorized to sign on behalf of the corporation. 
2.  General or limited partnerships. The protest must be signed by a general partner or by an attorney-in-fact authorized to sign on behalf of the general or limited partnership. 
3.  Community property. The city shall presume the written protest of one spouse to be the protest of both. 
4.  Condominiums. Lots or land subject to a condominium declaration are presumed to be commonly owned in undivided interests by the owners of all condominium units and under the control of the governing body of the condominium. For such lots or land to be included in calculating the lots or land area protesting a proposed rezoning, the written protest must state that the governing body of the condominium has authorized a written protest in accordance with its bylaws, and that the person signing the protest is authorized to act on behalf of the governing body of the condominium. 
b.  In all cases where a protest has been properly signed pursuant to this section, the city shall presume that the persons whose signatures appear on the protest are valid. 
c.  A withdrawal of a protest must be in writing. If multiple protests and withdrawals are filed on behalf of the same owner, the instrument with the latest date and time of execution controls. 
(f)  Joint public hearing and notice. 
(1)  At its discretion, the city council may conduct the public hearing on an amendment to the zoning ordinance jointly with a public hearing required to be held by the planning and zoning commission. The city council may not take action in the matter until it receives the final report of the commission. 
(2)  Notice of the planning and zoning commission public hearing may be combined with the notice of the city council's public hearing, if time permits. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-22. - Zoning petition details. 
(a)  The zoning petition shall contain sufficient information relative to the amendment requested including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A key map showing all existing zoning within 200 feet of the subject property. 
(2)  A location map showing existing and proposed thoroughfares, collector streets, and local streets on the subject property and within 200 feet of the subject property. 
(3)  A statement reading as follows: 
"Approval of the zoning case associated with this exhibit shall not imply approval of any associated study, plat, or plan, approval of development standards shown hereon, or the initiation of the development process. Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council action on studies, plats, or plans relating to development of this property shall be considered as an action separate from action taken on this zoning case." 
(b)  To ensure the submission of adequate information, the city manager is hereby empowered to maintain and distribute a list of specific requirements for zoning petitions. Upon periodic review, the city manager shall have the authority to update such requirements for zoning petition details. 
(c)  The zoning petition shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee in accordance with the fee schedule established by city council per each type of zoning requested on a tract of land, plus all publication and notification costs for new subdivisions and multiple lot annexations. Individuals who wish to annex individual lots into the city limits shall have the zoning fees waived and shall be zoned concurrently with annexation, provided that the requested zoning district is approved by the planning and zoning commission and city council. 
(d)  Fees for rezoning and zone change applications, specific use permits, and appeals to the board of adjustments shall be charged in accordance with the fee schedule established by city council per each type of zoning requested on a tract of land, plus all publication and notification costs. 
(e)  The applicant requesting a proposed amendment must submit a legal description of the property on which change is requested. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-23. - Following zoning approval. 
(a)  If, after holding a public hearing, a zoning change, amendment, or supplement is approved by the city council, no further petition may be considered for all or a part of the subject tract of land for a period of two years from the date of the city council's action, unless it is determined that there are substantive reasons to permit the waiving of the two-year waiting period and the granting of a new hearing. The determination shall be made by the planning and zoning commission, or on appeal, the city council. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to general text changes in the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Substantive reasons for waiving the two-year period include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Correction of an error. 
(2)  A change of conditions affecting the property and which were not known at the time of zoning. 
(3)  A change in public plans or policies as it affects the property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-24. - Pending zoning application. 
Any pending zoning petition shall automatically expire if no action of any kind has been taken on it by either the planning and zoning commission or the city council for a period of one year. If no ordinance granting zoning has been adopted within six months of the date on which the city council voted approval of a zoning change, such zoning change shall be automatically placed on the city council agenda for further consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-25. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  Organization. As the city is a type A general law municipality of the state, the city councilmembers are hereby granted the authority to act as a board of adjustment under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 211. 
(b)  Procedure. The board shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings; provided, however, that such rules are not inconsistent with this article or state statutes. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman, and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be public record. 
(c)  Appeals. 
(1)  Appeals to the board of adjustment can be taken by any person aggrieved, or by an officer, department, or board of the municipality affected, by a decision of the city manager under this chapter. Such appeal shall be taken within 15 days after the decision has been rendered by the city manager, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(2)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application and notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give the public notice thereof by posting such notice in the mail addressed to all owners of real property located within 200 feet of the property to which the appeal applies and by publishing notice of such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Both the posted and published notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by attorney or by agent. 
(d)  Jurisdiction. When in its judgment, the public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate use of the neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently injured, the board of adjustment may, in specific cases, after public notice and public hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize the following special exception to the regulations herein established. 
(1)  Permit the reconstruction, extension or enlargement of a building occupied by a nonconforming use of the lot or tract occupied by such building, provided such reconstruction does not prevent the return of such property to a conforming use. 
(2)  Permit such modifications of the height, yard, area, coverage, and parking regulations as may be necessary to secure appropriate development of a parcel of land which differs from other parcels in the district by being of such restricted area, shape, or slope that it cannot be appropriately developed without such modification. 
(3)  Require the discontinuance of nonconforming uses of land or structure under any plan whereby the full value of the structure and facilities can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the regulations of this article. All actions to discontinue a nonconforming use of land and structure shall be taken with due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered in the light of the public welfare and the character of the area surrounding the designated nonconforming use and the conservation and preservation of property. The board shall, from time to time on its own motion or upon cause presented by interested property owners, inquire into the existence, continuation or maintenance of any nonconforming use within the city. 
(4)  To bring about the discontinuance of a nonconforming use under a plan whereby the owner's actual investment in the structures on the property prior to the time that the use became nonconforming can be amortized within a definite time period. 
(e)  Action of the board of adjustment. 
(1)  In exercising its powers the board may, in conformity with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 211, as amended, revise or reform, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decisions, or determination appealed from and make such order, requirement, decisions, or determination as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken, including the power to impose reasonable conditions to be complied with by the applicant. 
(2)  The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to revise any order, requirements, decision or determination of the city manager, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under the ordinance from which this section is derived or to affect any variance in such ordinance. 
(3)  Any persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment or any tax payer or any officer, department or board of the municipality may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board and not thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-26. - Determination of vested rights. 
(a)  Vested rights petition. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of a vested rights petition is to determine whether one or more standards of this zoning chapter should not be applied to a zoning permit application by operation of state law, or whether certain permits are subject to expiration. 
(2)  Applicability. A vested rights petition may be filed with an application for a zoning permit. A vested rights petition may not be filed with a request to amend the text of the zoning regulations or the zoning map, or with a request for approval of a special use permit. A vested rights petition also may be filed to prevent expiration of certain zoning permits pursuant to section 77-27. 
(3)  Effect. Upon granting of a vested rights petition in whole or in part, the zoning permit application shall be decided in accordance with the standards specified in the relief order based on prior ordinance requirements or development standards, or the permit otherwise subject to expiration pursuant to section 77-27 shall be extended. 
(b)  Petition requirements. 
(1)  Who may petition. A vested rights petition may be filed by a property owner or the owner's authorized agents, including the applicant, with any zoning permit application, or by the holder of a permit subject to expiration pursuant to section 77-27. 
(2)  Form of petition. The vested rights petition shall allege that the petitioner has a vested right for some or all of the land subject to the zoning permit application under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 245 or successor statute, or pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.002 or successor statute, that requires the city to review and decide the application under standards in effect prior to the effective date of the currently applicable standards. The petition shall include the following information and documents: 
a.  A narrative description of the grounds for the petition; 
b.  A copy of each approved or pending zoning permit or other development application which is the basis for the contention that the city may not apply current standards to the zoning permit application which is the subject of the petition; 
c.  The date of submittal of the application for the permit, or of a development plan pursuant to which the permit was subsequently filed, if different from the official filing date; 
d.  The date the project for which the application for the zoning permit was submitted was commenced; 
e.  Identification of all standards otherwise applicable to the zoning permit application from which relief is sought; 
f.  Identification of the standards which the petitioner contends apply to the zoning permit application; 
g.  Identification of any current standards which petitioner agrees can be applied to the zoning permit application at issue; 
h.  A narrative description of how the application of current standards affect proposed use of the land, landscaping or tree preservation, open space, or park dedication, lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage or building size shown on the development application for which the petition is filed; 
i.  A copy of any prior vested rights determination involving the same land; and 
j.  Where the petitioner alleges that a zoning permit subject to expiration under section 77-27 should not be terminated, a description of the events, including any zoning permit or other development applications on file that should prevent such termination. 
(3)  Time for filing petition. A vested rights petition shall be filed with a zoning permit application for which a vested right is claimed, except that the petition may be filed before the date of expiration of any permit subject to expiration under section 77-27. Where more than one zoning permit application is authorized to be filed by this zoning chapter, the petition may be filed simultaneously for each application. 
(c)  Processing of petition and decision. 
(1)  Responsible official. The official responsible for processing the zoning permit application shall process the vested rights petition. A copy of the petition shall be forwarded to the city attorney following acceptance. 
(2)  Official's decision. If the responsible official is the decision maker on the zoning permit application, the official shall determine whether the relief requested in the vested rights petition should be granted in whole or in part, and shall formulate a written report summarizing the official's reasoning and setting forth the decision on the petition, which shall be delivered to the applicant within ten days of the date the vested rights petition is accepted for filing. 
(3)  Decision by commission on petition. If the zoning permit application is to be decided by the planning and zoning commission, the planning and zoning administrator shall submit a report in the form of a recommendation to the decision maker. The commission shall render a decision on the vested rights petition in conjunction with its decision on the zoning permit application. 
(4)  Appeal of decision on petition. The petitioner or any interested person may appeal the responsible official's or the commission's decision on the vested rights petition within ten working days of the date of such decision to the city council. An appeal under this subsection stays acceptance of filing of any related development applications. 
(5)  Decision by city council. Where the city council is the final decision maker on the zoning permit application, for any petition submitted pursuant to section 77-27, or upon appeal, the city council shall decide the vested rights petition. The request must be accompanied by a waiver of the time for decision on the application imposed under this zoning chapter pending decision by the council, which shall stay further proceedings on the application. The council shall decide the petition, after considering the responsible official's report and any decision by the planning and zoning commission with its decision on the zoning permit application or within 30 calendar days of receipt of the responsible official's report, or the notice of appeal, whichever is later. 
(d)  Action on petition and order. 
(1)  Action on the petition. The decision-maker on the vested rights petition may take any of the following actions: 
a.  Deny the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the zoning permit application shall be reviewed and decided under currently applicable standards; 
b.  Grant the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the zoning permit application shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with the standards contained in identified prior regulations; or 
c.  Grant the relief requested in part, and direct that certain identified current standards shall be applied to the zoning permit application, while standards contained in identified prior regulations also shall be applied; or 
d.  For petitions filed pursuant to section 77-27, determine whether the zoning permit(s) should be terminated, or specify the expiration date or the conditions of expiration for such permit(s). 
(2)  Order on petition. The responsible official's report and each decision on the vested rights petition shall be memorialized in an order identifying the following: 
a.  The nature of the relief granted, if any; 
b.  The approved or filed zoning permit or other development application(s) upon which relief is premised under the petition; 
c.  Current standards which shall apply to the zoning permit application for which relief is sought; 
d.  Prior standards which shall apply to the zoning permit application for which relief is sought, including any procedural standards; 
e.  The statutory exception or other grounds upon which relief is denied in whole or in part on the petition; 
(3)  For petitions filed pursuant to section 77-27, determine whether the zoning permit(s) should be terminated, and specify the expiration date or the conditions of expiration for the permit(s). 
(e)  Criteria for approval. 
(1)  Factors. The decision maker shall decide the vested rights petition based upon the following factors: 
a.  The nature and extent of prior zoning permit or other development applications filed or approved for the land subject to the petition; 
b.  Whether any prior vested rights determinations have been made with respect to the property subject to the petition; 
c.  Whether any prior approved applications for the property have expired or have been terminated in accordance with law; 
d.  Whether current standards adopted after commencement of the project affect proposed use of the land, landscaping or tree preservation, open space, or park dedication, lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage or building size based upon the proposed development application; 
e.  Whether any statutory exception applies to the standards in the current zoning regulations from which the applicant seeks relief; 
f.  Whether any prior approved zoning permit or other development applications relied upon by the petitioner have expired; 
g.  For petitions filed pursuant to section 77-27, whether any of the events in subsection (b) have occurred. 
(2)  Conditions. If the claim of vested rights under a petition is based upon a pending zoning or other development application subject to standards that have been superseded by current standards under this zoning chapter, the decision maker may condition any relief granted on the petition on the approval of the application under such prior standards. 
(f)  Application following relief order. Following the city's final decision on the vested rights petition, the property owner shall conform the zoning permit application for which relief is sought to such decision. If the zoning permit application on file is consistent with the relief granted on the vested rights petition, no revisions are necessary. Where proceedings have been stayed on the zoning permit application pending referral of the vested rights petition to the city council, proceedings on the application shall resume after the council's decision on the vested rights petition. 
(g)  Expiration. Relief granted on a vested rights petition shall expire on occurrence of one of the following events: 
(1)  The petitioner or property owner fails to submit a required revised zoning permit application consistent with the relief granted within 30 days of the final decision on the petition; 
(2)  The zoning permit application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition is denied under the criteria made applicable through the relief granted on the petition; or 
(3)  The zoning permit application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition expires. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-27. - Dormant projects. 
(a)  Termination of zoning permits. Any application for a zoning permit that has been approved by the city but which is not subject to an expiration date shall expire 90 days from the effective date of this section, unless one of the following events has occurred by such date: 
(1)  A subsequent application has been approved and remains in effect; provided, however, that if the subsequent application is for a zoning permit, such subsequent application also is subject to expiration under this subsection (b); or 
(2)  A subsequent application has been filed and is pending for decision; or 
(3)  Substantial construction on the development has occurred as authorized by and consistent with the zoning permit. 
(b)  Expiration dates. Notwithstanding any other provision of the zoning ordinance, for any application for a zoning permit to which no expiration date applies and which has been filed and is pending for decision on, or which is filed on or after the effective date of this chapter, approval of such application shall expire six months from the date of approval, unless a subsequent application is filed and approved, or construction is commenced consistent with and pursuant to the zoning permit, within such period. This subsection does not apply to a zoning permit application within a planned development district or subject to a special use permit. 
(c)  Vested rights petition. The owner of the land subject to a zoning permit that expires under subsection (b) may petition the city council to reinstate such zoning permit by filing a vested rights petition pursuant to section 77-26, as hereinafter established, prior to the expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-28. - Interpretation. 
(a)  Restrictiveness. Where the regulations imposed herein are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards are the requirements that shall govern. 
(b)  Abrogation. The provisions of these regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or other private agreement, provided that where the requirements of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other private agreement, the requirements of these regulations shall govern. 
(c)  Cumulative effect. The provisions of these regulations are cumulative and additional limitations upon all other laws and ordinances heretofore passed or which may be passed hereafter governing any subject matter set forth in the provisions of these regulations. 
(d)  Error correction. In the event that any property or zoning district set forth on the zoning district map as provided in section 77-42, zoning district map is misnamed, designated incorrectly, the boundaries are incorrect or the property is omitted, in part or in whole, the zoning district map may be amended and/or supplemented according to the following. 
(1)  Applicants. The property owner of said tract, the city council, or the planning and zoning commission may submit an application to the city manager to initiate the error correction process. 
(2)  Process. The error correction shall be processed as a zoning map or text amendment according to section 77-21, procedural steps of zoning petitions and amendments. 
(e)  City manager authority to interpret this chapter. Questions of interpretation of this chapter shall be referred to the city manager, who shall have the authority to determine the meaning and interpretation of any provision of this chapter. Any person aggrieved, or any officer, department or board of the city affected by an interpretation made by the city manager, may appeal said interpretation to the planning and zoning commission, whose decision in the matter shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-29. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular, except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word shall is mandatory and not discretionary. The following are this chapters' definitions. 
Accessory building means a building, either attached or detached from the main structure, for a subordinate use incidental to the principal building and use located on the same lot. Accessory buildings shall include, but not be limited to, parking garages, farm structures, garages for automobile storage, carports, tool houses, greenhouses, home workshops, children's playhouses, storage houses or garden shelters. 
Accessory use means a use that is subordinate to, serves, and is customarily incidental to the primary use of the main building or to the primary use of the premises; is located on the same lot or tract of land; and, which otherwise meets all requirements of this chapter and all applicable building and fire codes, as each of the foregoing may be amended. 
Adult day care center means a facility that provides services under an adult day care program on a daily or regular basis, but not overnight, to four or more elderly or persons with disabilities who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner of the facility. Adult day care centers must be licensed by the state department of human services. 
Airport landing field means a place where an aircraft can land and take off, usually equipped with hangars, facilities for refueling and repair and various accommodations for passengers. 
(1)  Heliport. An area of land or water or a structural surface which is used, or intended for use, for the landing and taking off of helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended for use, for heliport buildings and other heliport facilities. 
(2)  Helistop. The same as a heliport, except that no refueling, maintenance, repairs or storage or [of] helicopters is permitted. 
Alley means a public space or thoroughfare which affords only secondary means of access to property abutting thereon, which has been deeded or dedicated to the public for public use. 
Alternative financial institution means a payday advance/loan business or a motor vehicle title loan business. An alternative financial institution does not include state or federally chartered banks, community development financial institutions, savings and loans, credit unions, or regulated lenders licensed in accordance with Chapter 342 of the Texas Finance Code. 
Amenity center (private) means a facility or area that is an integral part of a residential project or planned development and that is used by the residents of the project or development for a place of meeting, recreation, or social activity, but not primarily to render a service that is customarily carried on as a business. Such facilities include but are not limited to swimming pools, saunas, hot tubs, game courts, playgrounds, community clubhouse, cabana, pavilion or roofed areas, leasing office, laundry facilities, and other similar uses. This use need not be located on the same lot as the property it serves. 
Amusement, commercial (indoors) means an amusement enterprise wholly enclosed in a building which is treated acoustically so that noise generated by the enterprise is not perceptible at the bounding property line and including, but not limited to a bowling alley, billiard parlor, or skating rink. 
Amusement, commercial (outdoors) means an outdoor area or structure, open to the public, which provides entertainment or amusement primarily by and for participants for a fee or admission charge. Typical uses include batting cages, miniature golf, go-kart tracks, and carnivals. 
Antenna means an instrument or device consisting of wires, poles, rods, or reflecting discs, designed for transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio, microwave, or electromagnetic spectrum. 
Antenna, stealth means a commercial antenna that is designed to be non-obtrusive, or virtually transparent or invisible to the surrounding neighborhood. Stealth antennas include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Antennas within a building's attic space, 
(2)  Antennas on the roof of a minimum three-story building and not visible from the property line of the lot on which the antenna is located, 
(3)  Antennas on a public utility structure, such as a water tower or high transmission line support tower, and painted to match the structure, 
(4)  Antennas located within a structure such as a flagpole, church steeple, subdivision monument, clock tower, or similar architectural feature, and antennas located on an athletic field light pole 
Antenna and/or antenna support structure, commercial means an antenna and its support structure used for commercial broadcasting or telecommunication purposes. This definition shall also include a satellite dish exceeding 12 feet in diameter and a microwave-transmitting tower. All radiating equipment must comply with Federal Communications Commission (FCC), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Occupational Health and Safety Administration (OSHA), and all other applicable State and Federal regulatory agency requirements and guidelines for human safety, as they exist or may be amended. Definition includes ancillary ground equipment. 
Antenna and/or antenna support structure, non-commercial means an instrument or device consisting of wires, poles, rods, or reflecting discs and its support structure not exceeding 40 feet in height above the ground elevation at the base of the support structure, designed for transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio, microwave, or electromagnetic spectrum. This definition shall also include a satellite dish antenna not to exceed 12 feet in diameter. 
Antenna support structure means any tower, mast, pole, tripod, box frame, or other structure utilized for the purpose of transmission, retransmission, and/or reception of electromagnetic, radio, television, or microwave signals. 
Antique shop and used furniture means a retail establishment engaged in the selling of works of art, furniture or other artifacts of an earlier period, with all sales and storage occurring inside a building. 
Apartment house means any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, or let to be occupied as three or more dwelling units or apartments, or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three or more families living in independent dwelling units. 
Area of lot means the area of a lot shall be the net area of the lot and shall not include portions of streets and alleys. 
Art gallery or museum means a building serving as a repository for a collection of natural, scientific, artistic, or literary objects of interest, and designed to be used for viewing, with or without an admission charge, and which may include as an accessory use the sale of goods. 
Artisan's workshop means an establishment used for the preparation, display, and sale of individually crafted artwork, jewelry, furniture, sculpture, pottery, leather-craft, textile articles, and related items. 
Auto parts and accessory sales (indoor) means the use of any building or other premise for the display and sale of new or used parts for automobiles, panel trucks or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles. 
Auto parts and accessory sales (outdoor) means the use of any land area for the display and sale of new or used parts for automobiles, panel trucks, or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles. 
Automobile repair, major means general repair or reconditioning of engines, air conditioning systems and transmissions for motor vehicles, collision services including body, frame or fender straightening or repair, customizing, painting, vehicle steam cleaning, undercoating and rustproofing, those uses listed under "automobile repair, minor," and other similar uses. 
Automobile repair, minor means an establishment used for the dispensing or sales of automobile fuels, lubricants, tires, and automobile accessories; the minor repair or replacement of parts, tires, paintless dent repair, and performing state inspections and making minor repairs necessary to pass said inspection; automobile detailing; window tinting, and the sales and installation of automobile radios. Uses listed under "automobile repair, major" or any other similar uses are not included. Vehicles, which are inoperative or are being repaired, may not remain parked outside for a period greater than seven calendar days. 
Automobile sales/leasing, new means sales, rental, and/or leasing of new automobiles or light load vehicles, and may include, as accessory uses: automobile sales, used; automobile repair, major; and automobile storage. 
Automobile sales, used means sales of used automobiles or light load vehicles. 
Bakery and confectioners works (retail) means a place for preparing, cooking, baking, and selling of products on the premises. 
Bakery and confectioners works (wholesale) means a place for preparing, cooking, baking, and selling of products intended for off-premises distribution. 
Banks, savings and loan, or credit union means an establishment for the custody, loan, exchange or issue of money, the extension of credit, and/or facilitating the transmission of funds. 
Banquet/meeting hall means an establishment that is leased on a temporary basis before the day of the event by individuals or groups who reserve the facility to accommodate functions, including, but not limited to, banquets, weddings, anniversaries, receptions, business and organizational meetings, and other similar functions, to which the general public is not admitted. Such establishments may include kitchen facilities for the preparation of food or catering of food and areas for dancing, dining, and other entertainment activities that customarily occur in association with banquets, weddings, or receptions. 
Basement means a building story which is partly underground, but having at least one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as a story in computing building height. 
Barber shop/beauty salon and personal service shops means establishments primarily engaged in providing services generally involved in the care of the person or his apparel including, but not limited to, barber and beauty shops, tanning salons, ear piercing shops, cosmetic tattooing shops, and reducing salons. 
Bed and breakfast inn means an owner (or operator) occupied residence with up to five bedrooms available for overnight guests. A bed and breakfast inn may provide for guest stays up to 14 consecutive days, however, it shall not offer weekly rental rates. Kitchen and dining facilities may be included to provide meals for guests only; however, no food preparation shall be permitted in guest bedrooms. A bed and breakfast inn shall not include restaurants, banquet facilities, or similar services. 
Big box retail development means any retail building for a single, primary tenant that exceeds 70,000 square feet in size. A big box retail development may contain multiple secondary tenants with interior access to the primary tenant space. A big box retail development may be freestanding or may be an in-line tenant in a larger center. The square footage of a big box retail development shall include all primary and ancillary uses with interior access to the primary tenant space including inventory storage, automotive repair, and open storage areas. 
Block means an area enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for buildings and is used as a term of measurement. The term "block" also means the distance along a side of a street between the nearest two streets which intersect the street on the side. 
Board means the zoning board of adjustment as provided for in section 77-25. 
Boarding house or rooming house means a residence structure other than a hotel where lodging and/or meals for four or more persons are provided for compensation. 
Body art studio means an establishment whose services include tattooing and/or body piercing. Tattooing shall mean the placing of designs, letters, figures, symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin of any person, using ink or other substances that result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means of the use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the skin. Body piercing shall mean the creation of an opening in an individual's body to insert jewelry or another decoration. 
Bottling works means a manufacturing facility designed to place a product into a bottle for distribution. 
Building means any structure built for the occupancy of persons, animals, or movable property of any kind. When subdivided in a manner sufficient to prevent the spread of fire, each portion so subdivided may be deemed a separate building. 
Building ends means those sides of a building having the least dimensions as compared to the front or rear of a building. As used in this chapter, a building end shall be interpreted as being the most narrow side of a building regardless of whether its front is upon a street, faces the rear of the lot or is adjacent to the side lot line or another building. 
Building line means a line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line at a specified distance therefrom making the minimum distance from the street line that a building may be erected. 
Building maintenance service and sales means a facility or area for contracting services such as building repair and maintenance, the installation of plumbing, electrical, air conditioning and heating equipment, janitorial services, and exterminating services. The retail sale of supplies is permitted as an accessory use. 
Building materials and hardware sales, inside storage means an establishment for the sale of materials and hardware customarily used in the construction of buildings and other structures, without any outside storage or display of materials or merchandise. 
Building materials and hardware sales, outside storage means an establishment for the sale of materials and hardware customarily used in the construction of buildings and other structures, including outside storage or display of materials or merchandise. 
Car wash, full service means a facility where a customer can have a motorcycle, automobile and light load vehicle washed in exchange for financial consideration. 
Car wash, self-service means a facility, typically coin operated, used by the customer to wash motorcycles, automobiles and light load vehicles. 
Carport means a structure open on a minimum of three sides, designed or used to shelter vehicles. 
Cemetery or mausoleum means property used for the interment of the dead. 
Certificate of occupancy and compliance means an official certificate issued by the city through the enforcing official as specified in [this chapter], which indicates conformance with or approved conditional waiver from the zoning regulations and authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued. 
Church, rectory, or other place of worship means a building for regular assembly religious worship which is used primarily for such purpose and those accessory activities which are customarily associated therewith, and the place of residence for ministers, priests, nuns or rabbis on the premises. This use does not include home meetings or other religious activities conducted in a privately occupied residence. 
City manager means the city's chief administrative officer. 
Cleaning and laundry, self-service means a facility where patrons wash, dry, or dry-clean clothing and other fabrics in machines operated by the patron. 
Clinic, medical or dental means an establishment for one or more physicians, surgeons, or dentists to treat sick or injured outpatients who do not remain overnight. 
College, university or private school means an institution established for educational purposes offering courses for study beyond the secondary education level, but excluding trade schools and commercial schools. 
Community center (public) means a building or complex of buildings that house cultural, recreational, athletic, library or entertainment facilities owned and/or operated by a governmental agency or private non-profit agency. 
Concrete/asphalt batching plant means a facility or area, which is not temporary in nature, for mixing concrete or asphalt. 
Concrete/asphalt batching plant, temporary means a temporary manufacturing facility for the on-site production of concrete or asphalt during construction of a project, and to be removed when the project is completed. 
Construction yard (temporary) means a storage yard or assembly yard for building materials and equipment directly related to a construction project and subject to removal at completion of construction. 
Contractor's shop and storage yard means a building, part of a building, or land area for the storage of construction materials, tools, products, and vehicles. 
Convenience store with gas pumps means a retail establishment that sells food and other consumable and non-consumable products for off-premise use or consumption. This definition shall also include the dispensing or sales of motor vehicle fuels, lubricants, and accessories, but shall not include automobile repair or the sale of replacement parts. 
Convenience store without gas pumps means a retail establishment that sells food and other consumable and non-consumable products for off-premise use or consumption. 
Court means an open, unoccupied space, bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court has one side open to a street, alley, yard or other permanent open space. 
Coverage means the percent of a lot or tract covered by the roof or first floor of a building. Roof eaves to the extent of two feet from the walls of a building shall be excluded from coverage computations. 
Dancehall or nightclub means an establishment offering to the general public facilities for dancing and entertainment for a fee, and subject to licensing and regulation by the city. 
Day camp means a facility arranged and conducted for the organized recreation and instruction of children, including outdoor activities on a daytime basis. 
Day care center means a facility or area providing care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for seven or more children for less than 24 hours per day. The term "day care center" shall not include overnight lodging, medical treatment, counseling, or rehabilitative services and does not apply to kindergartens, prekindergartens, and schools listed elsewhere in this chapter. 
Depth of lot means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
District means a section of the city for which the regulations governing the area, height, or use of the land and buildings are uniform. 
Drive-in or drive-through service means and refers to a retail or commercial facility whose employees provide goods or services to patrons without requiring the patrons to leave their automobiles. Drive-in or drive-through service may be an accessory use or the primary use of the retail or commercial facility as more particularly provided in the land use charts contained in section 77-46, and as hereafter amended. Any drive-in or drive-through service shall provide the appropriate number of required stacking spaces. 
Dry cleaning plant means an industrial facility where fabrics are cleaned with substantially non-aqueous organic solvents on a commercial or wholesale basis. 
Dry cleaning or laundry, minor means a custom cleaning shop or pick-up station not exceeding 6,000 square feet of floor area, including, but not limited to, dry cleaning plants having no more than 1,500 square feet of floor area for dry cleaning equipment. 
Dwelling unit means a building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied, or intended to be occupied as living quarters and includes facilities for food preparation and sleeping. 
Equipment and machinery sales and rental, major means a building or open area, other than a right-of-way or public parking area, used for display, sale, rental or storage of heavy equipment. Heavy equipment includes, but is not limited to, tractors, farm machinery, bulldozers, street graders, paving devices, or other equipment with a gross vehicle weight (GVW) greater than 25,000 pounds. 
Equipment and machinery sales and rental, minor means a building or structure used for the inside display, sale, rental, or storage of light machinery, including, but not limited to, bicycles, lawn mowers, tools, and other small machinery. 
Fairgrounds/exhibition area means an area where outdoor fairs, circuses, rodeos, or exhibitions are held. 
Family means any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, in which not more than three individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
Farm accessory building means a structure, other than a dwelling, on a farm as herein defined, for the housing, protection or storage of the usual farm equipment, animals and crops. 
Farm, ranch, garden, or orchard means an area of five acres or more which is used for growing of usual farm products, vegetables, fruits, trees, and grain and for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals such as horses, cattle and sheep and including the necessary accessories used for raising, treating and storing products raised on the premises, but not including the commercial feeding of offal and garbage to swine and other animals and not including any type of agricultural or husbandry specifically prohibited by ordinance or law. 
Farmer's market means the retail sale of farm produce by individual vendors within a covered lease space, for the primary purpose of selling fruits, vegetables, herbs, spices, edible seeds, nuts, live plants, flowers, and honey. Sale of any type of meat, fish, or poultry, eggs, refrigerated dairy products, and home canned or packaged items shall be prohibited. 
Feed store means an establishment for the selling of corn, grain, and other food stuffs for animals and livestock, and including other implements and goods related to agricultural processes, but not including farm machinery. 
Fire station and public safety building means a building housing fire apparatus and, usually, firefighters, or a building housing a law enforcement agency of a unit of local government. 
Flea market, inside means a building or structure wherein space is rented to vendors on a short-term basis for the sale of merchandise. The principal sales shall include new and used household goods, personal effects, tools, art work, small household appliances, and similar merchandise, objects, or equipment in small quantities. The term flea market shall not be deemed to include wholesale sales establishments or rental services establishments, but shall be deemed to include personal services establishments, food services establishments, retail sales establishments, and auction establishments. 
Flea market, outside means an outdoor site where space is rented to vendors on a short-term basis for the sale of merchandise. The principal sales shall include new and used household goods, personal effects, tools, art work, small household appliances, and similar merchandise, objects, or equipment in small quantities. The term flea market shall not be deemed to include wholesale sales establishments or rental services establishments, but shall be deemed to include personal services establishments, food services establishments, retail sales establishments, and auction establishments. 
Floodplain means an area of land subject to inundation by a 100-year frequency flood, as shown on the city's floodplain map. 
Floor area means the total square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor level, but excluding carports, residential garages, and breezeways. 
Floor area ratio (FAR) means the floor area of a main building on a lot, divided by the lot area. 
Florist shop means an establishment for the display and retail sale of flowers, small plants, and accessories. 
Foundation. A man-made structure element on which a structure is erected, with the ability to transfer the applied loads of the structure to the ground. 
Foundation fascia. Covering of a foundation wall or stem wall. 
Fraternal organization, lodge, or civic club means an organized group having a restricted membership and specific purpose related to the welfare of the members, such as Elks, Masons, Knights of Columbus, or a labor union. 
Fuel pumps mean any facility, equipment, or fixture, including a canopy, used for retail dispensing of motor vehicle fuels. 
Furniture, home furnishing, and equipment stores means retail stores selling goods used for furnishing the home including, but not limited to, furniture, floor coverings, draperies, glass and chinaware, domestic stoves, refrigerators, and other household electrical and gas appliances. 
Gaming device means coin-operated machines or devices, which are operated by or with a coin or other United States currency, metal slug, token, electronic card, or check, specifically including eight-liners (an electronic, electromechanical or mechanical contrivances which have eight lines on which a player can win — three across, three down and two diagonally — by matching symbols) that dispenses credits, tickets, coupons, merchandise, commodities or some other representation of value and which may play music in connection with or in addition to dispensing skill or pleasure. The primary use of any building, structure, facility or space that houses two or more coin-operated machines or devices, as described above, shall be deemed to be a game room use. In addition, any business that receives 50 percent or more of its gross revenues from the provision, exhibition and/or operation of coin-operated machines or devices, as described above, shall also be deemed a game room use. 
Game room means any premise, building, structure, facility or space to deal, operate, carry on, conduct, maintain, or expose for play any game, sports book, promotion, sweepstakes, or other activity electronic or otherwise that may or may not confer upon the patrons or participants the right, chance, or ability to win and or claim prizes. 
Garage apartment means a dwelling unit erected in conjunction with a garage when the main structure is an owner occupied detached dwelling unit. 
General commercial plant means establishments other than personal service shops for the treatment and/or processing of products as a service on a for-profit basis including, but not limited to, newspaper printing, laundry plant, or cleaning and dying plant. 
Golf course and/or country club means a land area and buildings used for golf, including fairways, greens, tee boxes, driving range, putting green, and associated maintenance and retail facilities. This definition shall also include clubhouses, dining rooms, swimming pools, tennis courts, and similar recreational or service uses available only to members and their guests. 
Grocery store or supermarket means a retail establishment, singular retailer, or wholesale user primarily selling food, pharmaceutical medication, household merchandise, clothing, and a variety of other retail goods that may or may not have membership requirements, emphasize bulk sales, discount sales, and department stores. 
Ground level. The final grade elevation of a lot. 
Guest house means an accessory building used to house guests of the owner(s) of the main residential structure, and which is never rented or offered for rent. 
Gun or archery range (indoor) means any indoor facility open to the public and occupying all or a portion of a building where firearms and/or archery are discharged for testing or recreation purposes. 
Health/fitness center means a public or private facility operated to promote physical health and fitness. Activities may include exercise, physical therapy, training, and education pertaining to health and fitness. Uses or combinations of uses or facilities would typically include, but are not limited to, game courts, weight lifting and exercise equipment, aerobics, swimming pools and spas, and running or jogging tracks. 
Height means the vertical distance of a building measured from the average established grade at the street line or from the average natural front yard ground level, whichever is higher, to the: 
(1)  Highest point of the roof's surface, if a flat surface; 
(2)  Deck line of mansard roofs; or 
(3)  Mean height level between eaves and ridge for hip and gable roofs and, in any event, excluding chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, penthouses, tanks, water towers, radio towers, ornamental cupolas, domes or spires, and parapet walls not exceeding ten feet in height. If the street grade has not been officially established, the average front yard grade shall be used for a base level. 
High impact use means a facility or area for activities or products which have the potential to be dangerous, extremely obnoxious, or cause substantial environmental impacts on or beyond the boundaries of the property on which the activity or use is conducted. High impact uses include but are not limited to the following activities: 
(1)  Manufacture and/or bulk storage and testing of explosives, fireworks, or munitions. 
(2)  Refining petroleum and the storage and distribution of natural and liquid gas or other petroleum derivatives in bulk including terminals, tank farms or other similar facilities. 
(3)  Manufacture, storage, compounding or handling radioactive materials or wastes. 
(4)  Manufacture, blending or mixture of pesticides, certain acids, and fertilizer. 
(5)  Stockyards, feed pens, livestock sales with barns and/or shipping facilities. Rendering of animal fats, slaughtering or processing of animals and industrial manufacturing processes using the following raw materials: bones, garbage, offal and dead animals. 
(6)  Refining of raw materials, such as, but not limited to chemicals, rubber, wood or wood pulp, into other products. 
(7)  The extraction of raw materials, such as sand or gravel mining. 
(8)  Forging, casting, melting, refining, extruding, rolling, drawing and/or alloying metals. 
(9)  Jet engine or other engine testing. 
(10)  Refuse disposal services including but not limited to landfills, incinerators, and other locations which receive garbage and refuse generated offsite for storage, treatment or disposal. 
(11)  Asphalt or concrete batch plant. 
(12)  Boiler works. 
Historically significant area means one or more places or areas designated by the city for its historical, cultural, or architectural importance and significance before April 1, 2019. The areas included within the CA—Central Area District, the Farmersville Commercial Historic District, and the Farmersville Main Street America Program Area are Historically Significant Areas designated by the City before April 1, 2019 or as authorized by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 3000. 
Home occupation means an occupation carried on in the home by a member of the occupant's family without the employment of additional persons, use of a sign to advertise the occupation, offering any commodity or service for sale on the premises, use of equipment other than that customarily found in a household and which does not create obnoxious noise or other obnoxious conditions to abutting residential property, such as emission of odor, increased traffic or generation of light or smoke, and where the use is carried on in the main structure only and there is not a separate entrance for the use. The term "home occupation" shall specifically exclude the operation of a repair garage, plumbing shop or similar activity. 
Hospital means an institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily in-patients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, helistops, outpatient facilities, or training facilities as licensed by the state. 
Hotel means a building or group of buildings used as a temporary dwelling place for individuals in exchange for financial consideration where customary hotel services such as linen, housekeeping service, and telephone are provided. Hotel room units are accessed through doorways into an internal hallway, courtyard, or lobby. Financial consideration for hotel room units is generally calculated on a nightly basis. 
Housing development means any development involving the provision of housing as the primary land use and the inclusion of secondary facilities, such as streets and sidewalks. 
HUD-Code manufactured home means a structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width, or 40 body feet in length, or when erected on site is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. The term "HUD-Code manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle, or mobile home as defined in the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St., art. 5221f. 
Industrialized housing (or modular home) Per Section 1202 of the Texas Occupations Code or as may be amended: 
(1)  Industrialized housing is a residential structure that is: 
a.  Designed for the occupancy of one or more families; 
b.  Constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one or more modular components built at a location other than the permanent site; and 
c.  Designed to be used as a permanent residential structure when the module or the modular component is transported to the permanent site and erected or installed on a permanent foundation system. 
(2)  Includes the structure's plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. 
(3)  Industrialized housing does not include: 
a.  A residential structure that exceeds four stories or 60 feet in height; 
b.  Housing constructed of a sectional or panelized system that does not use a modular component; or 
c.  A ready-built home constructed in a manner in which the entire living area is contained in a single unit or section at a temporary location for the purpose of selling and moving the home to another location. 
Licensed massage therapy means a health care service by a licensed massage therapist, as defined by state law. The term "massage therapy" means the manipulation of soft tissue for therapeutic purposes and includes, but is not limited to, effleurage (stroking), petrissage (kneading), strokes, and Swedish gymnastics, either by hand or with mechanical or electrical apparatus for the purpose of body massage. Massage therapy may include the use of oil, salt glows, heat lamps, hot and cold packs, tub, shower, or cabinet baths. Equivalent terms for massage therapy are massage, therapeutic massage, and massage technology, myotherapy or any derivation of those terms. The terms "therapy" and "therapeutic" do not include diagnosis, the treatment of illness or disease, or any service or procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry is required by law. 
Living unit means the rooms occupied by a family, which must include cooking facilities. 
Loading space means an off-street space or berth used for the loading or unloading of vehicles. 
Lot area means the net horizontal area of a lot excluding portions of streets and alleys and easements for streets and alleys. 
Lot, corner, means a lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
Lot coverage means the percentage of the total area of a lot occupied by the base (first story or floor) of buildings located on the lot. 
Lot depth means the horizontal distance measured perpendicularly between two points on the front lot line and two points on the rear lot line which creates an area that meets the minimum width and depth requirements for the zoning district. The term "lot depth" shall not include easements, which impair the use of the lot surface as a yard. 
Lot, flag or panhandle means a lot having access to a street by means of a parcel of land having a depth greater than its frontage, and having a width less than the minimum required lot width, but not less than 12 feet. 
Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot line, front means the narrower side of the lot abutting a street. Where two lot lines abutting streets are of equal length, the owner shall have a choice in designating which shall be the lot frontage. For a lot which has a boundary line which does not abut the front street line, is not a rear lot line and lies along the same general directional orientation as the front and rear lot lines, such line shall be considered a front lot line in establishing a minimum setback line. 
Lot line, rear means the lot line farthest from, but most nearly parallel to, the front lot line. For triangular lots, the point opposite the front lot line shall be considered the rear lot line and have a value of zero. 
Lot line, side means any lot line which is not the front or rear lot line. 
Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot as defined in this section. 
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat for which has been recorded in the county clerk's office. 
Lot, plot or tract means land occupied, or to be occupied, by a building and its accessory buildings, and including such open spaces as are required under this chapter and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved place. 
Lot, through means a residential lot, other than a corner lot, abutting more than one street and having access to more than one street. Through lots are prohibited by this chapter. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance measured between side lot lines, perpendicular to the front lot line, and measured from the point on the building line which is closest to the front lot line. 
Main building means the buildings on a lot which are occupied by the primary use. 
Manufactured home display and sales means the open display, storage, and sale of HUD-Code manufactured homes. 
Manufacturing, Heavy means a facility or area for generally mass producing goods usually for sale to wholesalers or other industrial or manufacturing uses. A heavy manufacturing use is one which employs the following or similar types of processes: 
(1)  The milling of grain as retail sales and service. 
(2)  Producing animal food, and tanning animal hides. 
(3)  Production of large durable goods such as but not limited to motorcycles, cars, manufactured homes, or airplanes. 
(4)  Canning or bottling of food or beverages for human consumption using a mechanized assembly line. 
(5)  Manufacturing of paint, oils, pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, solvents, and other chemical products; and use of a foundry for metals. 
(6)  Production of items made from stone, clay, metal or concrete. 
(7)  Tire recapping or retreading. 
Manufacturing, light means a facility or area for producing goods without the use of chemical processing of materials and determined not to be a hazard or nuisance to adjacent property or the community at large, due to the possible emission of excessive smoke, noise, gas, fumes, dust, odor, or vibration, or the danger of fire, explosion, or radiation. Light manufacturing activities include but are not limited to the following activities: 
(1)  Assembly, finishing, and/or packaging of small items from component parts made at another location. Examples include but are not limited to cabinetmaking or the assembly of clocks, electrical appliances, or medical equipment. 
(2)  Production of items made from materials derived from plants or animals, including but not limited to leather, pre-milled wood, rubber, paper, wool, or cork; or from textiles or plastics. 
(3)  Electrical component manufacturing. 
(4)  Reproduction, cutting, printing or binding of written materials, drawings, or newspapers on a bulk basis using lithography, offset printing, blue printing and other similar methods. 
(5)  Machine or welding shop — a facility where material is processed by machining, cutting, grinding, welding or similar processes. 
(6)  Spray painting or motor vehicle conversion. 
Masonry construction 
(1)  Primary materials. Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, exterior construction materials are fired brick, natural and manufactured stone, granite, marble, architectural concrete block, and three-step stucco process for all structures. 
(2)  Other materials. Other exterior construction materials for nonresidential structures are tilt wall concrete panels and sealed and painted concrete block. 
Medical or scientific research lab means a facility or area for conducting medical or scientific research, investigation, testing, or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory. This definition also includes labs for the manufacture of dentures and prostheses. 
Mini-warehouse/self-storage facility means a facility or area where enclosed storage space, divided into separate compartments no larger than 500 square feet in size, is provided for use by individuals to store personal items or by businesses to store materials for operation of a business establishment at another location. Related activities, such as retail sale of packing and moving materials and the rental of moving equipment, including vans and trucks, are allowed as incidental uses. 
Mobile home means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight feet or more in body width and 40 feet or more in length, or when erected on site is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. 
Model home (temporary) means a single family dwelling in a developing subdivision located on a legal lot of record that is limited to temporary use as a sales office for the subdivision and to provide an example of the dwellings which have been built or which are proposed to be built in the same subdivision. 
Mortuary or funeral parlor means a place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial or cremation, or a building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased, and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation. 
Motel means a building or group of buildings used as a temporary dwelling place for individuals in exchange for financial consideration where customary hotel services such as linen, housekeeping service, and telephone are provided. Each motel room unit has direct access to the outside. Financial consideration for motel room units is generally calculated on a nightly basis. 
Motor vehicle means every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be transported, carried, propelled, or drawn including by way of illustration, and not limitation, cars, busses, mopeds, motorcycles, trucks, tractors, trailers, and watercraft. 
Motorcycle sales/service means the display, sale and servicing, including repair work of motorcycles. 
Multiple-family dwelling means any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as three or more dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three or more households living in independent dwelling units. 
Nonconforming use or structure means a building, structure, or use of land lawfully occupied at the time of the effective date of the ordinance, or amendments thereto, from which this article is derived, or annexed into the city and which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
Nursery, major means an establishment for the cultivation and propagation, display, storage, and sale (retail and wholesale) of large plants, shrubs, trees, and other materials used in indoor or outdoor plantings; and the contracting for installation and/or maintenance of landscape material as an accessory use. Outdoor display and storage is permitted. 
Nursery, minor means a retail business for the display and/or sale of trees, shrubs, flowers, ornamental plants, seeds, garden and lawn supplies, and other materials used in indoor and outdoor planting, without outside storage or display. 
Nursing/convalescent home means an institutional facility licensed by the state providing in-patient health care, personal care or rehabilitative services over a long period of time generally exceeding 30 days to persons chronically ill, aged or disabled who need on-going health supervision but not including hospitals. This use excludes the provision of surgical or emergency medical services and the provision of care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease, or communicable disease. 
Occupancy means the use or intended use of the land or building by owners, proprietors, or tenants. 
Office, professional/general administrative means a room or group of rooms used for the provision of executive, management, or administrative services. Typical uses include administrative offices and services, including real estate, insurance, property management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone answering, and business offices of public utilities, organizations and associations, but excluding medical offices. 
Office, medical or dental. See clinic, medical or dental. 
Office, showroom/warehouse means an establishment that primarily consists of sales offices and sample display areas for products and/or services delivered or performed off-premises. Catalog and telephone sales facilities are appropriate. Incidental retail sales of products associated with the primary products and/or services are permitted. Warehousing facilities shall be incidental to the primary use and shall not exceed 50 percent of the total floor area. This designation does not include contract construction or a contractor's shop and storage yard. 
One-family dwelling (attached) means a dwelling that is part of a structure containing three or more dwellings, which is joined to another dwelling at one or more points, by a party wall or abutting separate wall, which is designed for occupancy by one household and is located on a separate lot delineated by front, side and rear lot lines. This definition includes the term "townhome." 
One-family dwelling (detached) means a dwelling designed and constructed for occupancy by one household, which is located on a lot or separate building tract, and having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract. 
Open space means area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on the lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky, except for the ordinary projections of cornices, eaves, or porches. 
Open storage and outside display means as a primary use, over 50 percent of a property area used for outdoor storage or display of commodities, materials, goods, equipment, vehicles, or merchandise in its normal day-to-day business activities. This definition excludes new and used sale or lease of automobiles, motorcycles recreational vehicles, boats, or watercrafts. 
Outdoor structure means open to the public and which provides entertainment or amusement for a fee or admission charge including, but not limited to, batting cages, miniature golf, go-kart tracks and carnivals. 
Owner (or operator) occupied residence means the structure, house, or home is the primary or principal residence of the owner or operator. 
Park or playground (public) means an open recreation facility or park owned and operated by a public agency for the general public, including a baseball field, golf course, football field or stadium. 
Parking garage, residential means an enclosed all-weather surfaced area used for parking a vehicle, not on a public street or alley, together with an all-weather surfaced driveway connecting the area with a street, permitting free ingress and egress without encroachment on the street. 
Parking lot/garage (accessory) means an area or structure for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. 
Parking lot/garage (commercial) means an area or structure where a fee is charged for parking motor vehicles and which serves as the primary use on the lot. 
Patio home means a one-family dwelling on a separate lot, with open space setbacks only on three sides, commonly developed in a cluster configuration. 
Pawn shop means an establishment where money is loaned on the security of personal property pledged in the keeping of the owners (pawnbroker). 
Pet grooming means an establishment that provides grooming services for dogs, cats and other small domesticated animals inside a heated and air conditioned building; but which establishment does not provide indoor or outdoor pens in which such animals are housed or boarded on a daily basis or overnight or are otherwise bred, trained, or sold for commercial purposes. Pet grooming may be an accessory use to a pet shop. 
Pet shop means an establishment offering small animals, fish, or birds for sale as pets and where all such creatures are housed within the building. 
Planning and zoning commission means the agency appointed by the city council as an advisory body to it and which is authorized to recommend changes in the zoning and other functions as delegated to it by the city council. 
Plat means a plan for a subdivision of land creating building lots or tracts and showing all essential dimensions and other information essential to comply with the city's subdivision standards and state law. It is subject to approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council and is filed with the county plat records. 
Play field or stadium (public) means an athletic field or stadium owned and operated by a public agency for the general public, including a baseball field, golf course, football field, or stadium. 
Plot means a single unit or parcel of land, or a parcel of land that can be identified and referenced on a recorded plat or map. 
Portable building sales means an establishment which displays and sells structures which are capable of being carried and transported to another location, not including mobile homes or HUD-Code manufactured homes. 
Post office, government and private means the local branch of the United States Postal Service or private commercial venture engaged in the distribution of mail and incidental services. 
Premises means land together with any building or structures situated thereon. 
Primary use means the principal or predominant use of any lot or building. 
Principal building means same as main building. 
Print shop, major means an establishment specializing in long-run printing operations including, but not limited to, book, magazine, and newspaper publishing using engraving, die cutting, lithography, and thermography processes. 
Print shop, minor means an establishment specializing in short-run operations to produce newsletters, flyers, resumes, maps, construction documents and plans, and similar materials using photocopying, duplicating, and blue printing processes. This definition shall include mailing and shipping services, but excludes the on-site storage of heavy load fleet vehicles. 
Private club means a club where alcoholic beverages are stored, possessed and mixed on club premises and served for on-premises consumption only to members of the club and their families and guests, by the drink or in sealed, unsealed or broken containers of any legal size. 
Private street means a private vehicular accessway shared by and serving two or more lots, which is not dedicated to the public and is not publicly maintained. Private streets and alleys may be established only under the terms of chapter 65, Subdivisions. The term "private street" shall be inclusive of private alleys. 
Private utility, other than listed means a nonpublic utility requiring special faculties, in residential areas or on public property, for such purposes as heating, cooling, or communications, not customarily provided by the municipality or public utilities. 
Propane storage and distribution means facilities for the receipt, storage, and distribution of propane gas in tanks larger than five gallons. 
Public building, shop or yard of local, state or federal government means facilities such as office buildings, maintenance yards or shops required by branches of local, state, or federal governments for service to an area such as a highway department or city service center. 
Railroad or bus passenger station means any premises of the transient housing or parking of motor-driven buses and trains and the loading and unloading of passengers. 
Railroad team track, freight depot or docks means a facility or place for the loading and unloading of materials on trains. 
Recreational vehicle (RV) parks and campgrounds means an area for locating, establishing, or maintaining one or more sites for occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes. The area is intended for use on a temporary basis by campers, vacationers, and travelers. 
Recreational vehicle sales and service, new/used means sales and/or leasing of new and/or used recreational vehicles or boats, including, as an accessory use, repair work of recreational vehicles and boats. 
Rehabilitation care facility means a facility which provides residence and care to not more than nine persons regardless of legal relationship who have demonstrated a tendency towards alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct living together with not more than two supervisory personnel as a single housekeeping unit. 
Rehabilitation care institution means a facility which provides residence and care to ten or more persons, regardless of legal relationship, who have demonstrated a tendency toward alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct together with supervisory personnel. 
Repair shop, household equipment and appliances means the maintenance and rehabilitation of appliances customarily used in the home including, but not limited to, washing and drying machines, refrigerators, dishwashers, trash compactors, ovens and ranges, countertop kitchen appliances, vacuum cleaners and hairdryers. 
Residence means the same as dwelling, and when used with district means an area of residential regulations. 
Residence hotel means a multidwelling unit, extended stay lodging facility consisting of efficiency units or suites with a complete kitchen suitable for long-term occupancy. Customary hotel services such as linens, maid service, telephone, and upkeep of furniture shall be provided. Meeting rooms, clubhouse, and recreational facilities intended for the use of residents and their guests are permitted. This definition shall not include other dwelling units as defined by this section. 
Residential community center, private (accessory) means a facility or area that is an integral part of a residential project or planned development and that is used by the residents of the project or development for a place of meeting, recreation, or social activity, but not primarily to render a service that is customarily carried on as a business. Such facilities include but are not limited to swimming pools, saunas, hot tubs, game courts, playgrounds, community clubhouse, cabana, pavilion or roofed areas, leasing office, laundry facilities, and other similar uses. This use need not be located on the same lot as the property it serves. 
Residential district means a district where the primary purpose is residential use. 
Restaurant or cafeteria means an eating establishment where customers are primarily served at tables or self-served and food is consumed on the premises, which may include a drive-in window. 
Restaurant (drive-in type) means an eating establishment where primarily food or drink is served to customers in motor vehicles, or where facilities are provided on the premises, which encourages the serving and consumption of food in automobiles on or near the restaurant premises. 
Restaurant or food shop, take-out and delivery means a food establishment that is open to the public, where food and beverages are prepared primarily for carry-out by the consumer or delivery by the establishment and not for consumption on the premises. This classification may include ice cream shops, pizza delivery, specialty food and beverage shops, or baked goods shops. 
Retail or service, incidental means a retail or service use that is clearly incidental and supportive to the primary use. Said use shall be operated for the benefit or convenience of the employees, visitors, or customers of the primary use. Incidental shall mean an area that constitutes not more than 15 percent of the main use. 
Retail stores and shops means an establishment engaged in the sale or rental of goods and merchandise to the general public for personal or household use or consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale or rental of such goods or merchandise. 
Right-of-way and track means used by a railroad, but not including railroad stations, siding, team tracks, loading facilities, dock yards, or maintenance areas. 
Salvage yard means a yard or building where automobiles or machinery are stored, dismantled and/or offered for sales as whole units, as salvaged parts, or as processed metal. 
Sand and gravel storage means a facility where sand and gravel are stored for sale or use by private entity. 
School, private or parochial (primary or secondary), means a school operated by a private or religious agency or corporation other than an independent school district, having a curriculum generally equivalent to a public elementary or secondary school. 
School, public means a school operated by an independent school district and providing elementary or secondary curriculum. 
School, trade or commercial, means establishments, other than public or parochial schools, private primary or secondary schools, or colleges offering training or instruction in a trade, art, or occupation. 
Sexually oriented businesses or establishments are as defined and regulated in Ord. No. 98-12. 
Shopping center means a group of commercial, primarily retail and service establishments, that are planned, constructed, and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, and provisions for aesthetically appropriate design and protection from the elements. 
Shops, offices, and storage area for public or private utility means the pole yard, maintenance yard, or administrative office or public of private utilities. 
Sign means an outdoor advertising device that is a structure or that is attached to or painted on a building or that is leaned against a structure or a display on premises intended to accomplish the purposes customarily assigned to signs. Regulations of size, type, construction standards are set forth in Ord. No. 2000-07, or its successor ordinance, if any. 
Significantly important building means a building which is: 
(1)  Located in a historically significant area; 
(2)  Located in an area designated as a historic district on the National Register of Historic Places; 
(3)  Designated as a Recorded Texas Historic Landmark; 
(4)  Designated as a State Archeological Landmark or State Antiquities Landmark; 
(5)  Listed on the National Register of Historic Places or designated as a landmark by a governmental entity; 
(6)  Located in a World Heritage Buffer Zone; or 
(7)  Located in an area designated for development, restoration, or preservation in a main street city under the main street program established under V.T.C.A. Government Code § 442.014; or as otherwise provided in V.T.C.A. Government Code Ch. 3000. 
Small engine repair shop means shop for repair of lawnmowers, chain saws, lawn equipment, and other machines with one-cylinder engines. 
Stable (commercial) means a facility for boarding horses, renting horses to the public or conducting riding lessons. A minimum of ten acres is required for this use. 
Stable (private) means an accessory building for quartering horses, when the stable building is set back from all adjacent property lines at least 100 feet, and when the site contains a minimum area of one acre for each animal quartered. 
Stacking space means a designated area that provides the ability for motor vehicles to queue on site prior to receiving a service. Each required stacking space shall be a minimum of nine feet in width and 20 feet in length and shall not be located within or interfere with any other circulation driveway, parking space, fire lane, or maneuvering area. 
Story means the height between the successive floors of a building, or the distance from the floor to the roof. For the purpose of computing building height pursuant to this chapter, the average height for a story shall be defined as 12 feet, six inches. 
Street means any thoroughfare or public driveway, other than an alley, of more than 30 feet in width, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use. 
Street line means a boundary line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous street right-of-way. A street line is the same as a front property line or right-of-way line. 
Structural alterations means any change in the supporting member of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders. 
Structure means a combination of materials that are used to form a construction that is built and/or installed on, above or below the surface of land or water. (Means that which is built or constructed vertically above ground level). 
Studio for dance, gymnastics, and/or martial arts means a building or portion of a building used as a place of work for a gymnast, dancer and/or martial artist or for instructional classes in gymnastics, dance and/or martial arts. 
Studio for photographer, musician, and artist means a building or portion of a building as a place of work by a photographer, musician, or artist. 
Studio for radio and television means a building or portion of a building used as a place for radio or television broadcasting. 
Swim and tennis club means a private recreational club with restricted membership, usually of less area than a country club, but including a clubhouse and swimming pool, tennis courts and similar recreational facilities, none of which are available to the general public. 
Swimming pool (private) means a swimming pool constructed for the exclusive use of the residents of a one-family, two-family, or multiple-family dwelling and located and fenced in accordance with city regulations. A private swimming pool shall not be operated as a business nor maintained in a manner to be hazardous or obnoxious to adjacent property owners. 
Telephone line and exchange means a line for the transmission of telephone signals and a central office in which telephone lines are connected to permit communication. 
Temporary field office means a building or structure of either permanent or temporary construction, used in connection with a development or supervisory and/or administrative functions related to development, construction or the sale of real estate properties within the active development or construction project. 
Theater (drive-in) means an open lot with its appurtenant facilities devoted primarily to the showing of motion pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis to patrons seated in automobiles. 
Theater (indoor) means a building or part of a building devoted to the showing of motion pictures, or for dramatic, musical or live performance. 
Thoroughfare means the same as street. 
Tow truck means a vehicle for hire: 
(1)  Designed to lift, pull, or carry another vehicle by means of a boom, wheel-lift or spectacle lift, integrated boom and wheel-lift (a.k.a. self-loader, snatcher, quick pick or repo truck), flatbed (a.k.a. rollback or slide), lift flatbed, or other mechanical apparatus; and 
(2)  Having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of at least 10,000 pounds that may be used to move disabled, improperly parked, impounded, repossessed, or otherwise indisposed motor vehicles. 
Towing or wrecker service means a facility or area in which tow trucks are employed in the hauling of motorized vehicles and for the storage of vehicles that have been towed, repossessed, or otherwise in the care and custody of the operator of the lot, but not disassembled or junked. 
Townhome. See one-family dwelling (attached). 
Tract means an area, parcel, site, piece of land, or property which is the subject of a zoning or development application. 
Trailer sales or rental means the display and offering for sale or rent of trailers designed to be towed by a vehicle. Such trailers offered or displayed in the GR District shall not exceed 20 feet in overall length. 
Transportation and utility structures/facilities mean permanent facilities and structures operated by companies engaged in providing transportation and utility services including, but not limited to, sewage pumping stations, telephone exchanges, water reservoirs, and water pumping stations. 
Travel trailer means a mobile vehicle, designed and used as a temporary place of dwelling, and of such size and design so as to be subject to licensing for towing on the highway by a passenger motor vehicle or other vehicle, and not requiring a special permit for moving on the highways as contrasted to a mobile home. 
Truck parking lot means an area for parking vehicles weighing more than 6,500 pounds. 
Truck sales (heavy truck) means the display, sale, or rental of new or used heavy load vehicles in operable condition. 
Truck terminal means an area and building where cargo is stored and where trucks, including tractors and trailer units, load and unload cargo on a regular basis, and may include facilities for the temporary storage of loads prior to shipment. 
Two-family dwelling (duplex) means a single structure designed and constructed with two living units under a single roof for occupancy by two households living independently of each other. 
Utility distribution/transmission lines means facilities which serve to distribute and transmit electrical power, gas and water, including but not limited to electrical transmission lines, gas transmission lines and metering stations. 
Variance means an adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of this chapter to a particular parcel of property which, because of special conditions or circumstance peculiar to the particular parcel, is necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the same vicinity and zoning district. 
Vehicle recovery means the recovery of any vehicle to another place, generally speaking with a tow truck. 
Vehicle storage means a holding facility for the storage of operable or inoperable vehicles awaiting adjustment or settlement of insurance claims, repossessed motor vehicles, or motor vehicles that have been impounded for other various reasons. Dismantling of vehicles is not permitted. 
Veterinarian clinic and/or kennel, indoor means an establishment, not including outside pens/kennels, where animals and pets are admitted for examination and medical treatment, or where domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold for commercial purposes. 
Veterinarian clinic and/or kennel, outdoor an establishment with outdoor pens/kennels, where animals and pets are admitted for examination and medical treatment, or where domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold for commercial purposes. 
Warehouse/distribution center means a building or area for storage, wholesale, and/or distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment. This definition excludes the bulk storage of materials that are flammable or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. 
Wholesale office storage or sales facility means a wholesale, storage, and distribution use, not generally open to the public, in which merchandise is displayed and sold at wholesale to business representatives for resale, rather than to the general public for direct consumption, including the storage of goods for sale, and not including "truck terminal". An establishment should have a minimum 75 percent of its total floor area devoted to storage and warehousing, but not accessible to the general public. The remaining area may include retail and wholesale areas, sales offices, and display areas for products sold and distributed from the storage and warehouse areas. Wholesalers that do not have auxiliary storage as a part of the use shall be considered offices. 
Yard means an open space, other than a court, on the lot in which a building is situated and which is not obstructed from a point 40 inches above the general ground level of the graded lot to the sky, except as provided by roof overhang or similar special architectural features. 
Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space on a lot facing a street extending across the lot front between the side lot lines and from the main building to the front lot or street line, with the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building line as specified for the zoning district in which it is located. 
Yard, rear, means an open, unoccupied space, except for accessory building as herein permitted, extending across the rear of a lot from one side lot line to the other side lot line and having a depth between the building and the rear lot line as specified the district in which the lot is situated. (See appendix illustration 3 on file in the city secretary's office.) 
Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space or spaces on one side or two sides of the same lot with a main building, and being situated between the building and a side line of the lot extending through from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line, not the rear line or a front line, shall be deemed as a side line. (See appendix illustration 3 and 4 on file in the city secretary's office.) 
Zero lot line dwelling means detached single-family dwellings on lots without a side yard requirement on one side of the lot. 
Zoning administrator means the city manager or other person designated as the one responsible for the administration and enforcement of the city zoning and building codes. 
Zoning district map means the official certified map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are drawn and which is an integral part of this chapter. 
Zoning ordinance means this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2020-0114-001, § 2, 1-14-2020)  
Secs. 77-30—77-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND USES 
 
Sec. 77-41. - Establishment of zoning districts. 
The city is divided into zoning districts. The use, height and area regulations set out herein are uniform within each district. The districts established in this section shall be known as: 
Abbreviated 
Designation 	Zoning District Name 
A 	Agricultural District 
ED 	Estate Development 
SF-1 	Single Family Dwelling-1 District 
SF-2 	Single Family Dwelling-2 District 
SF-3 	Single Family Dwelling-3 District 
2F 	Two Family Residence (Duplex) District 
MF-1 	Multifamily Residence-1 
MF-2 	Multifamily Residence-2 
NS 	Neighborhood Service District 
GR 	General Retail District 
C 	Commercial District 
CA 	Central Area District 
LI 	Light Industrial District 
HI 	Heavy Industrial District 
HII 	High Impact Industrial District 
 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-1023-002, § 2A, 10-23-2018)  
Sec. 77-42. - Zoning district map. 
(a)  Establishment. The boundaries of the zoning districts set out herein are delineated upon the zoning district map, with such map being a part of this section as fully as if the same were set forth in this section in detail. 
(b)  Maintenance and updates. 
(1)  Three original, official and identical copies of the zoning district maps are hereby adopted, each bearing the signature of the mayor and the attestation of the city secretary, and shall be filed and maintained as follows: 
a.  One copy shall be filed for permanent record in the city secretary's office and shall be designated as "exhibit A." This copy shall not be changed in any manner. 
b.  One copy shall be filed in the city manager's office and shall be designated as "exhibit B." This copy shall be maintained by the zoning administrator and kept up to date by posting thereon all subsequent changes and amendments for use in issuing building permits and certificates of compliance and occupancy and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
c.  One copy shall be filed with the planning and zoning commission and shall be designated as "exhibit C." This copy shall be maintained and kept up to date by the zoning administrator by posting thereon all subsequent changes and amendments. 
d.  Reproductions for information purposes only may from time to time be made of the official zoning district map. 
(c)  District boundaries. 
(1)  The district boundary lines shown on the zoning district maps are usually along streets, alleys, property lines or extensions thereof, where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning maps, the following rules shall apply: 
a.  Boundaries indicated, as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
b.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
c.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits. 
d.  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the centerline of the right-of-way or if no centerline is established the boundary shall be interpreted to be midway between the right-of-way lines such railroad. 
e.  Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines and in the event of change in the shore line shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, drainage ways or draws shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
f.  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (b)(1)a. through (b)(1)e. shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the original zoning maps shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
g.  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the city council, the zoning district line adjoining each side of such street, alley or other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley or way, and all area so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
(2)  Where physical features on the ground are at variance with information shown on the official zoning district map or when there arises a question as to how or whether a parcel of property is zoned and such question cannot be resolved by the application of subsection (b)(1)a. through (b)(1)g., the property shall be considered as classified A, Agricultural District temporarily in the same manner as provided for newly annexed territory and the issuance of a building permit and the determination of permanent zoning shall be in accordance with the provisions provided in section 77-43 for temporarily zoned areas. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-43. - Zoning upon annexation. 
All territory hereafter annexed to the city shall be temporarily classified in the A, Agricultural District, until permanent zoning is established by the city council, unless permanent zoning can be established at the time of annexation as provided in section 77-21 procedural steps of zoning petitions and amendments. The procedure for establishing permanent zoning on annexed territory shall conform to the procedure established by law for the adoption of the original zoning regulations. 
(1)  Rules of newly annexed territory classified as the agricultural district. In an area temporarily classified as A, Agricultural District: 
a.  No person shall erect, construct or add to any building or structure, or cause the same to be done in any newly annexed territory to the city without first applying for and obtaining a building permit therefore from the zoning administrator or the city council as may be required herein; 
b.  No permit for the construction of a building or use of land shall be issued by the zoning administrator other than a permit which will allow the construction of a building permitted in the A, Agricultural District, unless and until such territory has been classified in a zoning district other than the A, Agricultural District, by the city council in the manner provided by law except that a building permit may be issued in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1)c. 
c.  An application for a permit for any other use than that specified in subsection (1)b. shall be made to the zoning administrator, and by him referred to the planning and zoning commission for consideration and recommendation to the city council. The planning and zoning commission, in making its recommendation to the city council concerning any such permit, shall take into consideration the appropriate land use for the area. The city council, after receiving and reviewing the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission, may by majority vote authorize the issuance of a building permit or specific use permit or may disapprove the application. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-44. - Specific use permits. 
The city council by an affirmative vote may, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected, and after recommendations from the planning and zoning commission that the use is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan of the city and containing such requirements and safeguards as are necessary to protect adjoining property, authorize the granting of a specific use permit for those uses indicated by "S" in the schedule of uses to this chapter, according to the following criteria: 
(1)  An application for a specific use permit shall be accompanied by a plan drawn to scale and showing the general arrangement of the project, together with essential requirements such as off-street parking facilities; size, height, construction materials, and locations of buildings; the uses to be permitted; location and construction of signs; means of ingress and egress to public streets; the type of visual screening such as walls, plantings, and fences; and the relationship of the intended use to all existing properties and land uses in all directions (the "plan"). A specific use permit that will require the construction of a new structure shall be accompanied by said plan. A plan may not be required if a specific use permit is applied for that will locate in an existing structure, if the city manager or his designee determines that the existing site adequately addresses the above elements and a plan is not necessary to evaluate the specific use permit. 
(2)  In recommending that a specific use permit for the premises under consideration be granted, the planning and zoning commission shall determine that such uses are harmonious with and adaptable to building structures and uses of abutting property and other property within 200 feet of the premises under consideration, and shall make recommendations regarding the adequacy of the streets, alleys and sidewalks abutting and adjacent to the proposed use (subject to the city's subdivisions chapter), means of ingress and egress from and to public streets, provisions for drainage, adequate off-street parking, protective screening and open space, heights of structures, and whether the building is compatible for the use under consideration. 
(3)  Every specific use permit granted under these provisions shall be considered as an amendment to this chapter and shall remain applicable to the property so long as all conditions imposed at the time of granting said permit continue to be met and no substantive change in the use of the property occurs. 
(4)  In granting a specific use permit, the city council may impose conditions that shall be complied with by the owner or grantee before a certificate of occupancy may be issued by the city for use of the building on such property pursuant to such specific use permit. Such conditions are not precedent to the granting of a specific use permit, but shall be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of the certificate of occupancy. 
(5)  No specific use permit shall be granted unless the applicant, owner, and grantee of the specific use permit shall be willing to accept and agree to be bound by and comply with the written requirements of the specific use permit, as attached to the site plan drawings and approved by the city council. 
(6)  A building permit shall be applied for and secured within six months from the time of granting the specific use permit; provided, however, that the city council may authorize an extension of this time upon recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, except in the case of a private street development, which shall have no limit regarding the application and securing of a building permit. If a building permit has not been secured within six months from the time of granting the specific use permit, or if a building permit has been issued but subsequently allowed to lapse, a city-initiated zoning change will be placed on the agenda of the planning and zoning commission and city council to consider the revocation of the specific use permit. 
(7)  No building, premises, or land used under a specific use permit may be enlarged, modified, structurally altered, or otherwise changed unless a separate specific use permit is granted for such enlargement, modification, structural alterations, or change. 
(8)  The board of adjustment shall not have jurisdiction to hear, review, reverse, or modify any decision, determination, or ruling with respect to the granting, extension, revocation, modification or any other action taken relating to such specific use permit. 
(9)  When the city council authorizes granting of a specific use permit, the official zoning district map shall be amended according to its legend to indicate that the affected area has conditions and limited uses, said amendment to indicate the appropriate zoning district for the approved use and suffixed by an "S" designation. 
(10)  Specific use permits are issued to the property, and subsection (5) shall be applicable to any new owner or occupant of the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-45. - Permitted uses. 
Land and buildings in each of the following classified districts may be used for any of the following listed uses but no land shall hereafter be used and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, altered or converted which is arranged or designed or used for other than those uses specified for the district in which it is located as set forth by the following schedule of uses. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-46. - Schedule of permitted uses. 
(a)  Explanation of use chart. 
(1)  Permitted by-right uses. "P" in a cell indicates that the use is permitted by right in the respective zoning district. Permitted uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this chapter. 
(2)  Uses requiring a specific use permit. "S" in a cell indicates that, in the respective zoning district, the use is allowed only if issued a specific use permit, in accordance with the procedures of section 77-44, Specific Use Permits. Uses requiring a specific use permit are subject to all other applicable regulations of this chapter. 
(3)  Prohibited uses. A blank cell indicates that the use is prohibited in the respective zoning district. 
(4)  Use-specific regulations. Regardless of whether a use is allowed by right, or permitted with a specific use permit, there may be supplemental regulations that are applicable to the use. The existence of these regulations is noted through a cross-reference in the last column of the table. Cross-references refer to section 77-49, Use-Specific Regulations. An asterisk [*] in a cell indicates that the use, whether permitted by right or as a special use, is permitted subject to use-specific regulations in that district. 
(5)  Allowed land uses in overlay districts. Except as otherwise provided by this Code for a specific overlay district: 
a.  Any land use permitted by right in the applicable underlying base zoning district may be permitted within an overlay district, subject to any use-specific regulations required by this section and any additional requirements of the specific overlay district. 
b.  Any land use requiring a specific use permit in the applicable underlying base zoning district is only allowed if a specific use permit is issued for the use. 
c.  Any land use prohibited in the underlying base zoning district is also prohibited in an overlay district. A specific overlay district may include additional prohibited land uses. 
(6)  Allowed land uses in planned development districts. Land uses in a planned development district are permitted as follows: 
a.  If the PD development plan references a base zoning district: 
1.  Any land use permitted by right in the applicable underlying base zoning district, as amended, may be permitted. 
2.  Any land use requiring a specific use permit in the applicable underlying base zoning district, as amended, is only allowed if a specific use permit is issued for the use. 
3.  Any land use prohibited in the underlying base zoning district, as amended, is also prohibited in the PD district. 
b.  The PD district may list the permitted and prohibited uses separately. 
c.  A combination of the above options. 
(b)  Legend for use chart. 
P 	Use is permitted in district indicated 
S 	Use is permitted in district upon approval of a Specific Use Permit 
	Use is prohibited in district indicated 
* 	Use is permitted in the district indicated if the use complies with use-specific regulations in the corresponding numeric end note in section 77-49, Use-Specific Regulations 
 
(c)  Residential uses. 
Zoning District Legend 	Residential Districts 	Non-Residential and Mixed-Use Districts 	Use-Specific Regulations 
P 	Permitted Use 	A — Agricultural District 	ED — Estate Development 	SF-1 — Single Family 
Dwelling-1 District 	SF-2 — Single Family 
Dwelling-2 District 	SF-3 — Single Family 
Dwelling-3 District 	2F — Two Family Residence 
(Duplex) District 	MF-1 — Multifamily 
Residence-1 	MF-2 — Multifamily 
Residence-2 	NS — Neighborhood 
Service District 	GR — General Retail 
District 	C — Commercial District 	LI — Light Industrial 
District 	HI — Heavy Industrial 
District 	HII — High Impact 
Industrial District 	CA — Central Area 
District 1 	
S 	Special Use Permit 																
	Prohibited Use 																
* 	Special Conditions Apply 
(see section 77-49, Use-Specific Regulations) 																
Type of Use 																
Bed and breakfast inn 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 							S 	
Boarding house or rooming house 										S 	P 	P 				
Garage apartment 	P 	P 	P 	P 											S 	
Guest house 	P 	P 	P 	P 											S 	
Hotel 	S 									S 	P 	P 			S 	
HUD-Code manufactured home 			S 	S 												
Industrialized housing (or modular home) 																
Mobile Home 																
Motel 											S* 	S* 			3.9.9 	
Multiple-family dwelling 							P 	P 							S 	
One-family dwelling (attached) 					S 		P 	P 							S 	
One-family dwelling (detached) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 								
Residence hotel 											S 	S 				
Two-family dwelling (duplex) 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				S 	
Zero lot line dwelling 				S 	P 	P 	P 	P 								
 
1  Property in the Central Area District shall be used only in the manner and for the purposes provided for by this division, provided that a residence or residential use in such district by specific use permit shall be subject to the limitations of section 77-53(d). 
(d)  Accessory and incidental uses. 
Zoning District Legend 	Residential Districts 	Non-Residential and Mixed-Use Districts 	Use-Specific Regulations 
P 	Permitted Use 	A — Agricultural District 	ED — Estate Development 	SF-1 — Single Family 
Dwelling-1 District 	SF-2 — Single Family 
Dwelling-2 District 	SF-3 — Single Family 
Dwelling-3 District 	2F — Two Family Residence 
(Duplex) District 	MF-1 — Multifamily 
Residence-1 	MF-2 — Multifamily 
Residence-2 	NS — Neighborhood 
Service District 	GR — General Retail 
District 	C — Commercial District 	LI — Light Industrial 
District 	HI — Heavy Industrial 
District 	HII — High Impact 
Industrial District 	CA — Central Area 
District 1 	
S 	Special Use Permit 																
	Prohibited Use 																
* 	Special Conditions Apply 
(see section 77-49, Use-Specific Regulations) 																
Type of Use 																
Accessory building 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Farm accessory building 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	
Fuel pumps (accessory use) 										P* 	P* 			P 		3.9.7 
Home occupation 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 							S 	
Parking lot/garage (accessory) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Stable (private) 	P 	S 										P 	P 			
Swimming pool (private) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		S 	3.9.12 
Temporary field office 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Tennis courts 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		S 	3.9.11 
 
(e)  Agricultural uses. 
Zoning District Legend 	Residential Districts 	Non-Residential and Mixed-Use Districts 	Use-Specific Regulations 
P 	Permitted Use 	A — Agricultural District 	ED — Estate Development 	SF-1 — Single Family 
Dwelling-1 District 	SF-2 — Single Family 
Dwelling-2 District 	SF-3 — Single Family 
Dwelling-3 District 	2F — Two Family Residence 
(Duplex) District 	MF-1 — Multifamily 
Residence-1 	MF-2 — Multifamily 
Residence-2 	NS — Neighborhood 
Service District 	GR — General Retail 
District 	C — Commercial District 	LI — Light Industrial 
District 	HI — Heavy Industrial 
District 	HII — High Impact 
Industrial District 	CA — Central Area 
District 1 	
S 	Special Use Permit 																
	Prohibited Use 																
* 	Special Conditions Apply 
(see section 77-49, Use-Specific Regulations) 																
Type of Use 																
Farm, ranch, garden, or orchard 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
Feed store 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Nursery, major 	S 										P* 	P 	P 			3.9.10 
Nursery, minor 										P 	P 	P 	P 		S 	
Stable (commercial) 	P 	S 														
Veterinarian clinic and/or kennel, indoor 										S 	P 	P 	P 			
Veterinarian clinic and/or kennel, outdoor 	S 											P 	P 			
 
(f)  Automobile and related uses. 
Zoning District Legend 	Residential Districts 	Non-Residential and Mixed-Use Districts 	Use-Specific Regulations 
P 	Permitted Use 	A — Agricultural District 	ED — Estate Development 	SF-1 — Single Family 
Dwelling-1 District 	SF-2 — Single Family 
Dwelling-2 District 	SF-3 — Single Family 
Dwelling-3 District 	2F — Two Family Residence 
(Duplex) District 	MF-1 — Multifamily 
Residence-1 	MF-2 — Multifamily 
Residence-2 	NS — Neighborhood 
Service District 	GR — General Retail 
District 	C — Commercial District 	LI — Light Industrial 
District 	HI — Heavy Industrial 
District 	HII — High Impact 
Industrial District 	CA — Central Area 
District 1 	
S 	Special Use Permit 																
	Prohibited Use 																
* 	Special Conditions Apply 
(see section 77-49, Use-Specific Regulations) 																
Type of Use 																
Auto parts and accessory sales (indoor) 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Auto parts and accessory sales (outdoor) 												P 	P 	P 		
Automobile repair, major 											S 	P 	P 	P 		
Automobile repair, minor 										S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	
Automobile sales, used 												S 	S 	P 		
Automobile sales/leasing, new 										S 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Car wash, full service 										S 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Car wash, self-service 											S 	P 	P 	P 		
Convenience store with gas pumps 									S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	
Convenience store without gas pumps 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Motor vehicle towing, motor vehicle recovery, and motor vehicle storage 												S 	P 	P 		
Motorcycle sales/service 											P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	
Recreational vehicle sales and service, new/used 											P 	P 	P 	P 		
Salvage yard 													S 	P 		
Trailer sales/rental 										S 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Truck sales (heavy truck) 											S 	P 	P 	P 		
 
(g)  Commercial and professional uses. 
Zoning District Legend 	Residential Districts 	Non-Residential and Mixed-Use Districts 	Use-Specific Regulations 
P 	Permitted Use 	A — Agricultural District 	ED — Estate Development 	SF-1 — Single Family 
Dwelling-1 District 	SF-2 — Single Family 
Dwelling-2 District 	SF-3 — Single Family 
Dwelling-3 District 	2F — Two Family Residence 
(Duplex) District 	MF-1 — Multifamily 
Residence-1 	MF-2 — Multifamily 
Residence-2 	NS — Neighborhood 
Service District 	GR — General Retail 
District 	C — Commercial District 	LI — Light Industrial 
District 	HI — Heavy Industrial 
District 	HII — High Impact 
Industrial District 	CA — Central Area 
District 1 	
S 	Special Use Permit 																
	Prohibited Use 																
* 	Special Conditions Apply 
(see section 77-49, Use-Specific Regulations) 																
Type of Use 																
Building maintenance service and sales 											P 	P 	P 	P 		
Clinic, medical or dental 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Contractor's shop and storage yard 											P 	P 	P 	P 		
Dry cleaning plant 												P 	P 	P 		
Equipment and machinery sales and rental, major 											P 	P 	P 	P 		
Manufactured home display and sales 													S 	S 		
Medical or scientific research lab 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Office showroom/warehouse 											P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	
Office, professional, general administrative 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Open storage and outside display 												P 	P 	P 		
Print shop, major 											P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	
Propane storage and distribution 												P 	P 	P 		
 
(h)  Educational, institutional, and public uses. 
Zoning District Legend 	Residential Districts 	Non-Residential and Mixed-Use Districts 	Use-Specific Regulations 
P 	Permitted Use 	A — Agricultural District 	ED — Estate Development 	SF-1 — Single Family 
Dwelling-1 District 	SF-2 — Single Family 
Dwelling-2 District 	SF-3 — Single Family 
Dwelling-3 District 	2F — Two Family Residence 
(Duplex) District 	MF-1 — Multifamily 
Residence-1 	MF-2 — Multifamily 
Residence-2 	NS — Neighborhood 
Service District 	GR — General Retail 
District 	C — Commercial District 	LI — Light Industrial 
District 	HI — Heavy Industrial 
District 	HII — High Impact 
Industrial District 	CA — Central Area 
District 1 	
S 	Special Use Permit 																
	Prohibited Use 																
* 	Special Conditions Apply 
(see section 77-49, Use-Specific Regulations) 																
Type of Use 																
Adult day care center 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Art gallery or museum 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Banquet/meeting hall 											S* 				S* 	3.9.4 
Cemetery or mausoleum 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		S 	
Church, rectory, or other place of worship 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
College, university or private school 	S 								P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	
Day care center 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	S 	S 	S 		S 	
Fire station and public safety building 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Fraternal organization, lodge, or civic club 	S 								P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	
Hospital 										S 	P 	P 			S 	
Nursing/convalescent home 	S 						S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 			S 	
Post office, government and private 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Public building, shop or yard of local, state or federal government 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	
Rehabilitation care facility 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 								
Rehabilitation care institution 	S 										P 	P 				
School, private or parochial (primary or secondary) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	
School, public 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	
School, trade or commercial 	S 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
 
(i)  Entertainment and recreational uses. 
Zoning District Legend 	Residential Districts 	Non-Residential and Mixed-Use Districts 	Use-Specific Regulations 
P 	Permitted Use 	A — Agricultural District 	ED — Estate Development 	SF-1 — Single Family 
Dwelling-1 District 	SF-2 — Single Family 
Dwelling-2 District 	SF-3 — Single Family 
Dwelling-3 District 	2F — Two Family Residence 
(Duplex) District 	MF-1 — Multifamily 
Residence-1 	MF-2 — Multifamily 
Residence-2 	NS — Neighborhood 
Service District 	GR — General Retail 
District 	C — Commercial District 	LI — Light Industrial 
District 	HI — Heavy Industrial 
District 	HII — High Impact 
Industrial District 	CA — Central Area 
District 1 	
S 	Special Use Permit 																
	Prohibited Use 																
* 	Special Conditions Apply 
(see section 77-49, Use-Specific Regulations) 																
Type of Use 																
Amenity center (private) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 							S 	
Amusement, commercial (indoors) 	S 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	
Amusement, commercial (outdoors) 	S 										S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	
Community center (public) 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Dancehall or nightclub 										S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	
Day camp 	P 		S 							P 	P 	P 	P 			
Fairgrounds/exhibition area 	S 									S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	
Game room 												S* 		S 		3.9.8 
Golf course and/or country club 	P 		S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		S 	
Gun or archery range (indoor) 	S 									S 	S 	P 	P 	P 		
Park or playground (public) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Play field or stadium (public) 	P 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Recreational vehicle (RV) parks and campgrounds 	S 										S 	P 	P 	P 		
Swim and tennis club 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 							S 	
Theater (drive-in) 	S 										S 	S 	S 		S 	
Theater (indoor) 	S 									S 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
 
(j)  Industrial and wholesale uses. 
Zoning District Legend 	Residential Districts 	Non-Residential and Mixed-Use Districts 	Use-Specific Regulations 
P 	Permitted Use 	A — Agricultural District 	ED — Estate Development 	SF-1 — Single Family 
Dwelling-1 District 	SF-2 — Single Family 
Dwelling-2 District 	SF-3 — Single Family 
Dwelling-3 District 	2F — Two Family Residence 
(Duplex) District 	MF-1 — Multifamily 
Residence-1 	MF-2 — Multifamily 
Residence-2 	NS — Neighborhood 
Service District 	GR — General Retail 
District 	C — Commercial District 	LI — Light Industrial 
District 	HI — Heavy Industrial 
District 	HII — High Impact 
Industrial District 	CA — Central Area 
District 1 	
S 	Special Use Permit 																
	Prohibited Use 																
* 	Special Conditions Apply 
(see section 77-49, Use-Specific Regulations) 																
Type of Use 																
Bakery and confectioners works (wholesale) 										P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Concrete/asphalt batching plant 													S 	P 		
Concrete/asphalt batching plant, temporary 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	P 	* 	3.9.6 
High impact use 													S 	P 		
Manufacturing, heavy 												S 	P 	P 		
Manufacturing, light 												P 	P 	P 		
Mini-warehouse/self-storage 									S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Sand and gravel storage 												P 	P 	P 		
Warehouse/distribution center 											S 	P 	P 	P 		
Wholesale office storage or sales facility 											P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	
 
(k)  Retail and service uses. 
Zoning District Legend 	Residential Districts 	Non-Residential and Mixed-Use Districts 	Use-Specific Regulations 
P 	Permitted Use 	A — Agricultural District 	ED — Estate Development 	SF-1 — Single Family 
Dwelling-1 District 	SF-2 — Single Family 
Dwelling-2 District 	SF-3 — Single Family 
Dwelling-3 District 	2F — Two Family Residence 
(Duplex) District 	MF-1 — Multifamily 
Residence-1 	MF-2 — Multifamily 
Residence-2 	NS — Neighborhood 
Service District 	GR — General Retail 
District 	C — Commercial District 	LI — Light Industrial 
District 	HI — Heavy Industrial 
District 	HII — High Impact 
Industrial District 	CA — Central Area 
District 1 	
S 	Special Use Permit 																
	Prohibited Use 																
* 	Special Conditions Apply 
(see section 77-49, Use-Specific Regulations) 																
Type of Use 																
Alternative financial institution 										S* 	S* 	S* 	S* 		S* 	3.9.1 
Antique shop and used furniture 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Artisan's workshop 									S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Bakery and confectioners works (retail) 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Banks, savings and loan, or credit union 										P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Barber shop/beauty salon and personal service shops 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Big box retail development 										S 	S 					
Body art studio 												S* 	S* 	S* 		3.9.5 
Building materials and hardware sales, inside storage 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Building materials and hardware sales, outside storage 											S 	P 	P 		S 	
Cleaning and laundry, self-service 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Dry cleaning or laundry, minor 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Equipment and machinery sales and rental, minor 											P 	P 	P 	P 		
Farmer's market 										S 	S 	S 	S 			
Flea market, inside 											P 	P 				
Flea market, outside 												S 				
Florist shop 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Furniture, home furnishing, and equipment stores 										P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Grocery store or supermarket 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Health/fitness center 										P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Licensed massage therapy 									S 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Mortuary or funeral parlor 									S 	S 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Pawn shop 											P 	P 	P 	P 		
Pet grooming 										P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Pet shop 										P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Portable building sales 											S 	P 	P 			
Private club 										P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Repair shop, household equipment and appliances 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Restaurant (drive-in type) 										P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Restaurant or cafeteria 									S 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Restaurant or food shop, take-out and delivery 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Retail stores and shops 									S 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Sexually oriented businesses or establishments 												S 		S 		
Shopping center 									S 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
Small engine repair shop 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	S 	
Studio for dance, gymnastics, and/or martial arts 									S 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Studio for photographer, musician, and artist 									S 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Studio for radio and television 	S 									P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
 
(l)  Transportation, utility, and communications uses. 
Zoning District Legend 	Residential Districts 	Non-Residential and Mixed-Use Districts 	Use-Specific Regulations 
P 	Permitted Use 	A — Agricultural District 	ED — Estate Development 	SF-1 — Single Family 
Dwelling-1 District 	SF-2 — Single Family 
Dwelling-2 District 	SF-3 — Single Family 
Dwelling-3 District 	2F — Two Family Residence 
(Duplex) District 	MF-1 — Multifamily 
Residence-1 	MF-2 — Multifamily 
Residence-2 	NS — Neighborhood 
Service District 	GR — General Retail 
District 	C — Commercial District 	LI — Light Industrial 
District 	HI — Heavy Industrial 
District 	HII — High Impact 
Industrial District 	CA — Central Area 
District 1 	
S 	Special Use Permit 																
	Prohibited Use 																
* 	Special Conditions Apply 
(see section 77-49, Use-Specific Regulations) 																
Type of Use 																
Airport landing field 	S 										S 	P 	P 	P 		
Antenna and/or antenna support structure, commercial 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	S 	* 	3.9.2 
Antenna and/or antenna support structure, non-commercial 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	S 	S* 	3.9.3 
Parking lot/garage (commercial) 									S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Private utility, other than listed 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	
Railroad or bus passenger station 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Railroad team track, freight depot or docks 												P 	P 	P 	S 	
Shops, offices, and storage area for public or private utility 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Telephone line and exchange 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Transportation and utility structures/facilities 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Truck terminal 												P 	P 	P 		
Utility distribution/transmission lines 	P 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. 2018-0828-001, § 2, 8-28-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-1023-002, § 3A, 10-23-2018)  
Sec. 77-47. - Classification of new and unlisted uses. 
It is recognized that new types of land use will develop and forms of land use not anticipated may seek to locate in the city. In order to provide for such changes and contingencies, a determination as to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use shall be made as follows: 
(1)  The city manager shall refer the question concerning any new or unlisted use to the planning and zoning commission, requesting an interpretation as to the zoning classification into which such use should be placed. The referral of the use interpretation question shall be accompanied by a statement of facts listing the nature of the use and whether it involves dwelling activity, sales, processing, type of product, storage, and amount or nature thereof, enclosed or open storage, anticipated employment, transportation requirements, the amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic material and vibration likely to be generated and the general requirements for public utilities, such as water and sanitary sewer. 
(2)  The planning and zoning commission shall consider the nature and described performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts and determine the zoning district or districts within which such use should be permitted. 
(3)  The planning and zoning commission shall transmit its findings and recommendations to the city council as to the classification proposed for any new or unlisted use. The city council shall by resolution approve the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission or make such determination concerning the classification of such use as is determined appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-48. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  All uses not expressly permitted are prohibited, except as provided in section 77-47. 
(b)  No land or building shall be used or occupied for a use which will in any manner create an unreasonable potential hazard to the general public, health, safety, and welfare, as, for example, but not by way of limitation, any dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive, radioactive, or other hazardous conditions; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, odor, or other form of air pollution; heat, cold, dampness, movement of air, electrical, or other disturbances; glare; or liquid or solid wastes. 
(c)  Without limiting the foregoing sections, or being limited thereby, the following uses are specifically prohibited: 
(1)  Storage, manufacturing, purifying, packaging, repackaging, selling, or supplying of toxic or highly flammable chemicals or gases, as a primary use regardless of quantities involved. Examples include asbestos products, toxic or explosive chemicals and allied products or the processing of caustic acids. 
(2)  Above ground tank farms or storage of gasoline, fuel oils, gases, or chemicals, or other flammable, corrosive, or toxic substances as a primary use or in total on site quantities exceeding 30,000 liquid gallons or equivalent. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-49. - Use-specific regulations. 
(a)  Alternative financial institution. 
(1)  No alternative financial institution shall be located within 1,000 feet, measured from property line to property line, of any other alternative financial institution. 
(2)  No alternative financial institution shall be located within 200 feet, measured from property line to property line, of a lot zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(3)  No alternative financial institution shall be located within the highway commercial overlay district. 
(4)  An alternative financial institution may only be a main use that requires a specific use permit and a certificate of occupancy. An alternative financial establishment may not be an accessory use. 
(b)  Antenna and/or antenna support structure, commercial. 
(1)  All commercial antennae and antenna support structures located on property owned by the city shall be permitted with a specific use permit in any district. 
(2)  All commercial antennae and antenna support structures shall be permitted by specific use permit in nonresidential districts. 
(3)  All commercial antennae and antenna support structures allowed by an SUP shall be subject to the following regulations. 
a.  No radio, television or microwave tower for a commercial use shall be located within a distance equal to or less than the height of such tower from any residential structure or from any area zoned residential on the current comprehensive plan. Such distance shall be measured as the shortest possible distance in a straight line from the closest point of the tower to the closest point of such area or residence. 
b.  Antenna support structures shall be constructed to support at least two carriers. 
c.  Antenna facilities shall be screened by a six-foot masonry screening wall or a six-foot open ornamental fence with landscape screen. 
(4)  Commercial stealth antennas are permitted by right in residential districts only as a secondary use when the primary use on the lot is a church, school, athletic stadium or field, or public utility structure. 
(5)  Commercial stealth antennas are permitted by right in nonresidential districts. 
(c)  Antenna and/or antenna support structure, non-commercial. Amateur radio antennas and other transmitting and receiving devices of microwave or electromagnetic waves for broadcasting use shall not interfere with radio or television reception of adjoining property owners, and shall comply with all regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). In no case shall the height of such antennas exceed 40 feet and proper guy wire securement shall be followed. In no manner shall the use of such equipment infringe upon adjoining property owners. Roof-mounted satellite dishes in excess of 50 pounds shall be approved by a registered architect or professional engineer by written letter to the city manager, prior to installation, stating the antenna stability and support and that such dish shall not extend more than six feet above the roof. 
(d)  Banquet/meeting hall. 
(1)  Access to the lot on which the use is situated must be from an arterial or major collector street as identified on the city's thoroughfare development plan. 
(2)  The applicant shall submit a site plan and landscape plan in addition to any other plans that may be required by the city's ordinances, drawn to scale and sealed by a professional engineer or professional architect licensed by the state with the specific use permit application for consideration and approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. 
(3)  Banquet or meeting halls may provide live or recorded entertainment, and, may serve catered meals and alcoholic beverages when the owner or operator holds the appropriate licenses and permits. 
(4)  Banquet or meeting halls shall minimize disturbances to surrounding properties which includes restricting activities inside the structure or if located outside, no electronically amplified sound generated shall be audible at any time beyond the boundary of the property on which the facility is located. 
(e)  Body art studio. 
(1)  Facilities offering tattooing, permanent or intradermal cosmetic services and body piercing must be licensed by the state and must meet all city environmental health requirements. 
(2)  Body art studios as a primary or standalone use shall be required to obtain a specific use permit and shall be prohibited within 1,000 feet, as measured by a singular straight line, from any other body art studio, church, day care, residentially zoned district, or public or parochial school. The measurement for this distance requirement shall be in a straight line from the nearest property line of the lot where the body art studio is located without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the nearest property line of the lot where the church, day care, residentially zoned district, or public or parochial school is located. The 1,000 foot distance requirement may be reduced to 300 feet if the city council finds that issuance of the specific use permit would not be detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or general welfare, or otherwise offensive to the neighborhood. 
(3)  Tattooing, permanent cosmetics, and body piercing may be practiced as an accessory use to a custom personal service shop. 
(f)  Concrete/asphalt batching plant, temporary. 
(1)  Concrete plant. Issuance of temporary permit by city manager or his/her designee and removal as directed. 
(2)  Asphalt plant. Issuance of temporary permit by resolution of city council. 
(g)  Fuel pumps (accessory use). Accessory gas pumps are only allowed as an accessory use to a big box tenant and are subject to the following development standards. 
(1)  Accessory fuel pumps must be located on the same lot as a big box tenant. 
(2)  Fuel pumps are permitted at a maximum of two corners at an intersection of two major thoroughfares. 
(3)  A sales kiosk servicing the accessory fuel pumps shall be less than 500 square-feet in floor area. 
(4)  Accessory fuel pumps shall be located at least 250 feet from a property line of a residential lot. 
(h)  Game rooms. Specific use permit application requirements for game rooms: 
(1)  Game rooms shall be permitted only in the Light Industrial (LI) District upon the granting of a specific use permit (SUP); 
(2)  The specific use permit shall be a personal license specific to: 
a.  The game room named in the ordinance granting the SUP; 
b.  The physical address of the game room identified in the ordinance granting the SUP; and, 
c.  The person(s) and/or entity(ies) that own the game room; 
(3)  The specific use permit shall not be transferable to any other named game room, location or owner; 
(4)  The specific use permit shall be for an initial period not to exceed six months; 
(5)  The applicant may seek an extension or further renewal of the SUP prior to the expiration of the then current SUP with the length of any such renewal being from six months to two years as may be determined appropriate in the sole discretion of the planning and zoning commission and city council; 
(6)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted inside the building, structure, facility or space housing the game room; 
(7)  A sign stating that no one under the age of 18 is allowed inside the game room building shall be posted in plain sight immediately inside the entrance stating that: 
"No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted inside the building, structure, facility or space housing the game room." 
(8)  The number and various types of coin-operated machines or devices allowed to be provided, exhibited and/or operated in the game room shall be plainly requested by the applicant and the actual numbers coin-operated machines or devices approved to be installed in the game room shall be specified in the ordinance granting such an SUP. 
(9)  The applicant shall submit a site plan, landscape plan and floor plan of the game room interior, in addition to any other plans that may be required by the city's ordinances, drawn to scale and sealed by a professional engineer or professional architect licensed by the state depicting the layout of the game room interior specifically including, but not limited to, the location of all coin-operated machines or devices, the manager's station(s), restroom facilities, kitchen and bar facilities, if any, and all areas to which patrons will not be permitted; 
(10)  No game room shall be situated within 1,000 feet of any church, school, hospital or any other game room, with the distance being measured in a straight line without regard to intervening objects or structures and from the nearest lot line of the game room seeking a SUP to the nearest lot line of the church, school, hospital or any other game room; 
(11)  No skill or pleasure gaming machines, which are an accessory use to the primary use that is situated in a building, structure, facility or space, shall be permitted to be placed within 300 feet of any church, school or hospital; 
(12)  Only one game room shall be permitted on any lot or in any building, structure or strip center; 
(13)  The hours of operation for a game room shall be limited to the following hours: 
a.  Monday through Thursday, open at 8:30 a.m. and close at 11:00 p.m.: 
b.  Friday and Saturday, open at 8:30 a.m. and close at 12:00 a.m.; and 
c.  Sundays and holidays, open at 12:00 p.m. and close at 11:00 p.m.; 
(14)  All coin-operated machines or devices, described herein above shall be permitted by and the occupation tax thereon paid to the state and the city; 
(15)  The grant of an SUP shall not relieve the applicant, owner and/or operator of a game room or the subject coin-operated machines or devices from any other and further obligations under this Code; and, 
(16)  Nothing herein shall be construed or have the effect to license, permit, authorize or legalize any machine, device, table, or gaming machine, the keeping, exhibition, operation, display or maintenance of which is illegal or in violation of any ordinance of the city, any section of the penal code of this state, or the constitution of this state. 
(i)  Motel. The following shall be provided: 
(1)  Daily housekeeping service. 
(2)  On-site management 24 hours a day to provide check-in/check-out services, custodial and maintenance response, or other guest services. 
(3)  At least three amenities from the list below. 
a.  Business center. 
b.  Indoor/outdoor pool. 
c.  Spa/sauna. 
d.  Weight room/fitness center. 
e.  Playground. 
f.  Sports court. 
g.  Plaza/atrium. 
h.  Game room. 
i.  Conference room (1,000 square foot minimum). 
(j)  Nursery, major. In the C district, a maximum of 40 percent of the lot area may be used for accessory outside storage provided that: 
(1)  Outside storage is not allowed in any portion of the lot between a public street and the face(s) of the building. 
(2)  Outside storage shall be screened from view of public streets by a screening device of not less than eight feet in height. Screening of outside storage areas shall be constructed of the same materials as the building façade and plant material. 
(3)  Outside storage areas must be screened from view of any adjoining property by a screening device at least eight feet in height, except along adjacent property lines zoned LI or HI. 
(4)  No materials stored shall be stacked above the top of the screening device. 
(k)  Tennis courts (accessory use). It is the purpose of these provisions to recognize a tennis court as a potential attractive nuisance and to promote the safety and enjoyment of property rights by established rules and regulations governing the location and improvement of tennis courts whether privately, publicly, or commercially owned or operated. 
(1)  Permits and approvals. No tennis courts shall be constructed or used until a tennis court building permit and certificate of occupancy have been issued therefore. 
(2)  Requirements. A tennis court may be constructed and operated when: 
a.  The court is not located in any required front or side yard abutting a street; 
b.  The court is located behind the front yard or front building line and shall be no closer than three feet from the property line; 
c.  A wall or fence with a minimum of six feet and a maximum of ten feet in height completely encloses either the court area or the surrounding yard area; 
d.  All lighting of the court is shielded or directed to face way from adjoining residences. If lights are not individually shielded, they shall be so placed, or the enclosing wall or fence shall be so designed, that direct rays from the lights shall not be visible from adjacent properties. 
(l)  Swimming pools (accessory use). It is the purpose of these provisions to recognize an outdoor swimming pool as a potential attractive nuisance and to promote the safety and enjoyment of property rights by established rules and regulations governing the location and improvement of swimming pools whether privately, publicly or commercially owned or operated. 
(1)  Permits and approvals. No swimming pool shall be constructed or used until a swimming pool building permit and a certificate of occupancy have been issued therefor. No building permit and no final certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the proposed sanitary facilities and water supply comply with applicable local and state health department regulations. 
(2)  Requirements. A swimming pool may be constructed and operated when: 
a.  The pool is not located in any required front or side yard abutting a street; 
b.  The pool is located behind the front yard or front building line and shall be no closer than three feet from the property line. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-50. - Temporary uses. 
(a)  Purpose. This section allows for the establishment of certain temporary uses of limited duration and special events, provided that such uses comply with the standards in this subsection and are discontinued upon the expiration of a set time period. Temporary uses and special events shall not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent building or structure. Temporary uses operating for less than 90 days within a one-year time period shall obtain a temporary use permit from the city manager. Temporary use permits outline conditions of operations to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  Temporary uses defined. Temporary uses shall include short-term or seasonal uses that would not be appropriate on a permanent basis. In addition to the temporary uses identified in this section, the following uses and activities shall be considered temporary uses: 
(1)  Fundraising activities by not-for-profit agencies. Fundraising or noncommercial events for nonprofit educational, community service or religious organizations where the public is invited to participate in the activities and which last longer than 48 hours. 
(2)  Special and seasonal sales events. Significant commercial activities lasting not longer than 90 days intended to sell, lease, rent or promote specific merchandise, services or product lines, including but not limited to warehouse sales, tent sales, trade shows, flea markets, farmer's markets, Christmas tree lot sales, product demonstrations or parking lot sales of food, art work or other goods. 
(3)  Entertainment or amusement events. Short-term cultural and entertainment events including public or private events lasting not longer than 90 days intended primarily for entertainment or amusement, such as concerts, plays or other theatrical productions, circuses, fairs, carnivals or festivals. 
(c)  Approval procedure. 
(1)  Application. An application for a temporary use permit shall be submitted to the city manager at least ten working days before the requested start date for a temporary use and shall include the following: 
a.  A written description of the proposed use or event, the duration of the use or event, the hours of operation, anticipated attendance, and any building or structures, signs or attention-attracting devices used in conjunction with the event. 
b.  A written description of how the temporary use complies with the review criteria in subsection (3). 
c.  A plan showing the location of proposed structures, including onsite restrooms and trash receptacles, parking areas, activities, signs and attention attracting devices in relation to existing buildings, parking areas, streets and property lines. 
d.  A letter from the property owner agreeing to the temporary use. 
e.  Any additional information required by the director. 
(2)  Review and action by the city manager. The city manager shall make a determination whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the permit within five working days after the date of application. Any applicant denied a permit by the city manager shall be notified in writing of the reasons for the denial and of the opportunity to appeal to the commission. 
(3)  Review criteria. Temporary uses shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Land use compatibility. The temporary use must be compatible with the purpose and intent of this chapter. The temporary use shall not impair the normal, safe and effective operation of a permanent use on the same site. The temporary use shall not endanger or be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to property or improvements in the immediate vicinity of the temporary use, given the type of activity, its location on the site, and its relationship to parking and access points. 
b.  Compliance with other regulations. The temporary use shall conform in all respects to all other applicable city regulations and standards. 
c.  Restoration of site. Upon cessation of the event or use, the site shall be returned to its previous condition, including the removal of all trash, debris, signage, attention attracting devices or other evidence of the special event or use. The applicant shall be responsible for ensuring the restoration of the site. 
d.  Hours of operation and duration. The hours of operation and duration of the temporary use shall be consistent with the intent of the event or use and compatible with the surrounding land uses and shall be established by the building official at the time of approval of the temporary use permit. 
e.  Traffic circulation. The temporary use shall not cause undue traffic congestion given anticipated attendance and the capacity of adjacent streets, intersections and traffic controls. 
f.  Off-street parking. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for the temporary use, and it shall not create a parking shortage for any of the other existing uses on the site(s). 
g.  Public conveniences and litter control. Adequate onsite rest room facilities and litter control may be required. The applicant shall provide a written guarantee that all litter generated by the event or use shall be removed at no expense to the city. 
h.  Appearance and nuisances. The temporary use shall be compatible in intensity, appearance and operation with surrounding land uses in the area, and it shall not impair the usefulness, enjoyment or value of adjacent property due to the generation of excessive noise, dust, smoke, glare, spillover lighting, or other forms of environmental or visual pollution. 
i.  Signs. The city manager shall review all signage, although a sign permit is not required. The city manager may approve the temporary use of attention attracting devices. 
(4)  Additional conditions. The city manager may establish additional conditions to ensure land use compatibility and to minimize potential adverse impacts on nearby uses, including, but not limited to, time and frequency of operation, temporary arrangements for parking and traffic circulation, requirements for screening or buffering, and guarantees for site restoration and cleanup following the temporary use. 
(5)  Appeals. A denial of a temporary use permit may be appealed to the city council within ten days of the city manager's action. The appeal shall be made in writing to the city manager. 
(d)  Use table for temporary uses. 
Zoning District Legend 	Residential Districts 	Non-Residential and Mixed-Use Districts 	Use-Specific Regulations 
P 	Permitted Use 	A — Agricultural District 	ED — Estate Development 	SF-1 — Single Family 
Dwelling-1 District 	SF-2 — Single Family 
Dwelling-2 District 	SF-3 — Single Family 
Dwelling-3 District 	2F — Two Family Residence 
(Duplex) District 	MF-1 — Multifamily 
Residence-1 	MF-2 — Multifamily 
Residence-2 	NS — Neighborhood 
Service District 	GR — General Retail 
District 	C — Commercial District 	LI — Light Industrial 
District 	HI — Heavy Industrial 
District 	CA — Central Area 
District 1 	
S 	Special Use Permit 															
	Prohibited Use 															
* 	Special Conditions Apply 
(see section 77-49, Use-Specific Regulations) 															
Type of Use 															
Construction field office 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 		
Construction yard 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 		
Model home 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 	P* 								
Temporary residence 			P* 	P* 	P* 						P* 					
Temporary use (other than listed) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
 
(e)  Special conditions relating to certain temporary uses. 
(1)  Construction yards, field offices, model homes, and other temporary buildings. Temporary permits for construction yards, field offices, model homes, and other temporary buildings shall be permitted upon application and issuance of a permit for a period of time not to exceed 24 months. Construction yards, field offices, and other temporary buildings utilized in the development of a project may be granted extensions by the city manager until the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the respective project. Extensions for model homes may be granted by the city manager. Permits may be revoked by the city manager if the use of the building or structure is contrary to the uses allowed by definition in this chapter. 
(2)  Temporary residence. 
a.  Limited to the use of a recreational vehicle ("RV") or travel trailer as temporary living quarters by the resident-owner of a single-family residential dwelling unit ("house") that is being repaired or remodeled. For purposes of this subsection (e)(2), a "resident-owner" of a house: 
1.  Owns the house, 
2.  Resides in the house as a full-time resident, 
3.  Identifies the house as their primary residence, and 
4.  Has been granted and currently possesses the homestead exemption on the property on which the house is situated. 
b.  The RV or travel trailer must be parked on an improved surface or the driveway of the house that is being repaired or remodeled. 
c.  The RV or travel trailer must be connected temporarily to water and electricity and the black and gray water tanks thereon must be properly maintained and routinely emptied in accordance with all applicable local, state and federal regulations, rules, laws, ordinances and statutes. 
d.  The RV or travel trailer may only be used and occupied by the resident-owner of the house as temporary living quarters while the house is being repaired or remodeled. 
e.  The resident-owner of the house is required to submit the application and pay the corresponding fee for the temporary use permit allowing an RV or travel trailer to be used as a temporary residence. The resident-owner of the house must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city manager that: 
1.  The resident-owner of the house and his/her immediate family members cannot reside inside the house during the repair or remodeling of the house and the reasons for their inability to live inside the house; and 
2.  The use of a RV or travel trailer as a temporary residence is solely for the use of the resident-owner of the house being repaired or remodeled and his/her immediate family; and 
3.  The use of a RV or travel trailer as a temporary residence by the resident-owner of the house and his/her immediate family members will not adversely affect surrounding uses or violate any covenants, conditions and restrictions applicable to the property on which the house is situated; and 
4.  The parking of the RV or travel trailer on the driveway of the house that is being repaired or remodeled will not result in the parking of multiple motor vehicles in, on and about the public right-of-way during the term of the temporary use permit, and that the resident-owner of the house has developed a plan which addresses the parking of all vehicles associated with: 
a.  The persons or parties performing the work; and 
b.  The persons occupying the temporary residence. 
f.  The temporary residence will only be used and occupied for up to the lesser of the following events to occur: 
1.  Ninety days following the issuance of the temporary use permit; or 
2.  The date a final green tag is issued for the repair or remodeling work performed on the house. 
g.  The use of the temporary residence shall promptly cease upon the early of the following events to occur: 
1.  Ninety days following the issuance of the temporary use permit; or 
2.  The date a final green tag is issued for the repair or remodeling work performed on the house is issued. 
h.  Extension of time for temporary residence. 
1.  If the resident-owner believes the repairs or remodeling being performed on the house will not be complete before the deadline set forth in subsection (e)(1)g., the resident owner of the house may file an application and pay the accompanying fees to request an extension of the temporary use permit from the planning and zoning commission and city council following notice and a public hearing on the requested extension of the temporary use permit at which public hearings all interested persons may speak. 
i.  Any request for extension must be completed and filed with the city before the expiration date of the initial temporary use permit. 
j.  It shall be the responsibility of the resident-owner of the house to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning and zoning commission and the city council that: 
1.  The resident-owner of the house and his/her immediate family members are not able to reside inside the house during the repair or remodeling of the house and the reasons for their inability to live inside the house; and 
2.  The use of a RV or travel trailer as a temporary residence is solely for the use of the resident-owner of the house being repaired or remodeled and his/her immediate family; and 
3.  The use of a RV or travel trailer as a temporary residence by the resident-owner of the house and his/her immediate family members has not and will not adversely affect surrounding uses or violate any covenants, conditions and restrictions applicable to the property on which the house is situated; and 
4.  The repair or remodeling work on the house has not been deferred, delayed, postponed or abated at any time during the pendency of the temporary use permit, and all permits for such construction are still valid and being timely inspected; and 
5.  The resident-owner of the house has a specific plan for the completion of the repair or remodeling work on the house to allow the resident-owner of the house and his/her immediate family members to vacate the temporary residence and return to the house as soon as reasonably possible even if all of the repair or remodeling work has not been completed; and 
6.  The maximum amount of time the resident-owner of the house and his/her immediate family members will need to live in the temporary residence until the house is habitable. 
k.  The planning and zoning commission and the city council shall have broad discretion in considering and approving or disapproving an extension of time for a temporary use permit for a temporary residence; and may impose any conditions deemed advisable on the extension of the temporary use permit including periodic updates regarding progress on the repairs and remodeling and the condition of the interior of the house. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-51. - Non-conforming uses and structures. 
(a)  Nonconforming status. A nonconforming status shall exist under the following provisions of this article: 
(1)  When a use or structure which does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the district in which such use or structure is located was in existence and lawfully operating prior to June 16, 1970, and has been operating since without discontinuance. 
(2)  When, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the use or structure was in existence within the provisions of the prior zoning ordinance or which was a nonconforming use thereunder, and which use or structure does not now conform to the regulations herein prescribed for the district in which such use or structure is located. 
(3)  When a use or structure which does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the district in which such use or structure is located was in existence at the time of annexation to the city and has since been in regular and continuous use. 
(b)  Use within classifications. Any nonconforming use of land or structures may be continued for definite periods of time subject to such regulations as the board of adjustment may require for immediate preservation of the adjoining property prior to the ultimate removal of the nonconforming use. The city manager may grant a change of occupancy from one nonconforming use to another, providing the use is within the same, or higher or more restrictive, classification. It shall not later be changed to a less restrictive classification of use, and the prior, less restrictive classification shall be considered to have been abandoned. 
(c)  Structure destroyed; partial destruction; reconstruction. If a nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire, the elements, or other cause, it may not be rebuilt except to conform to the provisions of this article. In the case of partial destruction of a nonconforming structure, not exceeding 50 percent of its reasonable value, reconstruction will be permitted, but the size or function of a nonconforming use therein cannot be expanded. In addition, a nonconforming structure that is located in a historically significant area or which is a significantly important building may also only be restored or reconstructed so as to have the same appearance that it had immediately prior to the damage or destruction. 
Conversely, if a residential structure which was in existence within the provisions of prior zoning district regulations, which does not now conform to the regulations herein prescribed for highway commercial zoning, is destroyed in the above described manner, it shall be allowed to be rebuilt. A nonconforming structure that is located in a historically significant area or which is a significantly important building may also only be restored or reconstructed so as to have the same appearance that it had immediately prior to the damage or destruction. 
(d)  Expansion of area. No nonconforming use may be expanded or increased beyond the platted lot or tract upon which such nonconforming use is located nor may a nonconforming junk yard or trailer park be expanded by covering more area than it did as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, except to provide off-street parking or off-street loading space upon approval of the board of adjustment. Conversely, a residential structure which was in existence within the provisions of prior zoning district regulations, which does not now conform to the regulations herein prescribed for highway commercial zoning, shall be allowed to expand. A nonconforming structure that is located in a historically significant area or which is a significantly important building may also only be restored or reconstructed so as to have the same appearance that it had immediately prior to the damage or destruction. 
(e)  Abandonment. When a nonconforming use is abandoned, all nonconforming rights shall cease and the use of the premises shall thenceforth be in conformance to this article. Abandonment shall involve the intent of the user or owner to discontinue a nonconforming operation and the actual act of discontinuance. Any nonconforming use which is discontinued for, or which remains vacant for, a period of six months shall be considered to have been abandoned. 
(f)  Termination and amortization. 
(1)  Termination of nonconforming uses. It is the purpose of this article that nonconforming uses be eliminated and required to comply with the regulations and provisions of this Code, having due regard for the property rights of the persons affected, the public welfare, and the character of the surrounding area. 
(2)  Amortization of nonconforming uses. 
a.  Any person who resides or owns real property in the city may request that the board of adjustment establish a compliance date for a nonconforming use. Upon receiving such a request, the board shall determine whether there is a public necessity for expedited compliance with the zoning regulations. In doing so, the board shall consider the character of the surrounding neighborhood, the degree of incompatibility of the use to the zoning district in which it is located and the effect of the nonconforming use on the surrounding area and the effect of its cessation on that area. 
b.  The board shall provide a compliance date for the nonconforming use under a plan whereby the owner's actual investment in the use, before the time the use became nonconforming, can be amortized within a definite time period. 
c.  The following factors must be considered by the board in determining a reasonable amortization period: 
1.  The owner's capital investment in structures. Fixed equipment and other assets, excluding inventory and other assets that may be feasibly transferred to another site, on the property before the time the use became nonconforming. 
2.  Any costs that are directly attributable to the establishment of the compliance date, including demolition expenses, relocation expenses, and termination of leases. 
3.  Any return on investment since inception of the use, including net income and depreciation. 
4.  The anticipated annual recovery of investment, including net income and depreciation. 
d.  If the board establishes a compliance date for a nonconforming use, the use must cease operations on that date, and it may not operate thereafter unless it becomes a conforming use. 
e.  For purposes of this section, the term "owner" means the owner of the nonconforming use at the time of the board's determination of a compliance date for the nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2020-0114-001, § 3, 1-14-2020)  
Sec. 77-52. - Residential zoning district regulations. 
(a)  A — Agricultural. 
(1)  Purpose. The A district is primarily intended to accommodate agricultural uses, such as the keeping of livestock, dairy farming, pasturage and horticulture and the incidental uses necessary to support agricultural activities. It is anticipated that all A districts will be changed to other zoning classifications as the city proceeds toward full development. 
(2)  Permitted uses. See section 77-46, Schedule of Permitted Uses for a complete listing. 
(3)  Area, yard and bulk requirements. 
Description 	Requirements 
Minimum Lot Area 	2 acres 
Minimum Lot Width 	150 feet 
Minimum Lot Depth 	250 feet 
Minimum Front Yard 	40 feet 
Minimum Side Yard 	Interior Lot 	20 feet 
	Corner Lot 	See section 77-63 
Minimum Rear Yard 	10 feet 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	20% 
Maximum Height 	Two stories, 40 feet 
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit 	750 square feet 
 
(4)  See article IV., Development Standards for additional requirements and exceptions. 
(b)  ED — Estate Development. 
(1)  Purpose. The ED district is intended primarily for the development of semi-rural, low density, single-family residential detached development and in areas where topography and/or utility capacities limit the use of the land. 
(2)  Permitted uses. See section 77-46, Schedule of permitted uses for a complete listing. 
(3)  Area, yard and bulk requirements. 
Description 	Requirements 
Minimum Lot Area 	One acre 
Minimum Lot Width 	150 feet 
Minimum Lot Depth 	200 feet 
Minimum Front Yard 	40 feet 
Minimum Side Yard 	Interior Lot 	10% of lot width; minimum 15 feet 
	Corner Lot 	See section 77-63 
Minimum Rear Yard 	10 feet 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	20% 
Maximum Height 	Two stories, 40 feet 
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit 	750 square feet 
 
(4)  See article IV., Development standards for additional requirements and exceptions. 
(c)  SF-1 — Single Family Dwelling-1. 
(1)  Purpose. The SF-1 district is primarily intended to provide for single-family development on large lots, in addition to religious facilities, schools and other institutional uses. The SF-1 district may also serve as a transitional zone between the ED district and urban uses or activities. 
(2)  Permitted uses. See section 77-46, Schedule of permitted uses for a complete listing. 
(3)  Area, yard and bulk requirements. 
Description 	Requirements 
Minimum Lot Area 	12,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width 	80 feet 
Minimum Lot Depth 	125 feet 
Minimum Front Yard 	30 feet 
Minimum Side Yard 	Interior Lot 	10% of lot width; minimum 10 feet 
	Corner Lot 	See section 77-63 
Minimum Rear Yard 	10 feet 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	40% 
Maximum Height 	Two stories, 35 feet 
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit 	750 square feet 
 
(4)  See article IV., Development standards for additional requirements and exceptions. 
(d)  SF-2 — Single Family Dwelling-2. 
(1)  Purpose. The SF-2 district is primarily intended to provide for single-family development on medium-sized lots, in addition to religious facilities, schools and other institutional uses. 
(2)  Permitted uses. See section 77-46, Schedule of permitted uses for a complete listing. 
(3)  Area, yard and bulk requirements. 
Description 	Requirements 
Minimum Lot Area 	7,200 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width 	60 feet 
Minimum Lot Depth 	100 feet 
Minimum Front Yard 	30 feet 
Minimum Side Yard 	Interior Lot 	10% of lot width; minimum 6 feet 
	Corner Lot 	See section 77-63 
Minimum Rear Yard 	10 feet 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	45% 
Maximum Height 	Two stories, 35 feet 
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit 	750 square feet 
 
(4)  See article IV., Development standards for additional requirements and exceptions. 
(e)  SF-3 — Single Family Dwelling-3. 
(1)  Purpose. The SF-3 district is primarily intended to provide for single-family development on smaller lots, in addition to religious facilities, schools and other institutional uses. 
(2)  Permitted uses. See section 77-46, Schedule of permitted uses for a complete listing. 
(3)  Area, yard and bulk requirements. 
Description 	Requirements 
Minimum Lot Area 	Single-family (detached) 	5,000 sq. ft. 
	Zero lot line 	4,000 sq. ft. 
	Single-family (attached) 	2,500 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width 	Single-family (detached) 	50 feet 
	Zero lot line 	50 feet 
	Single-family (attached) 	25 feet 
Minimum Lot Depth 	Single-family (detached) 	90 feet 
	Zero lot line 	80 feet 
	Single-family (attached) 	100 feet 
Minimum Front Yard 	25 feet 
Minimum Side Yard 	Interior Lot 	Single-family (detached) 	5 feet 
		Zero lot line 	0 feet on one side and 10 feet on other side 
		Single-family (attached) 	N/A 
	Corner Lot 	15 feet 
Minimum Rear Yard 	10 feet 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	Single-family (detached) 	50% 
	Zero lot line 	55% 
	Single-family (attached) 	65% 
Maximum Height 	Two stories, 35 feet 
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit 	750 square feet 
 
(4)  See article IV., Development standards for additional requirements and exceptions. 
(f)  2F — Two Family Residence (Duplex). 
(1)  Purpose. The 2F district is primarily intended to provide for areas of two-family development that are consistent in design and in development patterns with typical single-family detached development. This district may provide a transitional zone between lower density residential areas and higher density or non-residential areas. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
a.  See section 77-46, Schedule of permitted uses for a complete listing. 
b.  Single family residential, zero lot line, and townhome development shall comply with the standards set forth in the SF-3 District. 
(3)  Area, yard and bulk requirements. 
Description 	Requirements 
Minimum Lot Area 	8,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width 	70 feet 
Minimum Lot Depth 	100 feet 
Minimum Front Yard 	25 feet 
Minimum Side Yard 	Interior Lot 	10% of lot width; minimum 5 feet 
	Corner Lot 	See section 77-63 
Minimum Rear Yard 	15 feet 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	50% 
Maximum Height 	Two stories, 35 feet 
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit 	750 square feet 
 
(4)  See article IV., Development standards for additional requirements and exceptions. 
(g)  MF-1 — Multifamily Residence-1. 
(1)  Purpose. The MF-1 district is primarily intended to accommodate condominiums and apartments at medium densities with usable open space and landscaping. MF-1 districts should be located along or near major thoroughfares and should not have principal access to standard residential streets. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
a.  See section 77-46, Schedule of permitted uses for a complete listing. 
b.  Single family residential, zero lot line, townhome, and duplex development shall comply with the standards set forth in the SF-3 and 2F Districts. 
(3)  Area, yard and bulk requirements. 
Description 	Requirements 
Minimum Lot Area 	7,500 sq. ft. (1—3 dwelling units) 
	1,500 sq. ft. each additional dwelling unit 
Minimum Lot Width 	70 feet 
Minimum Lot Depth 	120 feet 
Minimum Front Yard 	25 feet 
Minimum Side Yard 	Interior Lot 	8 feet 
	Corner Lot 	15 feet 
Minimum Rear Yard 	15 feet 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	50% 
Maximum Height 	Three stories, 45 feet 
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit 	Studio 	500 sq. ft. 
	1 bedroom 	600 sq. ft. 
	2 bedroom 	900 sq. ft. 
	Each additional bedroom 	150 sq. ft. 
Maximum Residential Density 	18 units per gross acre 
 
(4)  See article IV., Development standards for additional requirements and exceptions. 
(h)  MF-2 — Multifamily Residence-2. 
(1)  Purpose. The MF-2 district is primarily intended to accommodate condominiums and apartments at higher densities and taller heights in a park-like setting with usable open space and landscaping. MF-2 districts should be located along or near major thoroughfares and should not have principal access to standard residential streets. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
a.  See section 77-46, Schedule of permitted uses for a complete listing. 
b.  Single family residential, zero lot line, townhome, and duplex development shall comply with the standards set forth in the SF-3 and 2F Districts. 
(3)  Area, yard and bulk requirements. 
Description 	Requirements 
Minimum Lot Area 	7,500 sq. ft. (1—3 dwelling units) 
	1,500 sq. ft. each additional dwelling unit 
Minimum Lot Width 	70 feet 
Minimum Lot Depth 	120 feet 
Minimum Front Yard 	25 feet 
Minimum Side Yard 	Interior Lot 	8 feet 
	Corner Lot 	15 feet 
Minimum Rear Yard 	15 feet 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	50% 
Maximum Height 	Four stories, 55 feet 
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit 	Studio 	500 sq. ft. 
	1 bedroom 	600 sq. ft. 
	2 bedroom 	900 sq. ft. 
	Each additional bedroom 	150 sq. ft. 
Maximum Residential Density 	24 units per gross acre 
 
(4)  See article IV., Development standards for additional requirements and exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-53. - Non-residential and mixed-use zoning district regulations. 
(a)  NS — Neighborhood Service District. 
(1)  Purpose. The NS district is primarily intended to provide areas for low density retail, office and service uses compatible in scale, character, and intensity with adjacent residential neighborhoods. Automotive repair and automotive service businesses are generally not appropriate in the NS district. 
(2)  Permitted uses. See section 77-46, Schedule of permitted uses for a complete listing. 
(3)  Area, yard and bulk requirements. 
Description 	Requirements 
Minimum Lot Area 	5,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width 	None 
Minimum Lot Depth 	None 
Minimum Front Yard 	25 feet 
Minimum Side Yard 	Interior Lot 	None 
	Corner Lot 	15 feet 
Minimum Rear Yard 	None 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	60% 
Maximum Height 	Two stories, 40 feet 
 
(4)  See article IV., Development standards for additional requirements and exceptions. 
(b)  GR — General Retail District. 
(1)  Purpose. The GR district is primarily intended to provide areas for neighborhood, local and community shopping facilities for the sales of goods and services included convenience stores, shopping centers and limited automotive repair and automobile services. 
(2)  Permitted uses. See section 77-46, Schedule of permitted uses for a complete listing. 
(3)  Area, yard and bulk requirements. 
Description 	Requirements 
Minimum Lot Area 	10,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width 	None 
Minimum Lot Depth 	None 
Minimum Front Yard 	25 feet 
Minimum Side Yard 	Interior Lot 	None 
	Corner Lot 	15 feet 
Minimum Rear Yard 	None 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	50% 
Maximum Height 	Two stories, 40 feet 
 
(4)  See article IV., Development standards for additional requirements and exceptions. 
(c)  C — Commercial District. 
(1)  Purpose. The C district is primarily intended to provide a location for a broad range of commercial and service-related uses, such as contract construction, landscape contractors, plumbing shops paint and body shops and automotive repair services, and other similar commercial uses. 
(2)  Permitted uses. See section 77-46, Schedule of permitted uses for a complete listing. 
(3)  Area, yard and bulk requirements. 
Description 	Requirements 
Minimum Lot Area 	10,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width 	None 
Minimum Lot Depth 	None 
Minimum Front Yard 	30 feet 
Minimum Side Yard 	Interior Lot 	None 
	Corner Lot 	20 feet 
Minimum Rear Yard 	None 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	40% 
Maximum Height 	Two stories, 40 feet 
 
(4)  See article IV., Development standards for additional requirements and exceptions. 
(d)  CA — Central Area District. 
(1)  Purpose. The CA district is primarily intended to serve as a pedestrian oriented center for retail, office, governmental, cultural, entertainment and residential uses in downtown Farmersville and adjacent neighborhoods. It is designed to ensure that development, redevelopment, and renovation within the district are consistent with the historical character of the city's original business district and surrounding area. The standards of this district apply to specific characteristics of the city's downtown area and are not appropriate for other locations and districts. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
a.  See section 77-46, Schedule of permitted uses for a complete listing. 
b.  A residence or residential use may be established in a building as an accessory or incidental use only after issuance of a certificate of occupancy and establishment of the primary use of the building; and 
c.  A building in the CA District may be used for residential purposes provided however that such residential use shall be limited solely to: 
1.  A maximum of 40 percent of the overall square footage of the first floor and placed on that portion of the first floor at the farthest portion of the building away from the building's store front with the remaining 60 percent of the first floor actually being used for retail or other commercial use; and 
2.  The second floor and above of the building. 
(3)  Area, yard and bulk requirements. 
Description 	Requirements 
Minimum Lot Area 	5,000 square feet for one-family dwelling (detached) 
	4,000 square feet for zero lot line 
	2,000 square feet for one-family dwelling (attached) 
	3,000 square feet for two-family dwelling 
	1,500 square feet per unit for multiple family dwellings (1—3 stories) 
	900 square feet per unit for multiple-family dwellings (over three stories) 
Minimum Lot Width 	20 feet for one-family dwelling (attached) 
	50 feet for two-family dwellings 
	60 feet for multiple-family dwellings 
Minimum Lot Depth 	100 feet for one-family dwelling (detached) 
	80 feet for zero lot line 
	100 feet for one-family dwelling (attached) 
	120 feet for multiple-family dwellings 
Minimum Front Yard 	None 
Maximum Front Yard 	30 feet from the centerline of any street on which such structure fronts 
Minimum Side Yard 	10% of lot width; 5 feet minimum for one-family (detached) and two-family dwellings 
	15 feet for one-family dwelling (attached) 
	10 feet for zero lot line 
	None for non-residential uses 
Minimum Rear Yard 	10 feet for residential uses; none for non-residential uses (see Section 4.4) 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	None 
Maximum Height 	None if all code provisions are met 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio 	10:1 
Minimum Dwelling Size 	750 square feet 
 
(4)  See article IV., Development standards for additional requirements and exceptions. 
(e)  LI — Light Industrial District. 
(1)  Purpose. The LI district is primarily intended for the conduct of light manufacturing, assembling and fabrication, and for warehousing, wholesaling and service operations. 
(2)  Permitted uses. See section 77-46, Schedule of permitted uses for a complete listing. 
(3)  Area, yard and bulk requirements. 
Description 	Requirements 
Minimum Lot Area 	15,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width 	None 
Minimum Lot Depth 	None 
Minimum Front Yard 	30 feet 
Minimum Side Yard 	Interior Lot 	None 
	Corner Lot 	20 feet 
Minimum Rear Yard 	None 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	None 
Maximum Height 	None; 
40 feet when within 40' of a residential property line 
 
(4)  See article IV., Development standards for additional requirements and exceptions. 
(f)  HI — Heavy Industrial District. 
(1)  Purpose. The HI district is primarily intended to provide areas for manufacturing firms engaged in processing, assembling, warehousing, research and development, and incidental services. 
(2)  Permitted uses. See section 77-46, Schedule of permitted uses for a complete listing. 
(3)  Area, yard and bulk requirements. 
Description 	Requirements 
Minimum Lot Area 	15,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width 	None 
Minimum Lot Depth 	None 
Minimum Front Yard 	30 feet 
Minimum Side Yard 	Interior Lot 	None 
	Corner Lot 	20 feet 
Minimum Rear Yard 	None 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	None 
Maximum Height 	None; 
40 feet when within 40' of a residential property line 
 
(4)  See article IV., Development standards for additional requirements and exceptions. 
(g)  HII — High Impact Industrial District. 
(1)  Purpose. The HII district is primarily intended to provide areas for manufacturing firms engaged in high impact industrial activity that is generally incompatible with residential, commercial and lower impact industrial uses and sensitive natural areas due to, among other things, traffic, noise levels, emissions, lighting and odors while allowing office and limited commercial uses which are harmonious with such high impact industrial uses. 
(2)  Permitted uses. See section 77-46, Schedule of permitted uses for a complete listing. 
(3)  Area, yard and bulk requirements. 
Description 	Requirements 
Minimum Lot Area 	15,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width 	None 
Minimum Lot Depth 	None 
Minimum Front Yard 	30 feet 
Minimum 
Side 
Yard 	Interior Lot 	None 
	Corner Lot 	20 feet 
Minimum Rear Yard 	20' 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	None 
Maximum Height 	None, generally; 
Except 40 feet height limitation if any part is located within 40 feet of a residential property line 
 
(4)  Applicable development standards. All uses in the HII — High Impact Industrial District shall meet or exceed all of the minimum requirements established in article IV, "Development Standards," of this zoning ordinance for the HI — Heavy Industrial District including without limitation, except as otherwise specifically provided herein to the contrary, the requirements set forth in sections 77-61—77-80. Notwithstanding the foregoing, section 71-71(h) shall not generally apply to uses in the HII — High Impact Industrial District. However, any areas that are not used for buildings, facilities, structures, parking and roadways shall be devoted to living landscape, which shall at a minimum include grass, ground cover, plants, shrubs, or trees. 
(5)  Prohibited uses. Uses that are not expressly enumerated herein as permitted uses are prohibited. Those uses that are prohibited shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Refining of petroleum or its products, including tar distillation; 
b.  Distillation of bones; fat rendering; glue, soap, or fertilizer manufacture; 
c.  Dumping, disposal, incineration, or reduction of garbage, sewage, offal, dead animals, or refuse; 
d.  Stockyard or slaughtering of animals; 
e.  Smelting of iron, copper, tin, zinc, or any other ore; 
f.  Manufacture of explosives or fireworks; 
g.  Coal distillation or coke ovens; 
h.  Creosote treatment; 
i.  Steel mills or furnaces; 
j.  Coal- or coke-fired kilns; 
k.  Used tire storage; 
l.  Extraction of raw materials; and 
m.  Concert halls. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-1023-002, § 2B, 10-23-2018)  
Sec. 77-54. - Special district regulations. 
(a)  Highway commercial overlay district. 
(1)  Purpose. The highway commercial (HC) overlay district is intended to provide for retail, service, and office uses within the Highway 380 and Highway 78 corridors, with the high traffic volumes and high visibility. The regulations and standards of this district are designed to enhance the aesthetic and functional characteristics of this transportation corridor. Overlay zoning district regulations apply in combination with underlying (base) zoning district regulations and all other applicable standards of this chapter. All applicable regulations of the underlying base zoning district apply to property in an overlay zoning district unless otherwise expressly stated. When overlay district standards conflict with standards that otherwise apply in the underlying, base zoning district, the regulations of the overlay zoning district govern unless the regulations of the base zoning district are more stringent, in which event the more stringent or restrictive standards shall apply. 
(2)  Permitted uses. All applicable land uses of the underlying base zoning district apply to property in the HC overlay zoning district unless otherwise expressly stated. See section 77-46, Schedule of permitted uses for a complete listing. 
The following uses are allowed by right within the HC overlay zoning district unless the base zoning district is HII - High Impact Industrial, in which base zoning district the following uses are allowed, or not, as reflected in section 77-46, "Schedule of Permitted Uses": 
a.  Big box retail development. 
(3)  Specific use permit required. The following uses require a specific use permit within the HC overlay zoning district unless the base zoning district is HII - High Impact Industrial, in which base zoning district the following uses are allowed, or not, as reflected in section 77-46, "Schedule of Permitted Uses": 
a.  Automobile repair, major. 
b.  Building materials and hardware sales, outside storage. 
c.  Equipment and machinery sales and rental, major. 
d.  Print shop, major. 
e.  Warehouse/distribution center. 
(4)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited within the HC overlay zoning district unless the base zoning district is HII - High Impact Industrial, in which base zoning district the following uses are allowed, or not, as reflected in section 77-46, "Schedule of Permitted Uses": 
a.  Car wash, self-service. 
b.  Contractor's shop and storage yard. 
c.  Game rooms. 
d.  Mini-warehouse/self-storage. 
(5)  Area, yard and bulk requirements. 
Description 	Requirements 
Minimum Lot Area 	None 
Minimum Lot Width 	None 
Minimum Lot Depth 	None 
Minimum Front Yard 	25 feet 
Minimum 
Side 
Yard 	Interior Lot 	10 feet 
	Corner Lot 	25 feet 
Minimum Rear Yard 	20 feet 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	50% 
Maximum Height 	None, unless single family or two-family zoning districts or developments are within 200 feet of the property line, in which a 40-foot height maximum shall apply. 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio 	1.5:1 
 
(6)  Highway commercial overlay district regulations. 
a.  Façade design and exterior materials and products—75 percent of any front and side exterior wall must be faced with individual unit masonry consisting of brick, native or precast stone, glass and textured concrete masonry. Precast tilt wall systems may be used for 100 percent of the rear façade if it does not face a public street. Precast panels on all sides of the building shall be scored or seamed to provide visual interest and a repeating pattern. 
b.  Buildings shall be articulated at all entrances facing streets by a minimum of two offsets (façade articulations that extend outward from the building must be set back at some point in a corresponding manner) in the façade of a minimum two feet in depth. Main building entrances shall be covered by an awning, canopy or building overhang. 
c.  The planning and zoning commission may consider waivers of the building façade material and design requirements for expansions and reconstruction of buildings that existed within the HC district on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived in accordance with the requirements below: 
1.  The expansion or reconstruction does not increase the square footage of the existing building by more than 50 percent; and 
2.  Strict compliance with these standards would result in significant inconsistency in appearance between existing and proposed sections of the building. 
d.  The standards set out in subparagraphs a, b and c of this subsection (a)(6) shall not be required for the following uses if the base zoning district in which the use is situated is HII - High Impact Industrial: 
1.  Concrete/asphalt batching plant; 
2.  Concrete/asphalt batching plant, temporary; 
3.  High impact use; and 
4.  Sand and gravel storage. 
e.  Prohibited exterior materials and products. The following materials and products shall not be used for exterior walls or exterior accents on any building within the HC district: metal panels, wood siding, Masonite, particle board, stucco foam insulation systems, vinyl siding, and aluminum siding. Metal panels may only be used for decorative architectural features, awnings and canopies and may not constitute the exterior building material of any wall. Notwithstanding the foregoing, architectural metal panels (not corrugated metal or galvanized metal) may be used conjunction with uses situated within the base zoning district of HII - High Impact Industrial. 
f.  Building orientation. Bays for car washes, auto repair and other automotive uses shall not be oriented to face public streets. 
g.  Mechanical screening. Roof mounted mechanical units shall be screened from view at a point five feet five inches above the property line by solid panels, parapet walls, mansard roofs or other architectural feature. Ground mounted mechanical units, compressors, generators and other equipment must be screened by a minimum six-foot tall solid screening wall or solid, irrigated landscape screen of shrubs that will achieve a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
h.  Open storage and outside display. No outside storage and display, sales, or operations shall be permitted unless such activity is visually screened from all streets and adjacent residential property in accordance with section 77-68. Outside garden centers are allowed only if attached to the main building and screened by masonry walls constructed of the same materials and manner of construction as the main building. The walls may be interspersed with ornamental metal panels. 
i.  Loading area placement and screening. Loading areas shall be located on the side and/or rear sides of buildings within the HC district. The loading areas shall be screened from view of public streets and from adjacent residential uses by wing walls, landscaping or other screening features. 
j.  Screening of automobile storage areas. Storage areas for automobiles that have been towed, are being staged before or after repairs, and/or stored for auction shall be screened by a minimum six-foot tall masonry wall or a solid, irrigated landscaped screen of shrubs that will achieve a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
k.  Cross access. Cross access easements shall be required between properties within the HC district to allow access to existing and proposed median openings and left turn lanes and to provide access to two public streets. Access drives/aisles/access easements should be extended to the development's property boundary in order to provide for connectivity with future development(s). The planning and zoning commission may determine that cross access is not appropriate for security reasons or where topography and existing site conditions make cross access difficult. 
l.  Utility services. All utility service lines shall be underground. 
m.  Extra requirements for uses in the HC district having a base zoning district of HII - High Impact Industrial. In addition to complying with the other requirements set forth in this section 77-54, any use in the HII - High Impact Industrial base zoning district shall to the extent it is situated within the HC district provide a minimum six-foot tall masonry screening wall such that all HII - High Impact Industrial activity on and about the property is visually screened from U.S. Highway 380 and State Highway 78. 
(7)  Highway commercial overlay district landscape regulations. Landscaping shall conform to the following: 
a.  Landscaping shall be required on all developments and shall be completed prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. All detention ponds shall be landscaped. 
b.  Landscaping adjacent to public right-of-ways. 
1.  Every site adjacent to the highway right-of-way shall include a buffer strip, landscaped and irrigated, being ten feet in depth adjacent to the highway right-of-way. 
2.  A minimum ten-foot landscape buffer adjacent to the right-of-way of any minor thoroughfare is required. If the lot is a corner lot, all frontages on minor thoroughfares and private drives of two lanes or greater shall be required to observe the ten-foot buffer. 
3.  Developers shall be required to plant one large canopy tree per 40 linear feet or portion thereof of street frontage, not including entry drives or visibility triangles. These required trees must be planted within the landscape setback along thoroughfares, unless otherwise approved. Trees may be grouped or clustered to facilitate site design. Ornamental trees may be substituted for canopy trees at the ratio of two to one along the street frontage for up to 50 percent of the required canopy trees. 
c.  Screening of parking areas and drive aisles adjacent to public right-of-way 
1.  Landscaped screening is required for all parking areas and drive aisles within 50 feet of the property line. 
d.  Landscaping adjacent to buildings. 
1.  Foundation plantings with a minimum six-foot depth are required along 50 percent of a building façade facing a major or minor thoroughfare. 
2.  Entries should be accented. 
e.  General landscaping standards. 
1.  All trees shall be a minimum of four feet from all pavement and underground utilities. 
2.  Canopy trees shall be a minimum of three inches in caliper (measured six inches above the ground) and seven feet in height at time of planting. 
3.  Accent or ornamental trees shall be a minimum of one-inch in caliper (measured six inches above the ground) and five feet in height at time of planting. 
4.  Evergreen shrubs shall be a minimum height of 24 inches at time of planting. 
f.  The standards set out in subparagraphs c and d of this subsection (a)(7) shall not be required for the following uses if the base zoning district in which the use is situated is HII - High Impact Industrial: 
1.  Concrete/asphalt batching plant; 
2.  Concrete/asphalt batching plant, temporary; 
3.  High impact use; and 
4.  Sand and gravel storage. 
(b)  Planned development district. 
(1)  Purpose. The PD district is a district that accommodates coordinated development that provides a more flexible regulatory structure than the zoning districts outlined in this chapter. A PD may be used to permit new or innovative concepts in land utilization or diversification than achieved under conventional zoning approaches. Procedures are established herein to ensure appropriate use of PD zoning. 
a.  The PD designation shall be used for the following purpose(s): 
1.  Master planning; 
2.  To carry out specific goals of the comprehensive plan, city or public/private partnered special projects, and city council strategic focus areas; 
3.  Development of mixed use or traditional neighborhoods with a variety of uses and housing types; and/or 
4.  To preserve natural features, open space, and other topographical features of the land. 
b.  The PD designation shall not be used solely for the following purpose(s): 
1.  To obtain variances and waivers from existing development standards; 
2.  To secure agreements between an applicant and nearby property owners to receive zoning approval; and/or 
3.  To assign responsibility to the city of private deed restrictions or covenants. 
(2)  Establishment. The city council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the establishment or amendment of PD districts in accordance with the procedures contained within section 77-21 and as further described within this article. The boundary of each PD district shall be defined on the zoning map and identified with the letters PD followed by a unique number referencing the adopting ordinance and regulations. 
(3)  Standard of approval. The approval, approval with conditions, or denial of PD districts shall be at the sole discretion of the city council based upon its judgment of the merit of the proposed district as related to the stated purposes in subsection (b)(1). 
(4)  Minimum district size. Following the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, no PD district may be established smaller than five acres unless a specific finding is made by the city council that the establishment of the district is required to implement the comprehensive plan, a strategic focus area, a special project, or any other purpose. 
(5)  PD district types. A PD district may be created as an overlay district or as a freestanding district as described below: 
a.  Overlay PD districts. An overlay PD district superimposes regulations onto a standard zoning district defined in section 77-52 and section 77-53. A PD overlay may modify, supplement, and/or delete the regulations of a standard zoning district (referred to as the base district). Except as specified by the terms of the ordinance establishing a PD overlay, the regulations of the base district shall apply, and any subsequent general amendment to the base district shall apply. A PD district established as an overlay district shall be designated by letters PD followed by a unique number and the initials of the base district (i.e., PD-000-R). 
b.  Freestanding PD districts. A freestanding PD district is a unique zoning classification. The zoning regulations affecting development within the district are limited to those specifically defined within the ordinance establishing the district (which may include by reference other regulations) and may only be changed by amending the district. A freestanding PD district may only be established where the use of the overlay method cannot reasonably achieve the purposes of this chapter and the PD district is in accordance with the comprehensive plan. A PD district established as a freestanding district shall be designated by the letters PD followed by a unique number (i.e., PD-000). 
(6)  Regulations affected. PD districts may be used to modify and supplement the regulations contained within the following ordinances: 
a.  Zoning ordinance. 
b.  Subdivision ordinance. 
c.  Thoroughfare standards. 
(7)  Site plan and plat required. Article V., Site plan review shall apply to the development of land for nonresidential or multifamily use within any PD district. 
(8)  Initial plan review. A concept plan shall be normally required as part of an application for establishing or amending a PD district. Additional information, studies, and plans may be required by the planning and zoning commission or the city council to determine the merit of establishing a PD district and as required to develop regulations to be incorporated in the ordinance establishing or amending a PD district. The requirement for submitting a concept plan may be waived by the planning and zoning commission or the city council if they determine sufficient information exists to evaluate the proposed establishment or amendment of a PD district. 
(9)  Plan approval. Plans and land studies submitted in conjunction with establishing or amending a PD district may be approved by city council either by separate administrative action, or by reference as part of the ordinance establishing the PD district. All subsequent plans prepared for the development of property within a PD district must substantially conform to the approved plan in accordance with the standards and procedures of Article V. 
(10)  Amendment of plans. Plans which are administratively approved may be revised and re-approved by the planning and zoning commission by administrative action in accordance with the provisions of Article V and provided that the amended plan conforms to the regulations set forth within the PD ordinance. 
(11)  Expiration of plans. Plans which are approved by administrative action shall expire in accordance with the provisions of Article V. Where the plan has expired and no extension is approved, the property owners of the PD must receive approval of a new plan prior to applying for development permits. Any new plan or study must conform to the regulations existing at the time of application. 
(12)  Administration. It is the responsibility of the city manager and the planning and zoning commission to administer the regulations governing PD districts. 
(13)  Partial rezoning. Owners of property within a PD district may request rezoning of the portion of the district they own to separate it from the remaining property within the PD district. In considering the request, the planning and zoning commission and city council shall evaluate the effect of the rezoning on the remaining property and may require adjustments to terms and conditions of the original PD resulting from a change in boundary. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-1023-002, § 4, 10-23-2018)  
Secs. 77-55—77-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 77-61. - Lot regulations. 
(a)  General. Regulations governing lot dimensions, as specified in section 77-52 and section 77-53, shall apply to all lots except that a lot having less area, width, or depth than herein required which was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be used for a single-family dwelling, and no lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be reduced in area, width, or depth below the minimum requirements set forth herein. 
(b)  Minimum lot area. Independent living facilities, assisted living facilities, long-term care facilities, continuing care facilities, community centers, hospitals, colleges, universities, trade schools, and public, private, and parochial schools located in any residential district shall have a minimum site area of two acres. 
(c)  Lot coverage and floor area ratio. The maximum percentage of any lot area which may hereafter be covered by the main building and all accessory buildings and the maximum ratio of the floor area to the total area of the lot or tract on which a building is located shall not exceed the regulations specified in section 77-52 and section 77-53, except where an existing building at the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may have a greater percentage of lot coverage or a higher floor area ratio than herein prescribed, such building shall be considered a conforming structure. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-62. - Front yard regulations. 
(a)  General. Regulations governing yard requirements, as specified in section 77-52 and section 77-53, shall apply to all lots unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Special front yard regulations. 
(1)  On corner lots, the front yard setback shall be observed along the frontage of both intersecting streets, unless shown specifically otherwise on a final plat. 
(2)  Where the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is divided by two or more zoning districts, the front yard setback shall comply with the requirements of the most restrictive district for the entire frontage. 
(3)  Where a building line has been established by plat or Code provision and such line requires a front yard setback greater or lesser in depth than is prescribed by this article for the district in which the building line is located, the required front yard shall comply with the building line established by such ordinance or plat. 
(4)  Front yard measurements. 
a.  The front yard shall be measured from the property line to the front face of the building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory building. 
b.  Eaves and roof extensions or a porch without posts or columns may project into the required front yard setback for a distance not to exceed four feet. 
c.  Where no front yard is required, all stairs, eaves, roofs and similar building extensions shall be located behind the front street right-of-way line or property line and off-street parking facilities shall be equipped with stops or guards to prevent parked vehicles from being stored nearer than ten feet to any curb and all such parking shall be behind the property line. 
(5)  For existing through lots, a required front yard shall be provided on both streets unless a building line for accessory buildings has been established along one front-age on the plat or by ordinance, in which event only an accessory building may be built on the line thus established. The main building must observe the front yard requirements for both streets. 
(6)  In the case of existing through lots which are bounded on three sides by streets, all yards between the main building and a street shall be regulated as front yards unless a front, side, and rear building line have been established by plat. 
(7)  If buildings along the frontage of any street between two intersecting streets in any residential district have observed an average setback which is greater or lesser in dimension than the minimum front yard or setback established for the district in which such street frontage is located, then the average setback of all buildings fronting upon such street between two intersecting streets shall establish the minimum front yard requirement. All vacant lots shall be assumed to have a minimum front yard specified for the district in computing the average front yard. These provisions shall be not interpreted as requiring a setback or front yard greater than 50 feet nor shall they be interpreted as requiring any building to observe a front yard of more than ten feet greater than the front setback observed by any building on a contiguous lot. 
(8)  In all districts except CA, the distance as measured from the front lot line to the face of the building shall in no case be less than one-half the height of the building, and in no case need such distance exceed 50 feet regardless of the height of the building. 
(9)  In the CA district, no front yard is required except that no structure may be erected nearer than 30 feet to the centerline of any street on which such structure fronts. 
(10)  Gasoline service station pump islands may not be located nearer than 20 feet to the front property line and the outer edge of the canopy shall not be nearer than ten feet to the front property line. 
(11)  Satellite dishes are prohibited in the front yard of any district. Only one satellite dish shall be permitted per lot or primary unit. Satellite dishes in any residential district shall not exceed 12 feet in diameter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-63. - Side yard regulations. 
(a)  General. Regulations governing yard requirements, as specified in section 77-52 and section 77-53, shall apply to all lots unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Special side yard regulations. 
(1)  Every part of a required side yard shall be open and unobstructed by any building except for accessory buildings as permitted herein and the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices and other architectural features projecting not to exceed 12 inches into the required side yard, and a roof eave or canopy projecting not to exceed 24 inches into the required side yard. 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings shall provide a minimum side yard of 15 feet between any building face or wall containing openings for windows, light and air and any side lot line except that any such building face or wall not exceeding 35 feet in width may provide a minimum side yard of ten feet. Where a building wall contains no openings for windows, light or air, a minimum side yard of ten feet shall be provided between such wall and the side lot line (See appendix illustration 9 on file in the city secretary's office.) Where high-rise apartment building, exceeding three stories in height are erected in the MF-2, O or other districts permitting such construction, the side yard shall be increased one foot for each two feet the structure exceeds three stories, but no side yard shall exceed 50 feet. 
(3)  On a corner lot, a side yard adjacent to a street, for a multiple-family dwelling not exceeding three stories in height, shall not be less than 15 feet and no balcony or porch or any portion of the building may extend into such required side yard except that a roof may overhang such side not to exceed four feet. 
(4)  On a corner lot, used for one-family or two-family dwellings, both street exposure shall be treated as front yards on all lots platted after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, except that where one street exposure is designated as a side yard by a building line shown on a plat previously approved by the planning and zoning commission containing a side yard of ten feet or more, the building line provisions on that plat shall be observed. On lots which were official lots of record prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the minimum side yard adjacent to a side street shall comply with the required side yard for the respective districts as specified in subsection (a). 
(5)  A one-family attached dwelling shall provide a minimum required side yard adjacent to a side street of ten feet and no complex of attached one-family dwellings shall exceed 200 feet in length. A minimum required side yard of five feet shall be provided at the end of each one-family attached dwelling complex so that the end of any two adjacent building complexes shall be at least ten feet apart. 
(6)  No side yard is specified for non-residential use in the GR, C, CA, LI or HI Districts except where a commercial, retail or industrial or other nonresidential use abuts upon a district boundary line dividing such districts from a residential district in which event a minimum five feet side yard shall be provided on the side adjacent to such residential district. 
(7)  The minimum side yard requirements in a planned development district shall be established on the site plan or in the amending ordinance in accordance with section 77-54(b). 
(8)  Side yard requirements for zero lot lines are as follows: one side must be at least ten feet, and there is no minimum on the other side. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-64. - Rear yard regulations. 
(a)  General. Regulations governing yard requirements, as specified in section 77-52 and section 77-53, shall apply to all lots unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Special rear yard regulations. 
(1)  In the A, ED, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, 2F, MF-1, MF-2, NS, GR, C, CA, or LI districts, no main residential building may be constructed nearer than ten feet to the rear property line. The main residential building and all accessory building shall never cover more than 50 percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining midpoint on one side lot line with the mid-point of the opposite side lot line. For accessory building standards, see section 77-66. 
(2)  In the NS, GR, C, CA, LI, or HI Districts, no rear yard is specified for non-residential uses except where retail, commercial or industrial uses back upon a common district line, whether separated by an alley or not, dividing the district from any residential districts listed herein, a minimum rear yard of ten feet shall be provided. 
(3)  Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point 30 inches above the general ground level of the graded lot, except for accessory buildings, landscaping, fences and similar appurtenances and the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices and roof overhangs and other architectural features projecting not to exceed four feet into the required rear yard. 
(4)  The minimum rear yard in a PD, Planned Development District shall be established on the site plan or by the amending ordinance in accordance with section 77-54(b). 
(5)  Where multifamily dwellings exceed three stories in height, a rear yard equal to one foot for each two feet in height shall be provided, except that no such rear yard shall exceed 50 feet as a result of this provision, and except that in the MF-2 and CA Districts, no rear yard exceeding ten feet shall be required where the rear wall of a residential structure contains no opening or windows for light or air. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-65. - Height regulations. 
(a)  General. Regulations governing height limits, as specified in section 77-52 and section 77-53, shall apply to all lots unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Special height regulations. 
(1)  In all zoning districts and planned developments, water standpipes and tanks, religious facility architectural features, bell towers, domes and spires on school buildings and institutional buildings, the roofs of auditoriums and sanctuaries of one story construction, and public safety structures may be erected to exceed the district's maximum height. Side and rear yards shall be increased by two additional feet, and the front yard shall be increased by one additional foot, for each foot that such structures exceed the district's maximum height where adjacent to residential districts. The increase in the required yard shall apply only to the portion of the structure that causes the increased yard requirements. 
(2)  Publicly-owned sports lighting, communication antennas or communication structures, utility poles and towers, and water tanks are exempt from height restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-66. - Accessory building regulations. 
(a)  Use of accessory building. 
(1)  In a residential zoning district, an accessory building may not be used for commercial purposes and may not be rented. 
(2)  In a nonresidential zoning district, an accessory structure is a subordinate structure, the use of which is incidental to and used only in conjunction with the main structure. 
(b)  Garage apartment or guest house. Accessory dwelling units (garage apartment or guest house) shall be allowed as an incidental use on the same lot or tract as the main dwelling unit and used by the same person or persons of the immediate family when the main structure is owner occupied, and meet the following standards. 
(1)  Location. 
a.  A garage apartment shall be constructed attached to a garage, either above or adjacent to the garage. 
b.  A guest house shall be constructed to the rear of the main dwelling, separate from that upon which the main dwelling is constructed. 
(2)  Building permit requirement. An accessory dwelling unit may be constructed only with the issuance of a building permit. 
(3)  Independent sale and sublet prohibited. An accessory dwelling unit may not be sold separately from sale of the entire property, including the main dwelling unit, and shall not be sublet. 
(4)  Setbacks. Setback requirements shall be the same as for the main structure. 
(5)  Area regulations. 
a.  Accessory dwelling units may not exceed a height of 35 feet, and is limited to two stories. 
b.  Accessory dwelling units may not exceed 1,100 total square feet and 550 square feet on the second story, if any. The minimum allowed area of the accessory unit shall be 350 square feet. 
c.  The floor area of any detached accessory structure shall not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the principal structure. The total combined floor area of all structures shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(6)  Other regulations. 
a.  An accessory dwelling unit shall not contain more than one bedroom, more than one kitchen, or more than one bathroom. 
b.  Parking areas shall be located behind the front yard. 
c.  In order to maintain the architectural design, style, appearance and character of the main building as a single-family residence, the accessory dwelling unit shall have a roof pitch, exterior façades and window proportions identical to that of the principal residence if the principal residence is a significantly important building, or either or both of the principal residence and the accessory building are situated in a historically significant area. 
(c)  Height and yard requirements. 
(1)  Where the accessory building is attached to a main building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations applicable to the main building except as provided within this section. 
(2)  Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any required front yard. 
(3)  Carports and detached accessory buildings, except garages, shall not be located closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line. 
(4)  Detached accessory buildings enclosed on three or more sides shall not be located closer than ten feet to the main building. 
(5)  Garages entered from an alley shall be set back from the lot line adjacent to the alley a minimum of 20 feet. 
(6)  Accessory buildings may not be placed in the required side yard setback if the side yard lot line abuts a street. 
(7)  In no instance shall an accessory building be located within an easement or right-of-way. 
(8)  Detached accessory buildings located in a required rear or side yard shall not exceed ten feet in height. If the detached accessory building is located less than ten feet from the rear or side lot line, a six-foot solid fence or wall shall be built on the rear or side lot line to screen the building. No screening shall be required at the point of entry for a carport. 
(d)  Carports. 
(1)  In single-family and two-family developments, a carport shall shelter not more than three vehicles and shall not exceed 24 feet on its longest dimension. 
(2)  Carports must meet all height and yard setback requirements in section 3.12 and are prohibited within the front yard setback. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2020-0114-001, § 4, 1-14-2020)  
Sec. 77-67. - Exterior construction standards for structures. 
(a)  The Texas Legislature adopted House Bill 2439, which became effective on September 1, 2019, establishing V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 3000.001—3000.005. That legislation prohibits a governmental entity from adopting or enforcing a rule, charter provision, ordinance, order, building code or other regulation - with certain specified exceptions - that: 
(1)  Prohibits or limits, directly or indirectly, the use or installation of a building product or material in the construction, renovation, maintenance, or other alteration of a residential or commercial building if the building product or material is approved for use by a national model code published within the last three code cycles that applies to the construction, renovation, maintenance, or other alteration of the building; or 
(2)  Establishes a standard for a building product, material, or aesthetic method in construction, renovation, maintenance, or other alteration of a residential or commercial building if the standard is more stringent than a standard for the product, material, or aesthetic method under a national model code published within the last three code cycles that applies to the construction, renovation, maintenance, or other alteration of the building. 
V.T.C.A., Government Code § 3000.002(a). Certain of the provisions set out in this section 77-67 do not conflict with V.T.C.A., Government Code § 3000.001 et seq. However, to the extent that the foregoing legislation preempts the City's ability to enforce the following exterior construction standards, the city will not enforce these exterior construction standards. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city reserves the right to enforce any and all of the following exterior construction standards to the extent that the city's authority is not otherwise preempted. 
The following exterior construction standards requirements shall apply to any and all buildings in a "historically significant area" and any and all buildings that are a "significantly important building" which are situated within the corporate limits of the city, and as otherwise specifically noted. 
(b)  Residential structures. 
(1)  Exterior wall construction for residential structures shall consist of a minimum of 75 percent of the following masonry materials on the first floor and 50 percent of stories other than the first story. This coverage calculation does not include doors, windows, recessed entries, chimneys, dormers, window box-outs, bay windows that do not extend to the foundation, or any other exterior wall that does not bear on the foundation. 
a.  Stone or brick laid up unit by unit and set in mortar, 
b.  Cultured stone, or 
c.  Three-step stucco, or 
d.  An equivalent, permanent architecturally finished material with a minimum 30-year warranty period is also acceptable. 
(2)  Exterior walls of chimneys, dormers, window box-outs, bay windows that do not extend to the foundation, or any other exterior wall that does not bear on the foundation, shall be constructed of masonry materials or any other sustainable material with a minimum 30-year warranty period, such as: fiber cement siding, seamless steel siding, vinyl siding with a flat or low gloss embossed finish and at least 0.04-inch thick, three-coat stucco, or EIFS. Fascia may be constructed of sustainable materials with a minimum 20-year warranty period covering the product and its coating, such as: fiber cement siding, aluminum coil with vinyl coating, cedar wood, redwood, treated engineered wood, or treated dimensional lumber. Prohibited materials include wood (except as noted above), plywood, hardwood, and untreated engineered/manufactured wood. 
(3)  All main structures within the multifamily residential districts must have a minimum of 80 percent masonry on the first and second floors and 50 percent on all other floors. 
(4)  Alternate materials and designs may be considered by the planning and zoning commission for meritorious exceptions in accordance with section 77-67(h). 
(c)  Non-residential structures. 
(1)  Except for the LI and HI districts, and as otherwise regulated by this chapter, exterior wall construction for nonresidential structures shall consist of a minimum of 75 percent masonry, three-step stucco, glass, or combination of these materials, with no single wall face of any structure containing less than 50 percent of its exposed surface of masonry construction. A maximum of ten percent of any exposed exterior wall may consist of EIFS. 
(2)  No more than 80 percent of the ground floor of any exterior wall (to the first plate) shall be comprised of windows or glass. No more than 50 percent of any exterior wall above the ground floor shall be comprised of windows or glass. Glass walls shall include glass curtain walls or glass block construction. Glass curtain wall shall be defined as an exterior wall which carries no structural loads, and which may consist of the combination of metal, glass, or other surfacing material supported in a metal framework. 
(3)  Reflective glass with an exterior reflectance in excess of 27 percent shall not be permitted. 
(4)  Exterior Construction Standards for Central Area (CA), Neighborhood Service (NS), General Retail (GR), and Commercial (C) Districts. 
a.  All non-residential buildings shall be architecturally finished on all four sides with the same materials and detailing (e.g., tiles, moldings, cornices, wainscoting, etc.). 
b.  The rear façade of a building, which is not adjacent to or does not face a public right-of-way, park or residential district, shall not be required to comply with the above requirement. 
c.  All entrances of a building along any street shall incorporate arcades, roofs, alcoves, porticoes and awnings that protect pedestrians from the sun and weather. Minimum awning size shall be four feet by four feet. 
d.  All buildings facing a public right-of-way, park, or residential zoning district shall meet the following articulation requirements: 
1.  Façade articulation of at least three feet in depth or offset shall be required for every 30 feet in horizontal surface length. 
2.  Buildings greater than two stories or taller than 20 feet shall be designed to reduce apparent mass by including a clearly identifiable base, middle, and top, with horizontal elements separating these components. 
3.  A well-defined cornice or fascia shall be located at the top of the storefront and at the roofline. 
(5)  All buildings and structures in the Central Area (CA) District shall be of exterior fire resistant construction, having 100 percent of the total exterior walls, excluding doors and windows, be constructed of brick, stone, or brick veneer. 
(6)  In Industrial Districts (LI and HI) any exterior wall visible from a public thoroughfare or residential zoning district must be of 100 percent masonry, exclusive of doors and windows. 
a.  Up to 100 percent of any exposed exterior wall may consist of metal if the exterior wall is not visible from a public thoroughfare or residential zoning district. 
(7)  Procedure for determining alternative exterior materials. 
a.  Exceptions to the material requirements may be permitted on a case by case basis. 
1.  All requests for alternative exterior building materials shall be noted and described on a site plan with elevation drawings to be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for approval. 
b.  The planning and zoning commission may approve an alternative exterior material if it is determined it is equivalent or better than masonry according to the criteria listed in section 77-67(b). 
c.  Consideration for exceptions to the above requirements shall be based only on the following: 
1.  Architectural design and creativity; 
2.  Compatibility with surrounding developed properties. 
(d)  Accessory structures. 
(1)  Exterior façades. Any accessory building or storage building that is greater than 200 square feet in floor area which is allowed under this chapter shall be of like appearance to the primary building. 
(2)  Exceptions to exterior façades. 
a.  Any accessory building or storage building that is 200 square feet or less in area, which is allowed under this chapter, may be constructed of materials having a different appearance from the primary building provided that the building shall be the same color as the primary building. 
b.  Fiber cement siding may be used to fulfill masonry requirements for an accessory structure or structure of 200 square feet or less in a single family or two family district. 
c.  Metal or wood may be used as an exterior construction material for an accessory structure or structure of 120 square feet or less in a single family or two family district. 
d.  Fiber cement siding may be used to fulfill masonry requirements for structures accessory to an existing structure constructed entirely of wood or vinyl siding. 
e.  In nonresidential districts, accessory structures with pervious roofs (e.g., pergola) may be constructed of Cedar, Douglas Fir, or other material impervious to rotting, provided masonry, matching the material of the primary building or structure, wraps around the base of each column for a minimum three feet above grade. 
(3)  Foundation requirements. 
a.  Attached accessory buildings shall conform to the regulations applicable to the main building to which they are attached. Attached buildings are defined as any building sharing a common roof with the primary structure. 
b.  Foundation requirements for detached accessory buildings (except barns) are as follows: 
1.  Buildings 200 square feet and less. The building may be placed on the ground without a foundation provided that the building is anchored to the ground. This must be done to resist wind loads. 
2.  Buildings greater than 200 square feet. The building shall have a permanent foundation in accordance with the current city building codes, the plans for which shall be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer licensed by the state. Foundations higher than 12 inches above ground level shall be required to have a foundation fascia consisting of the same material that covers the exterior wall directly above the foundation, so that no more than 12 inches of the foundation is exposed. 
(e)  Prohibited exterior materials. The following materials and products shall not be used for exterior walls or exterior accents, unless otherwise permitted by this article: metal panels, wood siding, Masonite, particle board, stucco foam insulation systems, and aluminum siding. 
(f)  Roofing requirements. 
(1)  The implied visible purpose of the roof form is to perform those functions associated with a roof. That is to provide sunshade or shed water. A roof, which exists only to conceal mechanical equipment, is not allowed. The guidelines for roofs are as follows: 
(2)  Roof massing. Roofs (pitched or flat) shall be massed with an orderly sequence of subordinate roofs extending from a dominant roof mass. Where more complex building design creates multiple roof forms, there shall be a logical relationship of the roof composition. Single roof forms, other than flat roofs, which articulate the entire plate size of the structure, are not allowed. It is the intent of this guideline to encourage roof forms (other than flat roofs) with compositional components rather than the entire mass of the structure itself. When pitched roof forms are used in conformance with these guidelines, roof forms must be simple hipped or gable roofs. This guideline is not meant to limit the use of flat roofs in subordinate mass situations and where such a roof is necessary to attain an appropriate perception of span. A flat roof shall be concealed behind a parapet (or an extension of the wall plane). 
(3)  Roof projections. No plumbing stacks, venting stacks or roof mounted attic ventilators (except gable and or dormer vents) shall penetrate the roof surfaces facing the street. Roof projections must be mounted straight and perpendicular to the ground plane and be painted to blend with the roof color. Roof projections and HVAC equipment mounted on the roof shall be screened from view and shall not be visible from any streets abutting or adjacent to the structure. 
(4)  Roof span. Care must be taken in the design of new development to create (or give the illusion of) spans that are compatible with pedestrian scaled development and residential uses. Roof spans should not be larger than 45 feet unless a dominant span (larger in size) is made more complex and obscured by subordinate roof masses extending from it. 
(5)  Flat roofs. Flat roofs shall include parapets that adhere to articulation requirements for the main face of the structure. The average height of the parapet shall not exceed 15 percent of the height of the supporting wall, unless rooftop equipment cannot be sufficiently screened. A three-dimensional cornice treatment is encouraged for parapets. Parapets shall look complete from all sides if visible at any distance from the ground. Parapets shall be constructed of the same material as the primary façade. 
(6)  Roof pitch. Pitched roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 6:12 for all structures. This requirement excludes roofs for entries and dormers. 
(7)  Sloped roof materials. Sloped roof materials shall be one of the following: 
a.  Metal R panel; 
b.  Natural slate; 
c.  High quality clay or concrete tile (including such slate like products as Hardislate or equal) in warm darker gray or dark earth tone color range; 
d.  High quality composition shingle with a 30-year warranty with a gray, dark chocolate, or weathered blend color or other dark color; 
e.  All roof colors shall be limited to a Verde, dark bronze or naturally weathered or earth tone color. 
(8)  Flat roofs may be constructed of any industry-standard material, unless prohibited by this section. 
(9)  Wood shingles, corrugated metal, tar paper, and brightly colored asphalt shingle roof materials are prohibited on all roof types. Corrugated metal roofs on non-residential structures within the downtown historical area of the city shall be allowed. 
(10)  A pitched roof with a minimum 6:12 pitch shall be required on at least 75 percent of the roof of each single-family and two-family dwelling. 
(11)  All single-family and two-family dwellings erected after the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be required to have a pitched roof with a minimum 6:12 pitch on at least 75 percent of the roof. 
(12)  Detached garages, sheds, porticos and accessory structures on the same lot as a single-family or two-family dwelling shall have a minimum 4:12 pitched roof. 
(g)  Foundation requirements. 
(1)  All single-family and two-family dwellings shall have a permanent foundation the plans for which shall be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer licensed by the state. Foundations higher than 12 inches above ground level shall be required to have a foundation fascia consisting of the same material that covers the exterior wall directly above the foundation, so that no more than 12 inches of the foundation is exposed. 
(h)  Limited waivers for expansion or reconstruction of existing buildings'. The planning and zoning commission may, upon request by the applicant, authorize a waiver from specific requirements for exterior materials set out in section 77-67, if: 
(1)  Strict compliance with these standards would result in significantly inconsistent appearance between existing and proposed sections of the building; or, 
(2)  If the proposed expansion or reconstruction has been mandated as a condition to the applicant's ability to continue operating a franchise, or license, to conduct business in the existing building; and 
(3)  The expansion or reconstruction does not increase the square footage of the existing building by more than 50 percent; and 
(4)  The applicant proposes the use of high quality materials in the expansion or reconstruction of the existing building that significantly improve the quality and appearance of the existing building. 
(5)  The applicant shall submit detailed information to the city manager as required in subsection (g) regarding meritorious exceptions. The city manager shall review the application, prepare a report of findings and refer the request for a waiver to the planning and zoning commission for a decision according to procedures outlined in subsection (g). The applicant may appeal the decision of the planning and zoning commission to the city council according to the procedures outlined in subsection (g) regarding meritorious exceptions. 
(i)  Meritorious exception. It is not the intent of this section to discourage innovation. An architectural and site design that does not conform with the specific requirements of this section, but which has merit by making a positive contribution to the visual environment and which is appropriate to the site and use, may be submitted for consideration as a meritorious exception. Such proposals shall be fairly and seriously considered by the planning and zoning commission through the approval process outlined in this section. 
(1)  An applicant for a meritorious exception shall submit: 
a.  All items required for the review of required architectural and site standards; 
b.  A written description of the nature of the meritorious exception and the compelling reasons that prevent the applicant from meeting the minimum standards set forth herein; and 
c.  Color renderings of all elevations. 
(2)  The application for a meritorious exception shall be reviewed by the city manager and a report of findings shall be prepared and submitted to the planning and zoning commission. If the applicant is not in agreement with the decision of the planning and zoning commission, the applicant may, within 21 days of the planning and zoning commission action, request in writing to the city manager that the meritorious exception be appealed to the city council. Prior to consideration of an application for a meritorious exception, the planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing, with notice given according to the procedure for a change in a zoning district location or boundary. In considering the request, the planning and zoning commission shall consider the following factors in determining the extent of any exception granted: 
a.  The extent to which the application meets other specific standards of this article; 
b.  The extent to which the application meets the spirit and intent of this article through the use of building materials, colors, and façade design to create a building of exceptional quality and appearance; 
c.  The positive or negative impact of the proposed project on surrounding property use and property values, in comparison to the expected impact of a project, which could be built in conformance with the standards of this article; and 
d.  The extent to which the proposed project accomplishes city goals as stated in the comprehensive plan or other approved document. 
e.  A meritorious exception shall not be granted to serve solely as a convenience to the applicant, or for reasons related solely to economic hardship. 
(j)  Variances. When a property owner can show that a strict application of the terms of this article relating to architectural or site standards will impose upon him unusual and practical difficulties or particular hardship, including instances where an applicant has previously built in strict conformance with approved architectural and site standards plans and such approval was erroneously granted by the city manager or his designee, a variance from the strict application of this section may be granted by the board of adjustment; provided that: 
(1)  The variance requested is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this section; 
(2)  The board of adjustment is satisfied that a granting of such variance will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate a demonstrable and unusual hardship or difficulty; and 
(3)  The board of adjustment is satisfied that there will be no adverse impact on surrounding property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2020-0114-001, § 5, 1-14-2020)  
Sec. 77-68. - Open storage. 
(a)  Allowed zoning districts. 
(1)  Open storage is permitted as a primary use only in the LI and HI districts. 
(2)  Open storage and outside display are permitted as accessory uses to a primary use on the same lot in the A, NS, GR, C, CA, LI, and HI districts. 
(3)  Open storage and outside display are prohibited in all residential districts. 
(b)  Allowed locations for open storage and outside display. Open storage and outside display of goods, materials, merchandise, or equipment shall: 
(1)  Be screened as required in section 77-69, unless placed in accordance with subsection (c). 
(2)  Not be located within any required front, side, or rear yard setback. 
(3)  Not be located within parking spaces, fire lanes, maneuvering aisles, or customer pick-up lanes. 
(4)  Not obstruct visibility or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular circulation. If the items are placed on a sidewalk or other pedestrian area, a six-foot wide pedestrian path shall be maintained through or adjacent to the outside display area. The pedestrian path must be concrete or asphalt and may not be located within off-street parking areas, including parking spaces, fire lanes, maneuvering aisles, and customer pick-up lanes. 
(5)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit temporary open storage of merchandise for display and sale during a sidewalk sale. A four-foot wide clearance shall be provided along the public sidewalk and a six-foot wide clearance shall be provided on the sidewalk around the building. 
(6)  Be placed on an asphalt or concrete surface. In an industrial zoned district, open storage items, except vehicles, may be placed on a gravel surface. For freestanding garden center uses, when developed as the primary use of a lot, open storage items may be placed on a gravel or other permeable surface. 
(7)  Be immediately adjacent to the building when in an A, NS, GR, C, or CA district. 
(8)  Not be located on the roof of any structure. 
(9)  Not exceed five percent of the lot area or 20 percent of the main building gross floor area, whichever is more restrictive, in the NS, GR, C, CA districts. For freestanding garden center uses, when developed as the primary use of a lot, the area for open storage may be increased to a maximum of 50 percent of the lot area. 
(c)  Exceptions to screening requirements. 
(1)  No screening is required for open storage and outside display of goods, materials, merchandise, or equipment as an accessory use if placed in an area not more than five feet from the front building face, as designated by the main entrance and not stacked to exceed four feet in height. 
(2)  Screening is not required for items placed on a gasoline pump island that do not exceed three feet in height. 
(3)  Parked self-propelled vehicles or trailers shall not constitute open storage or outside display, except when staged, parked, or stored at collision, towing, auto storage, mini-warehouse, auto repair, or wrecker service. 
(4)  The planning and zoning commission may waive these requirements if no public purpose would be served by the construction of a required screen, or natural features (i.e. vegetation or topography) exist that sufficiently screen the open storage. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-69. - Screening, fence and wall regulations. 
(a)  Screening walls or visual barriers. 
(1)  In the event that a nonresidential or multi-family district sides or backs upon a single- or two-family residential district, or in the event that any nonresidential district sides or backs to a multifamily district, a solid screening wall or fence of not less than six nor more than eight feet in height shall be erected along the entire property line separating these districts, except where visibility triangles or easements are required. The purpose of the screening wall or fence is to provide a visual barrier between the properties. The owner of such property shall be responsible for and shall build the required wall or fence along the entire property line dividing his property from the residential district. In cases where the planning and zoning commission finds this requirement to be impractical for immediate construction, it may grant a temporary or permanent waiver of the required screening wall or fence until such time as the screening wall or fence may be deemed necessary by the city council. In cases where the planning and zoning commission finds this requirement to be better met by an irrigated living screen, the same may be substituted for the screening wall. Evergreen shrubs used for a landscape screen shall be placed so as to create at least a six-foot tall solid screen within two years of their installation. All landscaping shall be irrigated with an automatic sprinkler system and maintained in a healthy and growing condition. 
(2)  Any screening wall or fence authorized by or required under the provisions of this section shall be constructed of: 
a.  Brick masonry, stone masonry, or other architectural masonry finish; 
b.  Tubular steel (primed and painted) or wrought iron fence with masonry columns spaced a maximum of 20 feet on center with structural supports spaced every ten feet, and with sufficient evergreen landscaping to create a screening effect; 
c.  Alternate equivalent screening, upon approval by the planning and zoning commission and/or city council, depending on which body has the final approval authority as indicated through the site plan process; or 
d.  A six-foot-tall living plant screen, upon approval by the planning and zoning commission and/or city council, depending on which body has the final approval authority as indicated through the site plan process and which living plant screen meets the following requirements: 
1.  The plant material shall be evergreen shrubs of a density that will not permit through-passage; 
2.  The plant material shall be acceptable for a six-foot-tall living plant screen; 
3.  The plant material shall be a minimum of three feet in height when measured immediately after planting and shall be planted no further apart than three feet on center, unless otherwise approved by the city manager; 
4.  The plant material shall be maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid visual screen that exhibits the same year-round screening characteristics as a solid brick/masonry screening wall; and 
5.  The plant material shall be at least six feet tall within two years after time of planting. 
(3)  No fence, screen, wall, or other visual barrier shall be so located or placed that it obstructs the vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching any street or drive intersection. 
(4)  Where an alley intersects with a street, no fence or plant taller than 30 inches may be placed within a sight visibility triangle defined by measuring eight feet to a point along the property lines and joining said points to form the hypotenuse of the triangle. 
(5)  All required screening walls shall be equally finished on both sides of the wall. 
(6)  All openings in the surface for passage shall be equipped with gates equal in height and screening characteristics to the fence or wall. 
(7)  Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, all approved screening devices must be in place. 
(8)  All screening devices shall be permanently and continually maintained in a neat and orderly manner as a condition of use. The occupancy permit may be revoked by the city manager for failure to adequately maintain such screening device. 
(9)  Screening devices shall be placed and maintained in the following locations: 
a.  All wrecking yards, junkyards, or salvage yards shall be fenced on all sides and shall be screened from view from the public right-of-way and from adjacent residential property. 
b.  Loading docks or structures, bays, and bay doors shall be screened from view from the public right-of-way, from adjacent residential property, and from adjacent non-residential property, other than industrial. The required screening device adjacent to a non-residential property, other than industrial, may be waived with site plan approval if it is determined that the location of the proposed loading docks, bays or bay doors in relation to the adjacent development's site layout is not detrimental. Bays in any retail district or retail PD district shall be oriented away from the street frontage. 
c.  Display of new vehicles, or used vehicles not defined as junked vehicles under this chapter, need not be screened if they are, in the opinion of the city manager, maintained in a neat and orderly manner. 
d.  At motor vehicle service or repair facilities or automotive paint and body repair shops, vehicles awaiting repair for more than 24 hours or after the close of business shall be screened from view from public right-of-way and from adjacent residential property. Parking spaces used for the overnight storage of vehicles awaiting repair must be screened in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
e.  Parking lots shall meet the screening requirements of this section. 
f.  The foregoing requirements shall be in addition to all other screening requirements set out in this chapter. 
(b)  General fence and wall regulations. In any zoning district where a wall, fence, or screening separation is erected and is not required under the provision of subsection (a), the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  The maximum height of a fence or wall in a required front yard shall not exceed 40 inches and shall be at least 50 percent open in construction. Combinations of berms and fences shall not exceed 40 inches in height. Allowed exceptions to the height limitations in this section are as follows: 
a.  For public and parochial schools, private and primary schools, and day care centers, fences and berms may be a combined maximum height of 60 inches above grade, provided that the fence material is wrought iron or chain link. 
b.  A wall or fence not more than eight feet in height may be erected in the front yard setback of multifamily, independent living facility, assisted living facility, long-term care facility, or continuing care facility. The wall or fence construction must be at least 50 percent open. 
c.  For all uses within the LI and HI districts, a wall or fence not more than eight feet in height may be erected in the front yard setback. 
(2)  Any fence or wall located to the rear of the front yard setback shall not exceed eight feet in height above the grade of the adjacent property or eight feet when placed on a retaining wall. Walls that screen loading docks, loading spaces, and ground-mounted mechanical units may exceed eight feet in height if necessary for adequate visual screening. 
(3)  No fence, screening wall, or other visual barrier shall be located or placed so that it obstructs the vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching any street, alley or drive intersection. At all street intersections clear vision shall be maintained across the lot for a distance of at least 15 feet back from the property corner along both streets. 
(4)  A fence or screening device is required for residential property abutting a minor thoroughfare or local street. 
(5)  A fence or screening device is required for residential property abutting a major thoroughfare or arterial highway. This screening fence must be fabricated of masonry or tubular steel. 
(6)  Privacy fences on single-family and two-family residential lots. 
a.  This section applies to replacement of residential fences or construction of new fences. A fence permit is required when more than 50 percent of the length of the fence along a property line is being replaced. 
b.  Height shall not exceed eight feet as measured from the highest adjacent grade within ten feet of the fence. 
c.  Approved materials: 
1.  Masonry (brick, stone, reinforced cement concrete) or any other sustainable material with more than a 30-year life expectancy; 
2.  Ornamental metal rail fencing; 
3.  Cedar and redwood; 
4.  Composite fencing; 
5.  Vinyl fencing in flat white or flat natural tone colors such as rust or tan; and, 
6.  Other wooden picket fences, only if constructed with metal posts, metal brackets, and metal caps. Chemically pre-treated wooden horizontal members shall be at least two inches by four inches. 
d.  Prohibited materials: 
1.  Chain link; 
2.  Sheet, roll, or corrugated metal; and, 
3.  Cast off, secondhand, or other items not originally intended to be used for constructing or maintaining a fence. 
e.  An existing chain link fence may be replaced with a new chain link fence or be replaced with an approved material. If the existing fence is not chain link, the fence may be repaired with the existing material or an approved material. 
f.  When any stockade fence or other screening device, whether required or not, is located on a lot adjacent to a public street, said fence or screening device shall orient the side with exposed posts or rails away from view from the adjacent public street. 
g.  Where a corner lot has two front yards as required by this chapter, and a house is constructed facing one of the front yards, the second front yard may be fenced in the same manner as any other side yard adjacent to a street. The fence shall have a corner clip on an angle beginning at the intersection of the front yard setback with the lot line and ending at a point on the street right-of-way located a minimum of 15 feet from the lot line. 
(7)  Fences in front yard setback on single-family and two-family residential lots. 
a.  Up to four-foot open design fence consisting of wrought-iron, tubular steel, picket or similar type material designed for fencing (excluding chain link) that does not obscure visibility and is no greater than 50 percent in density may be erected on property within the minimum required front yard, platted front yard, established front yard projected front yard of one-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
b.  No solid fences and walls are permitted in the required front yard, projected front yard or platted yard of one-family and two-family residential dwellings. 
(8)  Fence arms and barbed wire are only allowed in the LI and HI districts and may not extend over property lines. Barbed wire, if used, must be attached to the fence arms. 
(9)  Wire fences are prohibited in the front yard setback in all districts, except when the fence is used to enclose pastures, cropland, and other areas used for agricultural activities. 
(10)  All fences, walls, screening walls, and other visual barriers require permits. 
(c)  Mechanical screening requirements. 
(1)  Mechanical and heating and air conditioning equipment in nonresidential and multifamily uses shall be screened from view from the public right-of-way and from adjacent residential property. 
(2)  In all nonresidential developments, roof-mounted mechanical units shall be screened from view at a point of five and one-half feet above the property line with a parapet wall, mansard roof, or alternative architectural element. The height of the screening element shall be equal to or greater than the height of the mechanical unit provided that the element shall not extend more than five feet above the roof on a one or two-story building or more than 13 feet above the roof on a building of three or more stories. A mechanical unit which is taller than the maximum permitted height of the screening feature shall be set back from the screen five feet plus two feet for each foot it exceeds the height of the screen. Screening for mechanical units shall apply to new building construction only. 
(d)  Requirements for refuse and recycling containers and compactors. 
(1)  Garbage, trash, sanitation, refuse, or recycling containers including, but not limited to, dumpsters and trash compactors (collectively "dumpsters") shall be screened on all sides. Screening materials shall be masonry and the same color as the exterior walls of the main structure. A solid metal gate shall be provided. Dumpsters shall not be located in front of the main building unless no other option is available. Gates shall be kept closed except when in use for access. 
(2)  Dumpster container enclosures shall be subject to the following design specifications. 
a.  Single container enclosures shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide by 12 feet deep, as measured from the inside of the enclosure's walls. 
b.  Double container enclosures shall be a minimum of 25.5 feet wide by 12 feet deep, as measured from the inside of the enclosure's walls. 
c.  Trash compactor enclosures and all other enclosure types shall be constructed to the minimum specifications provided by the city's official garbage and refuse contractor. 
d.  All enclosure types shall be required to provide a minimum of 40 feet of straight backing, as measured from the front gates of the enclosure, to accommodate a sanitation truck's maneuverability. If special circumstances prevent straight backing from being provided, the city manager shall have the authority in consultation with the city's official garbage and refuse contractor to approve angled or alternative backing movements. 
e.  All enclosure types shall be required to provide a 24-foot vertical clear zone, unless otherwise approved by the city manager. 
(3)  Refuse, recycling, and compactor enclosures or area allocated for future refuse and recycling enclosures shall be identified on preliminary site plans and site plans. Refuse containers, recycling containers, and/or compactors shall not be added to existing sites and/or to site plans approved for future development without submittal and approval of a revised site plan. 
(4)  Compactors, where provided, shall be enclosed on three sides with masonry wall construction finished to match the main building. Compactors shall not be screened by concealed placement. The minimum height of the enclosure shall be eight feet. Metal swinging gates of a height equal to the enclosure height shall be provided for the truck collection side of the compactor enclosure. The interior dimensions of the compactor enclosure shall provide for three feet of clearance between the compactor and enclosure walls or gates. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-70. - Off-street parking, stacking and loading. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided for in this article, off-street parking shall be provided as follows: 
a.  In all districts except CA, in connection with every business, institution, recreational, residential, manufacturing, research laboratory, public building, or any other use, there shall be provided, at the time any building or structure is erected or is enlarged or increased in capacity, off-street parking spaces, in accordance with the requirements set forth in subsection (c). 
b.  In all districts except CA, there shall be provided, at the time any use is changed, off-street parking spaces in accordance with the requirements set forth in subsection (c). 
(2)  Off-Street loading shall be provided in accordance with subsection (f). 
(3)  Following are parking requirements for new or unlisted uses: 
a.  Where questions arise concerning the minimum off-street parking requirements for any use not specifically listed, the requirements may be interpreted as those of a similar listed use. 
b.  Where a determination of the minimum parking requirements cannot be readily ascertained for new or unlisted uses according to subsection (h), or where uncertainty exists, the minimum off-street parking requirements shall be established by the same process as provided in section 77-47 for classifying new and unlisted uses. 
(b)  Offsite parking. Offsite, off-street parking space may be permitted with site plan approval in any district subject to all of the following requirements: 
(1)  That a permanent and irrevocable easement of the parking facilities in favor of the premises to be benefited thereby shall be dedicated and recorded as a condition of such use. 
(2)  That the nearest point of the premises utilized for such parking spaces shall be not more than 300 feet in a straight line from the nearest point of the premises to be benefited thereby. 
(3)  No such parking space may be located on the same lot as a residential dwelling. 
(c)  Off-street parking schedule. 
(1)  The minimum required number of off-street parking spaces shall be in accordance with the parking schedules and ratios that follow this section. Where calculation in accordance with following results in requiring a fractional space, any fraction less than one-half shall be disregarded, and any fraction of one-half or more shall require one space. 
(2)  Parking space schedule for residential uses. 
Zoning Districts or Uses 	Minimum Required Off-Street Parking or Spaces for Residential Uses 
Agricultural 	2 spaces for each dwelling unit 
Estate Development 	2 spaces for each dwelling unit 
Single-Family or Two-Family Dwellings 	2 spaces for each dwelling unit 
Single-Family Attached 	2.25 spaces for each dwelling unit 
Multifamily Dwelling 	1 per studio; 
1.5 per 1 bedroom; 
2.0 per 2 bedroom; 
2.5 per 3 bedroom; 
2.5 + .5 for each bedroom more than 3 
HUD-Code manufactured home/Mobile home 	2 spaces for each dwelling unit 
 
(3)  Parking space schedule for nonresidential uses. 
Zoning Districts or Uses 	Minimum Required Off-Street Parking or Spaces for Residential Uses 
Bank, savings and loan or similar financial establishment 	One space for each 300 square feet of floor area 
Banquet/meeting hall 	Ten spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area not including the kitchen or restrooms. Said gross floor area should be equal to the event floor area. 
Bed and breakfast inn 	One space for owner/operator and one for each guest bedroom 
Bowling alley 	Six spaces for each lane 
Clinic or doctors' offices 	One space for each 200 square feet of floor area (minimum of five spaces) 
Churches 	One space for each three seats in the main sanctuary 
College or university 	One space for each 2 students, plus one space for each classroom, laboratory, or instruction area 
Commercial indoor amusement (other than listed) 	One space for each 3 persons accommodated (design capacity) 
Commercial outdoor amusement 	30 spaces plus one space for each 100 square feet of floor area over 2,000 square feet 
Convalescent home or assisted living facility 	One space for every 2 rooms or beds, whichever is greater 
Day Care, Day Nursery, or Kindergarten School 	One space per 5 pupils (design capacity); 
Parking for this use will not be required when such facilities are located within a single-user structure as an accessory use as a service to its employees 
Fueling Station, automobile 	Minimum of six spaces 
Garden center/nursery 	One space for each 300 square feet of floor area plus one space for each 5,000 square feet of exterior sales area 
Golf course 	5 spaces for each green 
Hardware store 	One space per 200 square feet of floor area 
Hospitals 	One space for every two beds 
Hotel or motel 	One space for each room, unit, or guest accommodation of a hotel/motel with no restaurant, private club, meeting facilities, and/or recreational facility other than a swimming pool; 
1.25 spaces for each room, unit, or guest accommodation of a hotel/motel with restaurant, private club, meeting facilities, and/or recreational facility other than a swimming pool 
Independent living facility 	One space per dwelling unit 
Institutions of a philanthropic nature 	Ten spaces, plus one space for each employee 
Library or museum 	Ten spaces, plus one space for each 300 square feet of floor area 
Long-term care facility 	One space for each 2 rooms or beds, whichever is greater 
Manufacturing, processing or repairing 	One space for each two employees or one space for each 1,000 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater 
Mini-warehouse 	One space for each 20 storage cubicles plus required parking for the office and caretaker's quarters. Parking spaces to be rented shall not be included in this requirement. 
Mortuary 	One space for each 2 persons normally accommodated in services or one space per 200 square feet, whichever is greater 
Offices, general 	One space for each 300 square feet of floor area (minimum five spaces) 
Offices, medical 	One space for each 250 square feet of floor area 
Recreational area or building, private or commercial (other than listed) 	One space for every two persons to be normally accommodated in the establishment 
Residential amenity center 	Minimum ten (10) spaces 
Restaurant or cafeterias 	One space for every 100 square feet of floor area, except as noted for Retail or Shopping Center 
Restaurant or food shop, take-out and delivery 	One space for every 300 square feet of floor area 
Retail or shopping center 	• Retail uses or shopping centers 50,000 square feet in area or less — One space per 200 square feet 
• Retail uses or shopping centers greater than 50,000 square feet — One space per 250 square feet 
• Restaurants, cafeterias, and private clubs that are inline lease spaces and do not exceed 10 percent of the shopping center floor area (excluding single occupant, free-standing buildings) may utilize the required minimum parking ratio 
Schools, elementary or junior high 	Two per classroom 
Schools, high school 	Six per classroom and one per 300 square feet of administrative office space 
Service retail 	One space for each 200 square feet of retail sales area plus one space for each 400 square feet of service area 
Storage or warehousing 	One space for each two employees or one space for each 1,000 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater 
Theaters, meeting rooms and places of public assembly 	One space for every three seats 
Vehicle repair garage 	3 spaces per service bay, plus one space per employee (maximum shift), plus one space per tow truck or other service vehicle 
 
(4)  Parking space schedule for other nonresidential uses not listed in subsection (d). 
Zoning Districts or Uses 	Minimum Required Off-Street Parking or Spaces for Residential Uses 
Accessory and Incidental Uses 	One space per employee 
Automobile and Related Uses 	One space per employee plus one space per stored vehicle 
Commercial and Professional Uses 	One space per 400 square feet of gross floor area 
Educational, Institutional, and Public Uses 	One space per employee 
Entertainment and Recreational Uses 	Same as Commercial Indoor and Commercial Outdoor Amusement, above 
Industrial and Wholesale Uses 	Same as Manufacturing, processing or repairing/ Storage or warehousing, above 
Retail and Service Uses 	Same as Retail or Shopping Center, above 
Transportation, Utility, and Communications Uses 	One space per employee plus one space per stored vehicle 
 
(5)  In addition to the required off-street parking identified in this section, accessible parking shall be provided for multi-family and all non-residential uses in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Texas Accessibility Standards. 
(d)  Special off-street parking regulations. The following special off-street parking regulations shall apply: 
(1)  In computing the parking requirements for any building or development, the total parking requirements shall be the sum of the specific parking space requirements for each class of use included in the building for development. 
(2)  In the ED, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, 2F, MF-1, MF-2, and NS Districts, no parking space, garage, or carport or other automobile storage space or structure shall be used for the storage of any truck, truck trailer, or vans except for panel and pickup trucks not exceeding a one-ton capacity. 
(3)  Floor area of a structure devoted to off-street parking of vehicles shall be excluded in computing the off-street parking requirements of any use. 
(4)  No off-street parking space shall be located so as to permit any part of a parked vehicle to extend across the property line nor shall any portion of a parked vehicle be located so as to be nearer than ten feet to any street curb. Physical barriers shall be installed on all off-street parking areas to ensure that the above dimensions are maintained. 
(5)  In the NS, GR, C, CA, LI, and HI Districts, parking areas and driveways will be six inch minimum reinforced concrete, 3,600 PSI. Loading docks will be six inch concrete with No. 4 rebar, 3,600 PSI. The zoning administrator may approve the use of a porous paving system or other materials. 
(6)  All permanent parking areas and loading berths, whether required or provided in addition to the requirements of this section, shall have an all-weather surface, and shall be connected by an all-weather surfaced driveway to a street or alley. 
(7)  Residential parking standards. 
a.  An enclosed two-car garage is required for all single-family detached, single-family attached, and duplex dwellings. The garage must be a minimum of 390 square feet in area. 
b.  Only one carport may be allowed as long as it falls within the building setback lines for garages and within the impervious surface requirements for the respective zoning district and sit on a concrete pad sized for the area. A building permit is required to install the carport. 
c.  Required parking must be paved concrete. The zoning administrator may approve the use of a porous paving system or other materials. 
(e)  Stacking requirements for drive-through facilities. The following standards shall apply to businesses that contain a drive-through establishment, regardless if the drive-through is part of another use (e.g., restaurant or financial institution) or if it is a stand-alone use (e.g., automatic teller machine). 
(1)  Location of stacking lanes and use of audible electronic devices. 
a.  Stacking lanes shall not be located between the building and the street rights-of-way. 
b.  Audible electronic devices such as loudspeakers, automobile service order devices, and similar instruments shall not be audible beyond the property line of the site. 
c.  No service shall be rendered, deliveries made, or sales conducted within the required front yard or corner side yard; customers served in vehicles shall be parked to the sides and/or rear of the principal building. 
d.  All drive-through areas, including but not limited to menu boards, stacking lanes, trash receptacles, loudspeakers, drive up windows, and other objects associated with the drive-through area shall be located in the side or rear yard of a property to the maximum extent feasible, and shall not cross, interfere with, or impede any public right-of-way. 
(2)  Stacking space and lane requirements. 
a.  A stacking space shall be a minimum of nine feet in width and 20 feet in length and shall not be located within or interfere with any other circulation driveway, parking space, fire lane, or maneuvering area. 
b.  The number of required stacking spaces shall be as provided in accordance with the following schedule: 
Activity 	Minimum Stacking Spaces 
Bank, Financial Institution, or Automated Teller Machine (ATM) 	5 per window, service lane, or ATM lane 
Automobile oil change and similar establishments 	3 per bay 
Car wash, full service 	3 per bay 
Car wash, self-service 	3 per bay (automated); 
2 per bay (open bay) 
Child-care, kindergartens, day schools, and similar child training and care establishments 	1 per 20 students on a through "circular" drive 
Dry cleaning 	3 per lane from the first service window, order board, or other stopping point 
Restaurant with drive-through 	5 per lane from closest of the first service window, order board, or other stopping point 
 
c.  A single stacking space shall be provided after the final window, order board, or stopping point to allow vehicles to pull clear of the transaction area prior to entering an intersecting on-site driveway or maneuvering aisle. 
d.  An escape lane shall be provided for any use containing a drive-through facility. 
1.  An escape lane shall be nine feet in width and shall provide access around the drive-through facility. 
2.  An escape lane may be part of a circulation aisle. 
(f)  Off-street loading. 
(1)  Except in the CA District, all structures for retail, commercial, industrial and service establishments shall provide and maintain off-street facilities for receiving and loading merchandise, supplies and materials within a building or on the lot or tract. Such off-street loading space may be adjacent to a public alley or private service drive or may consist of a truck berth within the structure. Such off-street loading space or truck berth shall consist of a minimum area of ten feet by 45 feet, and such spaces or berths shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule: 
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area In Structure 	Minimum Required Spaces or Berths 
0 to 5,000 	None 
5,000 to 15,000 	1 
15,000 to 40,000 	2 
40,000 to 65,000 	3 
65,000 to 100,000 	4 
Each additional 50,000 	1 additional 
 
(2)  For hotels, office buildings, restaurants and similar establishments, off-street loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule: 
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area In Structure 	Minimum Required Spaces or Berths 
0 to 10,000 	None 
10,000 to 50,000 	1 
50,000 to 100,000 	2 
100,000 to 200,000 	3 
Each additional 200,000 	1 additional 
 
(3)  Trucks may not be parked on public streets, alleys, or adjacent private property for the purpose of receiving or loading merchandise, supplies or materials to or from a business entity. 
(4)  Loading docks must be located on the side or at the rear of a building. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-71. - Landscaping requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish certain regulations pertaining to landscaping within the city. These regulations provide standards and criteria for new landscaping which are intended to promote the value of property, enhance the welfare, and improve the physical appearance of the city. 
(b)  Scope. The standards and criteria contained within this section are deemed to be minimum standards and shall apply to all new construction or any existing development, which is altered by increasing the floor area by 30 percent or more of the originally approved floor area, either by a single expansion or by the cumulative effect of a series of expansions. 
(1)  All existing structures, which are a conversion or change in use requiring the expansion of or significant improvements to meet parking standards shall upgrade landscaping on the site and meet these requirements to the extent practical. The planning and zoning commission shall have the ability to waive landscape requirements on a case-by-case basis if unique circumstances exist on the property that makes application of these regulations unduly burdensome on the applicant. Requested waivers of specific portions of these regulations may be granted only if there will be no adverse impact on current or future development and will have no adverse impact on the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(2)  Uses within the downtown CA—Central Area District shall be exempt from the landscape requirements set forth herein, unless it is determined by the city manager that these standards are achievable and would contribute to the historic appearance and/or qualities that are inherent to the district. 
(c)  Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or his designee. 
(1)  If, at any time after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the approved landscaping is found to be in nonconformance to the standards and criteria as approved on the landscape plan, the city manager shall issue notice to the owner, citing the violation and describing what action is required to comply with this section. 
(2)  The owner, tenant, or agent shall make reasonable progress within the first 30 days from the date of said notice to restore the landscaping as required and shall have a total of 90 days to completely restore the landscaping as required. 
(3)  Two 30-day extensions may be granted by the city manager upon the applicant's request if a hardship due to extreme seasonal conditions can be demonstrated by the owner, tenant, and/or agent. 
(4)  If the landscaping is not restored within the allotted time, such person shall be in violation of this section. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  No permits shall be issued for building, paving, grading or construction until a landscape plan is submitted and approved by the city manager or his designee. In the event that the proposed development requires an approved subdivision plat, site plan, or development plan, no final approval shall be granted unless a landscape plan is submitted and approved. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any building or structure, all screening and landscaping shall be in place in accordance with the landscape plan and a digital copy of the landscaping as installed shall be provided to the planning department for permanent record. 
(3)  In any case in which a certificate of occupancy is sought at a season of the year in which the city manager determines that it would be impractical to plant trees, shrubs, or grass, or to lay turf, a certificate of occupancy may be issued notwithstanding the fact that the landscaping required by the landscape plan has not been completed, provided the applicant deposits cash in an escrow account with the city in the amount equal to 120 percent of the estimated cost of installing such landscaping which escrow will remain in effect until the landscape plan is installed and accepted or approved by the city. Such escrow deposit shall be conditioned upon the installation of all landscaping required by the plan within six months of the date of the application and shall give the applicant the right to draw upon the escrow deposit to complete the said landscaping. 
(4)  Failure to timely install the landscaping required by the landscape plan within six months of the date of the application shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and the certificate of occupancy may be revoked without liability to the city. The city manager shall have the right to determine the landscaping required at the time the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(e)  Landscape plans. Prior to the issuance of a building, paving, grading or construction permit for any use other than uses within the downtown CA—Central Area District, a landscape plan shall be submitted to the city for approval. The city manager or a designee shall review such plans and shall approve same if the plans are in accordance with the criteria of these regulations. If the plans are not in accord, they shall be disapproved and shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the changes necessary for compliance. 
Landscape plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect or landscape contractor who belongs to a bona fide nurseryman's association. Landscape plans shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
(1)  Minimum scale of one-inch equals 50 feet or the same scale as the associated site plan; 
(2)  The location, size, and species of all trees to be preserved and planted — tree stamps shall not be used unless they indicate the true size and location of trees; 
(3)  The location of all plant and landscaping material to be used including plants, paving, benches, screens, fountains, statues, earthen berms, ponds (to include depth of water), or other landscape features; 
(4)  The species, size, spacing and quantities of all plant material to be used in a tabular form; 
(5)  An affidavit on the plan stating that all required landscape areas shall be provided with an automatic underground irrigation system with rain and freeze sensors and evapotranspiration (ET) weather based controllers and said irrigation system shall be designed by a qualified professional and installed by an irrigator licensed by the state; 
(6)  Layout and description of irrigation, sprinkler or water systems including placement of water sources; 
(7)  Description of maintenance provisions for the landscape plan; 
(8)  The person responsible for the preparation of the landscape plan, including affidavit of their qualifications to prepare said plan; 
(9)  The mark indicating north; 
(10)  The date of the landscape plan, including any revision dates; 
(11)  The planting details percentage of total site in permanent landscaping; 
(12)  The percentage of street yard in permanent landscaping; 
(13)  The dimensions of all landscape areas; 
(14)  The number of required trees and number of trees provided; 
(15)  The location of all existing and planned overhead and underground utilities shall be shown on the landscape plan or on an accompanying utility plan drawn at the same scale, if necessary for clarity; and 
(16)  Additional information as deemed necessary to adequately evaluate the landscape plan. 
(f)  Maintenance. The owner, tenant and his or their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping. All required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner at all times. This shall include mowing of grass six inches or higher, edging, pruning, fertilizing, watering, weeding, and other such activities common to the maintenance of landscaping. Landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds and other such material or plants not a part of the landscaping. All plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition as is appropriate for the season of the year. Plant materials which die shall be replaced with plant material of similar variety and size within the time period provided by subsection (c). 
(g)  General standards. 
(1)  The following criteria and standards shall apply to landscape materials and installation. For the purposes of this section, the term caliper shall be defined as the diameter measurement of a tree trunk. 
a.  Quality. Plant materials used in conformance with the provisions of his section shall conform to the standards of the American Standards for Nursery Stock, or their equal. Grass seed, sod and other material shall be clean and free of weeds and noxious pests and insects. 
b.  Ornamental trees. Trees referred to in this section shall be chosen from the approved plant palette located in Table 1. Trees shall have an average spread or crown of greater than 15 feet at maturity. Trees having lesser average mature crown of 15 feet may be substituted by grouping the same so as to create the equivalent of 15 feet of crown width. At time of planting, ornamental trees shall be approximately two inches in caliper, measured six inches above the ground, and a minimum of six feet in height. 
c.  Canopy trees. Canopy trees shall have a minimum spread of crown of 25 feet at maturity. Canopy trees shall be a minimum of two inches in caliper as measured six inches above the ground and eight feet in height at the time of planting. 
d.  Shrubs. Shrubs not of the dwarf variety shall be a minimum of one-foot in height when measured immediately after planting and shall be chosen from the approved plant palette located in Table 1. Shrubs acceptable for six-foot screening, where installed, shall be a minimum of three feet in height when measured immediately after planting and shall be planted no further apart than three feet on center unless otherwise approved by the City Manager, and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid visual screen which will be six feet high within two years after time of planting. 
e.  Hedges. Hedges where installed for buffering or screening purposes shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid visual screen which will be three feet high within one years after time of planting. 
f.  Evergreen vines. Evergreen vines not intended as ground cover shall be a minimum of two feet in height immediately after planting and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens, or walls to meet screening requirements as specified herein and as approved by the city manager. Vine material shall be chosen from the approved plant palette located in Table 1. 
g.  Ground cover. Ground cover used in lieu of grass, in whole or in part, shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage within one year of planting. Groundcover material shall be chosen from the approved plant palette located in Table 1. 
h.  Lawn grass. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged, hydro-mulched, or seeded except that solid sod shall be used in swales, berms, or other areas subject to erosion. Grass areas shall be established with 100 percent coverage and 70 percent density with an approved perennial grass prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
i.  Credit for existing trees. Any trees preserved on a site meeting the specifications herein shall be credited toward meeting the tree requirement of any landscaping provision of this section. Trees of exceptional quality due to size, large canopy cover, trunk diameter, rareness, age or species may, at the discretion of the city manager, be credited as two trees to meet the minimum requirement. 
(2)  All required landscape areas shall be provided with an automatic underground irrigation system, except for required landscaping in single-family or two-family developments. Any new irrigation system installed on or after September 1, 2007, must be equipped with rain and freeze sensors and an evapotranspiration (ET) weather based controller. Said irrigation system shall be designed by a qualified professional and installed by a licensed irrigator after receiving a permit, as may be required under the construction code. Irrigation systems shall comply with the city's water conservation ordinance as it exists or may be amended. 
(3)  Earthen berms shall have side slopes not to exceed three feet of horizontal distance for each one foot of height. All berms shall contain necessary drainage provisions, as may be required by the city manager. 
(4)  No tree shall be planted closer than four feet to a right-of-way line nor closer than eight feet to a public utility line (water or sewer), unless no other alternative is available. Further, a landscape area in which trees are to be provided shall not conflict with a utility easement, unless no alternative is available. 
(5)  No tree that has a mature height of 25 feet or greater shall be planted beneath an existing or proposed overhead utility line. Where canopy trees are required adjacent to or underneath overhead utility lines, ornamental trees (approximately two inches in caliper as measured six inches above the ground) shall be provided instead of the required canopy trees. 
(6)  All landscape areas shall be protected by a monolithic curb or wheel stops and remain free of trash, litter, and car bumper overhangs. 
(h)  Minimum landscaping requirements. 
(1)  For all non-residential and multiple family parcels, at least 15 percent of the street yard shall be permanent landscape area. The term street yard shall be defined as the area between the front property line and the minimum front set back line. 
(2)  For all non-residential and multiple family parcels located at the intersection of two dedicated public streets (rights-of-way), a 30-foot corner clip shall be provided adjacent and parallel to the right-of-way dedication as a landscape buffer, which can be counted toward the 15 percent requirement. 
(3)  For all non-residential and multiple family parcels, a minimum of ten percent of the entire site shall be devoted to living landscape, which shall include grass, ground cover, plants, shrubs, or trees. 
(4)  For all non-residential and multiple family parcels, developers shall be required to plant one canopy tree per 40 linear feet, or portion thereof, of street frontage. These required trees must be planted within the associated landscape setback along thoroughfares, unless otherwise approved by the city manager or his designee. Trees may be grouped or clustered to facilitate site design. 
(5)  Landscape areas within parking lots must be at least one parking space in size (162 square feet). 
(6)  No landscape area counting toward minimum landscaping requirements shall be less than 25 square feet in area or less than five feet in width. 
(7)  For all non-residential and multiple family parcels, internal landscape areas shall: 
a.  Have a landscaped area with at least one tree within 65 feet of every parking space; and 
b.  Have a minimum of one tree planted in the parking area for every 10 parking spaces within parking lots with more than 20 spaces. 
(8)  Within parking lots, landscape areas with curbs and gutters must be provided to define parking areas and assist in clarifying appropriate circulation patterns. 
(9)  A landscape island shall be located at the terminus of each parking row, and should contain at least one canopy tree. 
(10)  All existing trees that are to be considered for credit shall be provided with a permeable surface (a surface that does not impede the absorption of water) within a minimum five-foot radius from the trunk of the tree. All new trees shall be provided with a permeable surface within a minimum two and one-half-foot radius from the trunk of the tree. 
(11)  At least 75 percent of the frontage of parking lots, adjacent to a public right-of-way, within the street yard shall be screened from public streets with evergreen shrubs attaining a minimum height of three feet, an earthen berm of a minimum height of three feet, a low masonry wall of a minimum height of three feet, or a combination of the above with a minimum combined height of three feet. A wall used for parking lot screening should be accompanied with landscape planting in the form of low shrubs and groundcover to soften the appearance of the wall. 
(12)  A minimum of 50 percent of the total trees required for the property shall be canopy trees as specified on the approved plant list. 
(13)  Necessary driveways from the public right-of-way shall be allowed through all required landscaping areas in accordance with city regulations. Shared driveways shall be allowed through perimeter landscape areas. 
(14)  For all non-residential and multiple family parcels, whenever an off-street parking area or vehicular use area abuts an adjacent property line, a perimeter landscape area at least five feet wide shall be maintained along and between the edge of the parking area and the adjacent property line. 
(15)  Whenever a non-residential use or multiple family use is adjacent to a property used or zoned for single-family or duplex residential uses, the more intensive land use shall provide a landscaped area of at least ten feet in width along the common property line planted with one canopy tree for each 40 linear feet or portion thereof of adjacent exposure. These trees may not be clustered. 
(16)  For all single-family and duplex parcels, builders shall be required to plant two canopy trees per lot, prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy. At least one of the trees shall be located in the front yard. An existing quality tree of approximately four-inch caliper size located on the lot may be counted towards the requirement for an approximately two-inch caliper tree, if appropriate tree protection measures have been followed. 
(i)  Approved plant list for new plantings or replacements. The following is a required list of trees for new plantings or replacements of existing trees. Other species may be acceptable for new plantings; however, their suitability for the proposed planting area shall be approved by the zoning administrator. 
Overstory Trees: Range: 30'—60' 
Bald Cyprus 	Taxodium distichum 
Cedar Elm 	Ulmus cressifolja 
Pecan 	Carya illinoinensis 
Chinese Pistache 	Pistacia chinesis 
Bur Oak 	Quercus macrocarpa 
Shumard's Oak 	Quercus Shumardii 
Sweet Gum 	Liquidambar styraciflua 
Catalpa 	Catalpa bignoniodes 
Honey Locust Green 	Gleditsia triacanthos 
Ash 	Fraximus pennsylvanica 
Live Oak 	Quercus virginiana 
Western Soapberry 	Sapindus drummondii 
Accent Trees: 10'—20' 
Redbud 	Cercis canadensis 
Crape Myrtle 	Lagerstroemia indica 
Yaupon Holly 	Ilex vomitoria 
Texas Sophora 	Sophora affmis 
Wild Plum 	Prunus americana 
Crabapple 	Malus angustifolia 
Deciduous Holly 	Ilex decidua 
Flameleaf Sumac 	Rhus Copallina 
Cherry-Laurel 	Prunus caroliniana 
Chaste Tree 	Vitex Agnus-castus 
Shrubs: Range: 3'—5' 
Dwarf Crape Myrtle 	Lagerstroemia indica nana 
Dwarf Burford Holly 	Ilex comuta 'Barfordii Nana' 
Dwarf Chinese Holly 	Ilex comuta 'Rotunda' 
Dwarf Yaupon Holly 	Ilex vomitoria 'Nana' 
Fraser's Photinia 	Photinia Fraseri 
Purple Sage 	Leucophyllum frutescens 
Purple Leaf Japanese Barberry 	Berberis Thunbergii 'Atropurpurea' 
Pampas Grass 	Cortaderia Selloana 
Nandina 	Nandina domestica 
Juniper Supp. 	Juniperus chinensis 
Cattail 	Typha latifolia 
Ground Cover: Range: 18" 
Juniper Supp. 	Juniperus horizontalis or procumbens 
Periwinkle 	Vinca major 
Liriope 	Liriope Muscari 
Asian Jasmine 	Trachclospermun asiaticum 
Vines 
Coral Honeysuckle 	Lonicera sempervirens 
Carolina Yellow Jessamine 	Gelsemium semperviems 
Lady Banksia Rose 	Rosa Banksiae 
Cross Vine 	Bignonia Capreolata Clematis 
Sweet Autumn Clematis 	Paniculata 
 
(j)  Tree preservation. 
(1)  Any trees preserved on a site meeting the herein specifications may be credited toward meeting the tree requirement of any landscaping provision of this section for that area within which they are located, according to the following table: 
Caliper of existing tree 	Credit against tree requirement 
6" to 8" 	2 trees 
9" to 15" 	3 trees 
16" to 30" 	4 trees 
31" to 46" 	5 trees 
47" or more 	8 trees 
 
For purposes of this section, caliper measurement shall be taken at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground, and shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. 
(2)  Existing trees may receive credit if they are not on the city's approved plant material list but approved by the City Manager or designee; however, trees must be located within the landscape area to which credit is applied. 
(3)  Any tree preservation proposed shall designate the species, size, and general location of all trees on the general landscape plan. The species, size, and exact location shall be shown on the landscape plan. 
(4)  During any construction or land development, the developer shall clearly mark all trees to be maintained and may be required to erect and maintain protective barriers around all such trees or groups of trees. The developer shall not allow the movement of heavy equipment or the storage of equipment, materials, debris, or fill to be placed within the drip line of any trees. This is not intended to prohibit the normal construction required within parking lots. 
(5)  During the construction stage of development, the developer shall not allow cleaning of equipment or material under the canopy of any tree or group of trees to remain. Neither shall the developer allow the disposal of any waste material such as, but not limited to, paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar, etc., under the canopy of any tree or groups of trees to remain. No attachment or wires of any kind, other than those of a protective nature, shall be attached to any tree. 
(k)  Sight distance and visibility. 
(1)  Rigid compliance with these landscaping requirements shall not be such as to cause visibility obstructions and/or blind corners at intersections. Whenever an intersection of two or more streets or driveways occur, a triangular visibility area, as described below, shall be created. Landscaping within the triangular visibility area shall be designed to provide unobstructed cross visibility at a level between two feet and seven feet. Trees may be permitted in this area provided they are trimmed in such a manner that no limbs or foliage extend into the cross visibility area. 
(2)  In the event other visibility obstructions are apparent in the proposed landscape plan, as determined by the city manager, the requirements set forth herein may be modified to eliminate the conflict. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-72. - Performance standards. 
(a)  General. In all zoning districts, any use indicated as a permitted use shall conform in operation, location, and construction to the performance standards hereinafter specified. In the LI and HI districts, in addition to the permitted uses, there shall be permitted any other manufacturing, processing, fabricating, packing, or storage use, except those requiring specific use permits, which conform in operation, location, and construction to the performance standards hereinafter specified for noise, smoke and particulate matter, odorous matter, fire or explosive hazard material, toxic and noxious matter, vibration, and glare. 
(b)  Noise. At no point at the bounding property line of any use shall the sound pressure level of any operation or plant exceed the A scale limits of 65 decibels for daytime and 58 decibels at nighttime. Measurement of noise shall be made with a sound level meter meeting the standards prescribed by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). For this section, daytime is defined as the time period from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., and nighttime is defined as the time period from 10:01 p.m. to 6:59 a.m. The boundary property line is the common line between two parcels of property. 
(c)  Smoke and particulate matter. No operation or use shall cause, create, or allow the emission for more than three minutes in any one hour of air contaminants which at the emission point or within the bounds of the property are: 
(1)  As dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines Information Circular 7118. 
(2)  Of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke or contaminants in the standard prescribed in subsection (c)(1), except that when the presence of uncombined water is the only reason for failure to comply or when such contaminants are emitted inside a building that prevents their escape into the atmosphere, this standard and the standard in subsection (c)(1) shall not apply. 
(3)  The emission of particulate matter from all sources shall not exceed one-half pounds per acre of property within the plant site per any one hour. 
(4)  The open storage and open processing operations, including onsite transportation movements which are the source of wind or airborne dust or other particulate matter; or which involves dust or other particulate air contaminants, generating equipment such as used in paint spraying, grain handling, sand or gravel processing or storage, or sand blasting shall be so conducted that dust and other particulate matter so generated are not trans-ported across the boundary line of the tract on which the use is located in concentrations exceeding four grains per 1,000 cubic feet of air. 
(d)  Odorous matter. 
(1)  No use shall be located or operated that involves the emission of odorous matter that exceeds the odor threshold at the bounding property line or any point beyond the tract on which the emitting use is located. 
(2)  The odor threshold as herein set forth shall be determined by observation by a person or persons. In any case, where uncertainty may arise, or where the operator or owner of an odor emitting use may disagree with the enforcing officer, or where specific measurement of odor concentration is required, the method and procedures specified by American Society for Testing Materials (A.S.T.M.D.) 1391-57 entitled "Standard Method for Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres" shall be used and a copy of A.S.T.M.D. 1391-57 is hereby incorporated by reference. 
(e)  Fire or explosive hazard material. 
(1)  No use involving the manufacture or storage of compounds or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted except that chlorates, nitrates, per chlorates, phosphorus, and similar substances and compounds in small quantities for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists, or wholesalers may be permitted when approved by the fire department. 
(2)  The storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials such as pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film, solvents, and petroleum products shall be permitted only when such storage or use conforms to the standards and regulations of the fire department. 
(f)  Toxic or noxious matter. No operation or use shall emit a concentration across the bounding property line of the tract on which such operation or use is located of toxic or noxious matter which will exceed ten percent of the concentration (exposure) considered as the threshold limit for an industrial worker as such standards are set forth by the Texas State Department of Health in "Threshold Limit Values Occupational Health Regulation No. 3," a copy of which is hereby incorporated by reference. 
(g)  Vibration. No operation or use shall at any time create earth borne vibrations which when measured at the bounding property line of the source operation exceed the limits of displacement set forth in the following table in the frequency ranges specified: 
Frequency Cycles per Second 	Displacement in Inches 
0 to 10 	0.0010 
10 to 20 	0.0008 
20 to 30 	0.0005 
30 to 40 	0.0004 
40 and over 	0.0003 
 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-73. - Exterior lighting. 
(a)  The Texas Legislature adopted House Bill 2439, which became effective on September 1, 2019, establishing V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 3000.001—3000.005. That legislation prohibits a governmental entity from adopting or enforcing a rule, charter provision, ordinance, order, building code or other regulation - with certain specified exceptions - that: 
(1)  Prohibits or limits, directly or indirectly, the use or installation of a building product or material in the construction, renovation, maintenance, or other alteration of a residential or commercial building if the building product or material is approved for use by a national model code published within the last three code cycles that applies to the construction, renovation, maintenance, or other alteration of the building; or 
(2)  Establishes a standard for a building product, material, or aesthetic method in construction, renovation, maintenance, or other alteration of a residential or commercial building if the standard is more stringent than a standard for the product, material, or aesthetic method under a national model code published within the last three code cycles that applies to the construction, renovation, maintenance, or other alteration of the building. 
V.T.C.A., Government Code § 3000.002(a). Certain of the provisions set out in this section 77-73 do not conflict with V.T.C.A., Government Code § 3000.001 et seq. However, to the extent that the foregoing legislation preempts the city's ability to enforce the following exterior lighting standards, the city will not enforce these exterior lighting standards. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city reserves the right to enforce any and all of the following exterior lighting standards to the extent that the city's authority is not preempted. 
The following exterior lighting standards requirements shall apply to any and all buildings in a "historically significant area" and any and all buildings that are a "significantly important building" which are situated within the corporate limits of the city, and as otherwise specifically noted. 
(b)  Purpose. Standards for controlling lighting and glare are set forth to reduce the annoyance and inconvenience to property owners and traffic hazards to motorists. These standards are intended to allow reasonable enjoyment of adjacent and nearby properties by their owners and occupants while requiring adequate levels of lighting of parking areas. 
(c)  Glare. Any use shall be operated so as not to produce obnoxious and intense glare or direct illumination across the bounding property line from a visible source of illumination of such intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from the use or enjoyment of adjacent property. All outside lights shall be made up of a light source and reflector so selected so that acting together, the light beam is controlled and not directed across any bounding property line above height of three feet. The allowable maximum intensity measured at the property line of a residential use in a residential district shall be one-quarter foot-candles. 
(d)  Nonresidential lighting. 
(1)  Off-street parking. All off-street parking areas, for nonresidential uses in nonresidential districts, which are used after dark shall be illuminated beginning one-half hour after sunset and continuing throughout the hours of business operation. In case only a portion of a parking area is offered for use after dark, only that part is required to be illuminated in accordance with these standards. However, the portion offered for use shall be clearly designated. Lighting within the parking areas shall meet the following minimum requirements. No intermittent flashing lights are permitted. 
(2)  Intensity. On the parking area surface, an average of at least two foot-candles, initial measurement, and a minimum average of one foot-candle on a maintained basis. 
(3)  Height. Luminaries located in an off-street parking area on privately owned property shall be mounted at a height not to exceed 30 feet as measured vertically from the horizontal surface of the nearest parking pavement. Special lighting or lighting higher than the maximum building height allowed in the applicable zoning district may be approved by city council as specifically noted on the site plan. 
(e)  Residential lighting. Residential lighting for security and night recreation use is permitted in all residential districts provided the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Direct lighting over ten feet in height is shielded from adjacent property. 
(2)  No light source shall exceed 20 feet in height. Street lights and other traffic safety lighting are exempt from this standard. 
(3)  Lighting shall not directly shine on adjacent dwellings. 
(f)  Luminaries. Light source shall be a down-light type, indirect, diffused, or shielded type luminaries installed so as to reduce glare effect and consequent interference with use of adjacent properties and boundary streets. Bare bulbs of 15 watts or more or strings of lamps are prohibited, except for temporary lighting not exceeding 45 days per year. Strings of low wattage lamps are permitted for use as café patio lights. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2020-0114-001, § 6, 1-14-2020)  
Sec. 77-74. - Sign regulations. 
City sign regulations are addressed in chapter 56, Signs and advertising. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-75. - Court standards. 
The minimum dimensions and area for outer or inner courts provided in buildings occupied for residential purposes shall be in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Outer courts residential structures. 
a.  For residential structures, three stories or less in height, any outer court which is used for access of light or air or which may be used for emergency access purposes shall be a minimum width equal to the depth of the court, but the width of any such outer court need not exceed 30 feet even though the depth of the court may exceed such dimension. 
b.  For residential structures exceeding three stories in height, any outer court which is used for access of light or air or which may be used for emergency access purposes shall have a minimum width equal to the depth of the court, but the width of any such outer court need not exceed 50 feet even though the depth of the court may exceed such dimension. 
(2)  Inner courts residential structures. 
a.  For residential structures three stories or less in height, any inner court which is used for access of light or air or which may be used for emergency access purposes shall have minimum dimensions in the length and in the width of its base equal to the height of the roof or eave at the top of the wall enclosing such court, but neither the width or the length of the base of such inner court need exceed 30 feet even though the height of the enclosing walls may exceed such dimension. 
b.  For residential structures exceeding three stories in height, any inner court which is used for access of light or air or which may be used for emergency access purposes shall have a minimum dimension in the length and in the width of its base equal to the height of the roof or eave at the top of the wall enclosing such court, but neither the width or the length of the base of such inner court need exceed 50 feet even though the height of the enclosing walls may exceed such dimension. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Secs. 77-76—77-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 
 
Sec. 77-81. - Site plan review approval for highway commercial overlay district. 
Site plan approval shall be required for all property zoned highway commercial district in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The purpose of the site plan review is to ensure, prior to issuance of building permits that all city requirements have been or will be met, including compliance with zoning, subdivision, landscape, parking, loading and building regulations. 
(2)  No building permit shall be issued on any tract of land for construction of new structures or any addition to a structure which affects its size, shape, or volume unless a site plan is first submitted for review by the planning and zoning commission and approved by the city council. A public hearing shall not be required. 
(3)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all construction and development conforms to the site plan as approved by the city council. 
(4)  Any major revision to an approved site plan must be approved by the planning and zoning commission then approved by council; however, minor revisions may be permitted upon approval by the city manager or his designee. 
(5)  The site plan shall indicate building elevations, location of separate buildings, and the minimum distance between buildings. Site plans shall also include property lines, access routes adjacent zoning and structures, streets and alleys, together with a parking plan and landscape plan showing the arrangements and provisions for off-street parking, and the layout of plating materials. An architectural rendering of proposed buildings shall be submitted with the site plan for consideration of approval. 
(6)  All site plans shall be filed with and reviewed by the city manager or his designee for compliance with this section before presentation to the planning and zoning commission and city council. 
(7)  An approved site plan shall be the final plan for development, and construction shall conform to the approved plan. A final site plan may be submitted for the total area zoned or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-82. - Site plan approval required for commercial development. 
(a)  Site plan approval shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of any new structure or any addition to a structure that is intended to be used for any commercial or nonresidential use and which construction affects the structure's size, shape, or volume. 
(b)  All building permits must conform to an approved site plan. 
(c)  Approval of a site plan by the city council, after a recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, shall be required when the site plan is in conjunction with a request for a specific use permit or for a planned development. 
(d)  A public hearing shall not be required on a site plan application unless the site plan is submitted in conjunction with the submission and request for approval of a specific use permit or a planned development. 
(e)  Submission of site plan drawn to scale. Prior to the issuance of any building permit, a site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted to the city manager for initiation of the review and approval process through city council and/or the planning and zoning commission, as appropriate, along with the number of copies of the plan deemed necessary by the city to complete the required reviews or memorandums. The scale and number of copies shall be that deemed necessary by the city manager. (Note: All references contained in this subsection to the city manager mean and include the city manager's designee.) 
(f)  Features to be shown on site plans. Site or development plans shall include the following information 
(1)  General. The following general information shall be included: 
a.  The applicant's name, address, and telephone number and his legal interest in the property; 
b.  The owner's name and address and, if different than the applicant, the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application; 
c.  Street address (or common description) of the property; 
d.  The zoning classification and present use of the subject property; 
e.  The proposed use or uses and a general description for the proposed development; 
f.  A survey, certified by a registered professional land surveyor, showing existing and proposed property boundary lines with dimensions, easements, roadways, rail lines and public rights-of-way crossing and adjacent to the subject property; 
g.  Maps showing the location, size, use and arrangements of all proposed buildings and computations showing height in stories and feet, total floor area, total square feet of ground area coverage of proposed and existing buildings which will remain, if any; 
h.  Location, dimensions and number of all vehicular and pedestrian circulation elements, including streets and roadways, driveways, entrances, curbs, curb cuts, parking stalls, loading spaces and access aisles; sidewalks, walkways and pathways; refuse areas; 
i.  The location and size of existing and proposed electric, water and sewer utilities on and adjacent to the site and fire hydrant locations; 
j.  All existing and proposed surface and subsurface drainage facilities, including culverts, drains and detention ponds, showing the size and direction of flow; 
k.  Location, size and arrangement of all outdoor signs; 
l.  The location and direction/intensity, if required, of all outdoor lighting; 
m.  Architectural renderings or elevations of proposed structures; 
n.  Location, designation and total area of all open usable space; 
o.  A detailed landscaping plan meeting the provisions of this chapter; 
p.  The adjacent land uses and improvements within 200 feet of the subject property; 
q.  The location of hazardous chemical storage; 
r.  A scale shall be shown with the dimensions as determined by the city manager; 
s.  The location of any on-site items (kiosks, sanitation containers, drop boxes, etc.; 
t.  The location and type of all existing and proposed screening; 
u.  The required landscape areas; and 
v.  Any additional information as deemed necessary to adequately evaluate the site or development plan. 
(2)  Screening of mechanical equipment. Mechanical and heating and air conditioning equipment in non-residential uses shall be screened from view from the public right-of-way and from adjacent residential properties. 
(3)  Lighting. The lighting for the subject property will be constructed in conformance with section 77-73. 
(g)  Site circulation and parking. The following site circulation and parking information shall be included on the site plan: 
(1)  The drive approach dimensions and radii; 
(2)  The delineation and width of internal circulation roadways; 
(3)  The distances between driveways and intersecting streets; 
(4)  The number of required parking spaces and number of parking spaces provided, including handicapped parking spaces; 
(5)  The parking dimensions; 
(6)  The stacking spaces and drive-through lane location; 
(7)  The location of curb stops relative to front of parking stall. (Note: Wheel stops are not permitted in lieu of curbs); 
(8)  The handicapped ramps (required at all intersections); 
(9)  The building entrances; 
(10)  The sidewalk dimensions; 
(11)  The fire lanes meeting fire code standards; 
(12)  The location and dimension of delivery truck docks; 
(13)  The location and dimension of loading spaces; 
(14)  The location of bay doors; 
(15)  The sanitation container locations; 
(16)  The medians, islands, barriers, and channelization; 
(17)  The width of adjacent streets, alleys, or other access abutting property; 
(18)  The length, width, and taper of turn bays; 
(19)  The directional signage and directional arrows for one-way traffic driveways; 
(h)  Utility plan. A utility plan shall be included on a separate drawing sheet(s) from the site plan, and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The existing and proposed water mains (include size and valve locations); 
(2)  The water meter size and location; 
(3)  The existing and proposed sewer mains (include size, manholes and cleanout); 
(4)  The sewer service size (provide cleanout at property line); 
(5)  The existing and proposed utility easements including the associated utility line (public or private) and its size; 
(6)  The existing and proposed fire hydrants (including any nearby off-site hydrants); 
(7)  The existing and proposed fire lines, fire sprinkler connections, and appurtenances; 
(8)  The location and size of irrigation meters; 
(9)  The location and size of grease and sand traps; 
(10)  The location and size of sampling pits; and, 
(11)  The location and type of pretreatment. 
(i)  Drainage plan. A drainage plan shall be included on a separate drawing sheet(s) from the site plan, and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The existing and proposed elevation at critical points; 
(2)  The drainage area map (if site is over one-acre); 
(3)  The on-site collection system, including stormwater detention areas and detention ponds; 
(4)  The 100-year flood elevation (if in floodprone area), and erosion hazard setback easement; 
(5)  The existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals; 
(6)  The existing and proposed drainage structures (include size and type); 
(7)  The existing and proposed culverts (use six-to-one sloped headwall); and 
(8)  The direction of surface drainage (must be discharged into existing waterway or public right-of-way). 
(j)  Landscape plan. A detailed landscape plan in conformance with [this chapter] shall be submitted along with the site plan. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect, landscape contractor, or landscape designer. A landscape plan shall include all information as listed in [this chapter]. 
(k)  Attributes in consideration. City council, planning and zoning commission, and staff consideration shall include paving and layout of streets, alleys and sidewalks, means of ingress and egress, provisions for drainage and utilities, parking spaces, protective screening and open spaces, as well as areas designated for landscaping, and any other aspect deemed necessary to consider in the interest of promoting the public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of the city. 
(l)  Additional information. If, during the course of considering the site plan or landscape plan, the planning and zoning commission is of the opinion that a proper recommendation or determination cannot be made without additional information, the planning and zoning commission is authorized to request that the applicant submit said information and is further authorized to withhold action on the site plan until the submission of the additional information for the planning and zoning commission's consideration. 
(m)  Expiration. A site plan shall expire two years after its approval, if no building permits have been issued for the site, or if a building permit has been issued but has subsequently lapsed. Site plans submitted for a planned development or specific use permit shall not expire. 
(n)  Approval required. A building permit shall not be issued prior to the approval of the site plan by the city council, planning and zoning commission and/or city manager, as appropriate. No building permit shall be issued except in compliance with the approved site plan, including all conditions of approval. 
(o)  Inspections, revisions, and continued compliance. During construction and upon completion, the project will be inspected to ensure that the approved site plan has been followed: 
(1)  In the event that changes to the approved site plan are proposed, the zoning administrator shall have the authority to require that a revised site plan be submitted to the city for review and approval; 
(2)  It is recognized that final architectural and engineering design may necessitate some judgment in the determination of conformance to an approved site plan. The city manager shall have the authority to interpret conformance to an approved site plan; provided that such interpretations do not materially affect access, circulation, general building location on the site, or any conditions specifically attached as part of a planning and zoning commission or city council approval. The city manager shall only approve minor changes, which substantially conform to the approved site plan, and to all applicable city regulations, such as: 
a.  Minor dimension and location adjustments; 
b.  Minor changes in the number of parking spaces provided that minimum parking requirements are met; 
c.  Adjustments to sanitation container location; 
d.  Minor revisions to approved elevations; and 
e.  Substitution of similar materials on an approved landscape plan. 
(3)  The city manager may not approve the following types of revisions: 
a.  Major changes to type of screening materials; 
b.  Significant alterations to the building footprint; 
c.  Specific conditions of approval; and 
d.  Any changes that may negatively impact adjacent properties. 
(4)  If, in the judgment of the city manager, the proposed revisions exceed staff's approval authority, the revised site plan shall be forwarded to the planning and zoning commission for consideration according to the procedures for site plan approval. If proposed revisions to the site plan have not been approved by the city manager within 30 days of their final submission, they shall be scheduled for consideration by the planning and zoning commission upon request by the applicant. 
(5)  A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the final inspection shows that the project has been completed in accordance with the approved site plan. 
(6)  The final site plan and landscape plan shall be accompanied by a digital copy for permanent record. 
(7)  Maintenance of the property in conformance with the approved site plan shall thereafter be a condition of a valid certificate of occupancy. Failure to maintain the property in conformance with an approved site plan shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(p)  Phasing plan. To assist in process planning or site plans to be constructed in phases, the zoning administrator may request a phasing plan for the development, to ensure adequate site access, circulation, parking, sanitation containers, utilities, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-83. - Site plan approval required for multi-family development. 
(a)  Site plan approval shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of any new structure or any addition to a structure that is intended to be used for any multi-family use and which construction affects the structure's size, shape, or volume. 
(b)  All building permits must conform to an approved site plan. 
(c)  Approval of a site plan by the city council, after a recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, shall be required when the site plan is in conjunction with a request for a specific use permit or for a planned development. 
(d)  A public hearing shall not be required on a site plan application unless the site plan is submitted in conjunction with the submission and request for approval of a specific use permit or a planned development. 
(e)  Submission of site plan drawn to scale. Prior to the issuance of any building permit, a site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted to the city manager for initiation of the review and approval process through city council and/or the planning and zoning commission, as appropriate, along with the number of copies of the plan deemed necessary by the city to complete the required reviews or memorandums. The scale and number of copies shall be that deemed necessary by the city manager. (Note: All references contained in this subsection (f) to the city manager mean and include the city manager's designee.) 
(f)  Features to be shown on site plans. Site or development plans shall include the following information 
(1)  General. The following general information shall be included: 
a.  The applicant's name, address, and telephone number and his legal interest in the property; 
b.  The owner's name and address and, if different than the applicant, the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application; 
c.  Street address (or common description) of the property; 
d.  The zoning classification and present use of the subject property; 
e.  The proposed use or uses and a general description for the proposed development; 
f.  A survey, certified by a registered professional land surveyor, showing existing and proposed property boundary lines with dimensions, easements, roadways, rail lines and public rights-of-way crossing and adjacent to the subject property; 
g.  Maps showing the location, size, use and arrangements of all proposed buildings and computations showing height in stories and feet, total floor area, total square feet of ground area coverage of proposed and existing buildings which will remain, if any; 
h.  Location, dimensions and number of all vehicular and pedestrian circulation elements, including streets and roadways, driveways, entrances, curbs, curb cuts, parking stalls, loading spaces and access aisles; sidewalks, walkways and pathways; refuse areas; 
i.  The location and size of existing and proposed electric, water and sewer utilities on and adjacent to the site and fire hydrant locations; 
j.  All existing and proposed surface and subsurface drainage facilities, including culverts, drains and detention ponds, showing the size and direction of flow; 
k.  Location, size and arrangement of all outdoor signs; 
l.  The location and direction/intensity, if required, of all outdoor lighting; 
m.  Architectural renderings or elevations of proposed structures; 
n.  Location, designation and total area of all open usable space; 
o.  A detailed landscaping plan meeting the provisions of this chapter; 
p.  The adjacent land uses and improvements within 200 feet of the subject property; 
q.  The location of hazardous chemical storage; 
r.  A scale shall be shown with the dimensions: as determined by the city manager; 
s.  The location of any on-site items (kiosks, sanitation containers, drop boxes, etc.); 
t.  The location and type of all existing and proposed screening; 
u.  The required landscape areas; and 
v.  Any additional information as deemed necessary to adequately evaluate the site or development plan. 
(2)  Screening of mechanical equipment. Mechanical and heating and air conditioning equipment in multi-family uses shall be screened from view from the public right-of-way and from adjacent residential properties. 
(3)  Lighting. The lighting for the subject property will be constructed in conformance with section 77-73. 
(g)  Site circulation and parking. The following site circulation and parking information shall be included on the site plan: 
(1)  The drive approach dimensions and radii; 
(2)  The delineation and width of internal circulation roadways; 
(3)  The distances between driveways and intersecting streets; 
(4)  The number of required parking spaces and number of parking spaces provided, including handicapped parking spaces; 
(5)  The parking dimensions; 
(6)  The stacking spaces and drive-through lane location; 
(7)  The location of curb stops relative to front of parking stall. (Note: Wheel stops are not permitted in lieu of curbs); 
(8)  The handicapped ramps (required at all intersections); 
(9)  The building entrances; 
(10)  The sidewalk dimensions; 
(11)  The fire lanes meeting fire code standards; 
(12)  The location and dimension of delivery truck docks; 
(13)  The location and dimension of loading spaces; 
(14)  The location of bay doors; 
(15)  The sanitation container locations; 
(16)  The medians, islands, barriers, and channelization; 
(17)  The width of adjacent streets, alleys, or other access abutting property; 
(18)  The length, width, and taper of turn bays; 
(19)  The directional signage and directional arrows for one-way traffic driveways; 
(h)  Utility plan. A utility plan shall be included on a separate drawing sheet(s) from the site plan, and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The existing and proposed water mains (include size and valve locations); 
(2)  The water meter size and location; 
(3)  The existing and proposed sewer mains (include size, manholes and cleanout); 
(4)  The sewer service size (provide cleanout at property line); 
(5)  The existing and proposed utility easements including the associated utility line (public or private) and its size; 
(6)  The existing and proposed fire hydrants (including any nearby off-site hydrants); 
(7)  The existing and proposed fire lines, fire sprinkler connections, and appurtenances; 
(8)  The location and size of irrigation meters; 
(9)  The location and size of grease and sand traps; 
(10)  The location and size of sampling pits; and, 
(11)  The location and type of pretreatment. 
(i)  Drainage plan. A drainage plan shall be included on a separate drawing sheet(s) from the site plan, and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The existing and proposed elevation at critical points; 
(2)  The drainage area map (if site is over one acre); 
(3)  The on-site collection system, including stormwater detention areas and detention ponds; 
(4)  The 100-year flood elevation (if in floodprone area), and erosion hazard setback easement; 
(5)  The existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals; 
(6)  The existing and proposed drainage structures (include size and type); 
(7)  The existing and proposed culverts (use six-to-one sloped headwall); and 
(8)  The direction of surface drainage (must be discharged into existing waterway or public right-of-way). 
(j)  Landscape plan. A detailed landscape plan in conformance with this Code shall be submitted along with the site plan. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect, landscape contractor, or landscape designer. Landscape plans shall include all information as listed in [this chapter]. 
(k)  Attributes in consideration. City council, planning and zoning commission, and staff consideration shall include paving and layout of streets, alleys and sidewalks, means of ingress and egress, provisions for drainage and utilities, parking spaces, protective screening and open spaces, as well as areas designated for landscaping, and any other aspect deemed necessary to consider in the interest of promoting the public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of the city. 
(l)  Additional information. If, during the course of considering the site plan or landscape plan, the planning and zoning commission is of the opinion that a proper recommendation or determination cannot be made without additional information, the planning and zoning commission is authorized to request that the applicant submit said information and is further authorized to withhold action on the site plan until the submission of the additional information for the planning and zoning commission's consideration. 
(m)  Expiration. A site plan shall expire two years after its approval, if no building permits have been issued for the site, or if a building permit has been issued but has subsequently lapsed. Site plans submitted for a planned development or specific use permit shall not expire. 
(n)  Approval required. A building permit shall not be issued prior to the approval of the site plan by the city council, planning and zoning commission and/or city manager, as appropriate. No building permit shall be issued except in compliance with the approved site plan, including all conditions of approval. 
(o)  Inspections, revisions, and continued compliance. During construction and upon completion, the project will be inspected to ensure that the approved site plan has been followed: 
(1)  In the event that changes to the approved site plan are proposed, the director of planning shall have the authority to require that a revised site plan be submitted to the city for review and approval; 
(2)  It is recognized that final architectural and engineering design may necessitate some judgment in the determination of conformance to an approved site plan. The city manager shall have the authority to interpret conformance to an approved site plan; provided that such interpretations do not materially affect access, circulation, general building location on the site, or any conditions specifically attached as part of a planning and zoning commission or city council approval. The city manager shall only approve minor changes, which substantially conform to the approved site plan, and to all applicable city regulations, such as: 
a.  Minor dimension and location adjustments; 
b.  Minor changes in the number of parking spaces provided that minimum parking requirements are met; 
c.  Adjustments to sanitation container location; 
d.  Minor revisions to approved elevations; and 
e.  Substitution of similar materials on an approved landscape plan. 
(3)  The city manager may not approve the following types of revisions: 
a.  Major changes to type of screening materials; 
b.  Significant alterations to the building footprint; 
c.  Specific conditions of approval; and 
d.  Any changes that may negatively impact adjacent properties. 
(4)  If, in the judgment of the city manager, the proposed revisions exceed staff's approval authority, the revised site plan shall be forwarded to the planning and zoning commission for consideration according to the procedures for site plan approval. If proposed revisions to the site plan have not been approved by the city manager within 30 days of their final submission, they shall be scheduled for consideration by the planning and zoning commission upon request by the applicant. 
(5)  A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the final inspection shows that the project has been completed in accordance with the approved site plan. 
(6)  The final site plan and landscape plan shall be accompanied by a digital copy for permanent record. 
(7)  Maintenance of the property in conformance with the approved site plan shall thereafter be a condition of a valid certificate of occupancy. Failure to maintain the property in conformance with an approved site plan shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(q)  Phasing plan. To assist in process planning or site plans to be constructed in phases, the director of planning may request a phasing plan for the development, to ensure adequate site access, circulation, parking, sanitation containers, utilities, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-84. - Amendments. 
At any time following the approval of a concept plan, preliminary site plan, adopted development plan, or site plan and before the lapse of such approval, the property owner(s) may request an amendment. Amendments shall be classified as major and minor. Minor amendments shall include corrections of distances and dimensions, adjustments of building configuration and placement, realignment of drives and aisles, layout of parking, adjustments to open space, landscaping, and screening, changes to utilities and service locations which do not substantially change the original plan. Minor phasing for adopted development plans are permitted only the purpose of adding an adjacent residential or vertically mixed-use building into the current phase. Amendments to previously approved storm water conservation areas, increases in building height and/or building proximity to an adjacent offsite residential use, and all other amendments shall be considered major amendments and may be considered by the planning and zoning commission at a public meeting in accordance with the same procedures and requirements for the approval of a plan. The city manager may approve or disapprove a minor amendment. Disapproval may be appealed to the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-85. - Extension and reinstatement procedure. 
(a)  Sixty days prior to or following the lapse of approval for a concept plan, preliminary site plan, or site plan as provided in these regulations, the property owner may petition the planning and zoning commission to extend or reinstate the approval. Such petition shall be considered at a public meeting of the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  In determining whether to grant such request, the planning and zoning commission shall take into account the reasons for lapse, the ability of the property owner to comply with any conditions attached to the original approval, and the extent to which newly adopted regulations shall apply to the plan. The planning and zoning commission shall extend or reinstate the plan, or deny the request, in which instance the property owner must submit a new application for approval. 
(c)  The planning and zoning commission may extend or reinstate the approval subject to additional conditions based upon newly enacted regulations or such as are necessary to as-sure compliance with the original conditions of approval. The planning and zoning commission may also specify a shorter time for lapse of the extended or reinstated plan than is applicable to original approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-86. - Revocation of approval. 
The city council or the planning and zoning commission may revoke approval of a concept plan, preliminary site plan, or site plan if it determines that the conditions of the approval have not been met or if the plan contains, or is based upon, incorrect information which affects a significant health or safety interest. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-87. - Appeals. 
The decision of the planning and zoning commission to approve or deny a concept plan, preliminary site plan, and site plan shall be final and binding unless an appeal of the decision is made to the city council. The applicant, city manager, or two members of city council may appeal the decision of the commission with regard to a plan by filing a notice of appeal in the office of the city manager, no later than ten days after the date on which the commission notifies the applicant of its decision. Such notification may take place by means of an oral ruling by the commission at a public meeting. Written notice of any appeal shall be sent to the property owner. The notice of appeal shall set forth in clear and concise fashion the basis for the appeal. The city council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than 45 days after the date on which the notice of appeal is filed. The city council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the commission and may, where appropriate, remand the plan to the commission for further proceedings consistent with city council's decision. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-88. - Additional development and redevelopment. 
Following the completion of improvements shown on an approved site plan, additional development, site modifications, or redevelopment of the site shall be permitted subject to the approval of a revised site plan. Minor expansions and redevelopment may be approved by the city manager under the terms of section 77-84. All other expansions or redevelopment shall require submittal of a revised site plan and the approval of the planning and zoning commission under the requirements and procedures then in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-89, 77-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 77-91. - Penalty for violations. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this chapter shall be subject to the same penalty as provided for in this chapter, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalty provided for in subsection (a), the right is hereby conferred and extended upon any property owner owning a property in any district, where such property owner may be affected or invaded by a violation of the terms of the article, to bring suit in such court or courts having jurisdiction thereof and obtain such remedies as may be available at law and equity in the protection of the rights of such property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-92. - Preserving rights in pending litigation and violations under existing ordinances. 
By the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless such use falls specifically within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this chapter that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time the zoning ordinance, as codified in this chapter, was adopted, shall be discharged or affected. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-93. - Severability. 
It is the intention of the city council that this chapter and every provision thereof shall be considered severable and the validity or partial invalidity of any section, clause, or provision of this chapter shall not affect the validity of any other portion of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Sec. 77-94. - Effective date. 
The ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall become effective on the 8 th day of May 2018, after publication of the caption, as the law in such cases provides. 
(Ord. No. 2018-0508-001, § 3, 5-8-2018)  
Appendix A - MASTER FEE SCHEDULE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Animal registration, impoundment, and disposal fees. 
Metal Tag Registration 
Unaltered Dog or Cat 	$20.00 yearly (3.106 C) 
Altered Dog or Cat 	$15.00 yearly (3.106 C) 
Microchip Registration 
Unaltered Dog or Cat 	$45.00 good for life of animal 
Altered Dog or Cat 	$40.00 for 1 st animal and $35.00 for each altered animal after that providing the additional animals are owned by the same individual 
Impoundment for Dogs and Cats 	$20.00 for first day; $15.00 for each additional day or portion of day (3.109 A, B) 
Release of dog or cat for disposal 	$25.00 per animal (3.109.1) 
 
(Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 17; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 17), 10-13-2015)  
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRICITY, WATER, SEWER, AND REFUSE 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Water and electrical service initiation fees; miscellaneous services. 
Electric and Water Service 	Deposits 
Transfer of Service Address 	$30.00 each 
Electric 
Service Connect Fee 	$30.00 
Homeowner Deposit 	$150.00 
Renter Deposit 	$200.00 
Temporary Service for Construction 	$150.00 minimum or 100% of the cost of installation and retirement whichever is more 
Service Disconnect/Reconnect Fee (during regular business hours) 	$30.00 
Service Disconnect/Reconnect Fee (after business hours) 	$45.00 
Security Light per month 	$12.00 
Water 
Service Connect Fee 	$30.00 
Homeowner Deposit 	$100.00 
Renter Deposit 	$150.00 
Temporary Service for Property Clean Up 	$27.50 for a period up to 
7 days 
Miscellaneous Water and Electric Services 	Deposits 
Meter Checks 	$35.00 
Reconnection 	$30.00 during business hours; $40.00 for other than business hours 
Reconnection following meter tampering 	$100.00 during business hours 
Reconnect Fee following rationing violations 	$100.00 plus any additional costs to City 
 
(Ord. No. O-2014-0408-002, § 1, 4-8-2014; Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 2; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 2), 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 2-2. - Water service fees. 
Inside City Limits 
Meter Charge (first 1,000 gallons) 	Rate 
3/4 Inch or Less 	$26.19 
1 Inch 	$36.88 
1 1/2 Inch 	$52.91 
2 Inch 	$74.29 
3 Inch 	$216.80 
4 Inch 	$409.19 
6 Inch 	$516.07 
Volumetric Charge 	Rate 
1,001 to 10,000 Gallons 	6.74 
10,001 to 20,000 Gallons 	8.59 
In Excess of 20,000 Gallons 	10.42 

Outside City Limits Customers 
Meter Charge (first 1,000 gallons) 	Rate 
3/4 Inch or Less 	$34.05 
1 Inch 	$47.94 
1 1/2 Inch 	$68.78 
2 Inch 	$96.58 
3 Inch 	$281.84 
4 Inch 	$531.95 
6 Inch 	$670.89 
Volumetric Charge 	Rate 
1,001 to 10,000 Gallons 	$8.76 
10,001 to 20,000 Gallons 	$11.17 
In Excess of 20,000 Gallons 	$13.55 
 
(Ord. No. O-2011-1025-003, § 2, 10-25-2011; Ord. No. O-2013-0312-001, § 2, 3-12-201; Ord. No. O-2013-1008-004, § 2, 10-8-2013; Ord. No. O-2014-0729-002, § 1, 7-29-2014; Ord. No. O-2014-1014-002, § 1, 10-14-2014; Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 3; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 3), 10-13-2015; Ord. No. O-2017-1010-003, § 1, 10-10-2017; Ord. No. O-2018-0925-001, § 1, 9-25-2018; Ord. No. O-2019-0910-001, § 1, 9-10-2019)  
Sec. 2-3. - Sewer service fees. 
SEWER SERVICE 
Inside City Limits Residential: 
Minimum monthly charge for first 1,000 gallons water consumption 	$39.50 
Volumetric rate using winter averaging Dec/Jan/Feb 1,000 gallons < water consumption <=15,000 gallons 	$9.68/1,000 gallon 
Maximum volumetric charge using winter averaging water consumption >15,000 gallons 	$175.02 
Volumetric rate for customers without winter averaging 1,000 gallons < water consumption <= 7,000 	$9.68 / 1,000 gallon 
Maximum volumetric charge without winter averaging water consumption >7,000 gallons 	$97.58 
Inside City Limits Commercial: 
Minimum monthly charge for first 1,000 gallons water consumption 	$39.50 
Volumetric charge 1,000 gallons<water consumption 	$9.68 / 1,000 gallon 
Outside City Limits Residential: 
Minimum monthly charge for first 1,000 gallons water consumption 	$35.73 
Volumetric rate using winter averaging Dec/Jan/Feb 1,000 gallons <water consumption<=15,000 gallons 	$11.13 / 1,000 gallon 
Maximum volumetric charge using winter averaging water consumption >15,000 gallons 	$210.02 
Volumetric rate for customers without winter averaging 1,000 <water consumption <=7,000 gallons 	$11.13 / 1,000 gallon 
Maximum volumetric charge without winter averaging water consumption >7,000 gallons 	$117.10 
Outside City Limits Commercial: 
Minimum monthly charge for first 1,000 gallons water consumption 	$35.73 
Volumetric rate 1,000 gallons <water consumption 	$11.13 / 1,000 gallon 
 
(Ord. No. O-2011-1025-003, § 3, 10-25-2011; Ord. No. O-2013-0312-001, § 3, 3-12-2013; Ord. No. O-2014-0923-003, § 1, 9-23-2014; Ord. of 4-22-2015, §§ 4, 5a; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, §§ 4, 5a), 10-13-2015; Ord. No. O-2019-0910-002, § 1, 9-10-2019)  
Sec. 2-4. - Water and sewer tap fees. 
WATER TAPS 
¾ inch 	$600.00 
1 inch 	$700.00 
2 inch 	$1,200.00 
Greater than 2 inch 	125% of materials cost plus $500.00 
SEWER TAPS 
4 inch 	$600.00 
6 inch 	$650.00 
Greater than 6 inch 	125% of materials cost plus $500.00 
 
(Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 5; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 5), 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 2-5. - Impact fees. 
Impact fees are determined by multiplying the number of service units in the proposed development by the impact fee per service unit amounts: Service unit equivalents. 
(1)  Impact fees to be collected on new developments record platted on or after October 1, 2013; and on new developments for which platting is not required. 
Meter 
Size 
(in inches) 	Maximum 
Continuous 
Operating 
Capacity (GPM) 	Service Unit 
Equivalent 	Water 
Impact Fee 	Wastewater 
Impact Fee 
¾" 	15 	1 	$787.00 	$2,507.00 
1" 	25 	1.67 	$1,314.00 	$4,187.00 
1½" 	50 	3.33 	$2,621.00 	$8,349.00 
2" 	80 	5.33 	$4,195.00 	$13,364.00 
3" 	160 	10.67 	$8,399.00 	$26,754.00 
4" 	250 	16.67 	$13,122.00 	$41,798.00 
6" 	500 	33.33 	$26,237.00 	$83,571.00 
 
(2)  Impact fees to be collected on new developments record platted on or after September 23, 2003, and before October 1, 2013, and not requiring a replat. 
Meter Size 	Service Unit 
Equivalent 	Water 
Impact Fee 	Wastewater 
Impact Fee 
¾" 	1.00 	$760.00 	$740.00 
1" 	1.67 	$1,269.00 	$1,236.00 
1½" 	3.33 	$2,531.00 	$2,464.00 
2" 	5.33 	$4,051.00 	$3,944.00 
3" 	10.00 	$7,600.00 	$7,400.00 
4" 	16.67 	$12,669.00 	$12,336.00 
6" 	33.33 	$25,331.00 	$24,664.00 
8" 	53.33 	$40,531.00 	$39,464.00 
10" 	76.67 	$58,269.00 	$56,736.00 
 
(Ord. No. O-2013-0910-005, § 7, 9-10-2013; Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 8; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 8), 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 2-6. - Refuse/garbage fees. 
REFUSE/GARBAGE
SERVICE 	MONTHLY 
FEE 
1X/Week 
Collection 	MONTHLY
FEE 
2X/Week 
Collection 	MONTHLY
FEE 
3X/Week 
Collection 	MONTHLY
FEE 
4X/Week 
Collection 
RESIDENTIAL 
First Polycart: 	$13.67 	
Additional Polycart 	$8.15 	
COMMERCIAL RATES 
First Polycart: 	$26.03 	
Additional Polycart 	$18.11 	
2 Yard Dumpster 	$65.27 	$105.97 	
3 Yard Dumpster 	$75.90 	$132.88 	
4 Yard Dumpster 	$88.23 	$161.43 	
6 Yard Dumpster 	$137.00 	$236.54 	$311.87 	$364.35 
8 Yard Dumpster 	$163.34 	$272.40 	$353.94 	$406.45 
Caster Set 	$5.50 	$5.50 	$5.50 	$5.50 
Locks 	$5.50 	$5.50 	$5.50 	$5.50 
 
COMMERCIAL SPECIAL SERVICES 
Extra Pick-up, 2 Yard Dumpster 	$37.60 
Extra Pick-up, 3 Yard Dumpster 	$46.85 
Extra Pick-up, 4 Yard Dumpster 	$56.09 
Extra Pick-up, 6 Yard Dumpster 	$67.83 
Extra Pick-up, 8 Yard Dumpster 	$79.58 
 
Note: Roll-off Compactors and Open Top Roll-off Containers will be billed by Refuse Provider but charges shall not exceed current charges shown below. 
ROLL OFF COMPACTORS 
28 Cubic Yard Per Haul (up to 4 tons payload) 	$539.50 
30 Cubic Yard Per Haul (up to 4 tons payload) 	$541.50 
35 Cubic Yard Per Haul (up to 4 tons payload) 	$574.00 
40 Cubic Yard Per Haul (up to 4 tons payload) 	$612.00 
42 Cubic Yard Per Haul (up to 4 tons payload) 	$614.00 
Trip Charge (Dry Run) - weekday 	$99.00 
Delivery - Weekday 	$99.00 
Compactor Rental Per Day 	$4.40 
 
OPEN TOP ROLL-OFF CONTAINERS 
20 Cubic Yard Per Haul (up to 4 tons payload 	$424.67 
30 Cubic Yard Per Haul (up to 4 tons payload) 	$496.50 
40 Cubic Yard Per Haul (up to 4 tons payload) 	$557.08 
Trip Charge (Dry Run) - weekday 	$99.00 
Delivery - Weekday 	$101.17 
Open Top Rental Per Day 	$4.40 
 
BUNDLED SPECIAL HAUL FEE 
2 Cubic Yard 	$45.50 
3 Cubic Yard 	$61.50 
4 Cubic Yard 	$81.55 
5 Cubic Yard 	$98.90 
6 Cubic Yard 	$117.60 
7 Cubic Yard 	$134.95 
8 Cubic Yard 	$153.65 
9 Cubic Yard 	$172.35 
10 Cubic Yard 	$191.05 
 
(Ord. No. O-2011-1107-002, § 6, 11-7-2011; Ord. No. O-2013-1203-001, §§ 1, 2, 12-3-2013; Ord. No. O-2014-0325-002, § 2, 3-25-2014; Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 1; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 1), 10-13-2015; Ord. No. O-2016-0927-002, § 6, 9-27-2016; Ord. No. O-2019-0910-003, § 2, 9-10-2019)  
Sec. 2-7. - Recycling fees. 
RECYCLING SERVICE 
Residential Recycling with Household Hazardous Waste (HHW) 	$6.22 per month 
Commercial Recycling 	$6.85 per month 
Drop-off recycling 	$1.00 per month 
Additional or Replacement Recycling Bins 	$100.00 
 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0612-001, § 1, 6-12-2012; Ord. No. O-2013-1203-001, § 3, 12-3-2013; Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 1; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 1), 10-13-2015; O-2018-0724-001, § 5, 7-24-2018; Ord. No. O-2019-0910-003, § 2, 9-10-2019)  
Sec. 2-8. - Electric service rates. 
	Amount 
Residential Rate (Schedule R) 	
Security Deposit 	$200.00 
Minimum monthly charge 	$6.75 
Energy Charge 	$0.1077 per kWh for all kWh 
Small Commercial Rate (Schedule SC) 	
Security Deposit 	$200.00 
Minimum monthly charge 	$15.00 
Energy Charge for 1 st 5,000 kWh or less 	$0.1110 per kWh 
Energy Charge greater than 5,000 kWh 	$0.0970 per kWh 
A Customer on this schedule whose demand exceeds 25 kW for any billing period shall be billed under Schedule MC for the next 12-month period beginning with the current month. 	
Medium Commercial Rate (Schedule MC) 	
Security Deposit 	$400.00 
Minimum monthly charge 	$40.00 
Demand Charge per kWh for all monthly billing demands greater than 25 kW 	$7.25 per kWh plus the Energy Charge immediately following 
Medium Commercial Rate (Schedule MC) 	
Energy Charge for 1 st 5,000 kWh or less 	$0.1010 per kWh 
Energy Charge for 5,001 kWh or more 	$0.0787 per kWh 
A Customer billed under this schedule for a period of 12 consecutive months without a demand in excess of 25 kW will be changed to Schedule SC on the first month succeeding such 12-month period. 	
A Customer on this schedule whose demand exceeds 100 kW for any billing period shall be billed under Schedule LC for the next 12-month period beginning with the current month. 	
Large Commercial Rate (Schedule LC) 	
Security Deposit 	$800.00 
Minimum monthly charge 	$86.00 
Demand Charge per kWh for all monthly billing demands for the 1 st 100 kW or less of monthly billing demand 	$7.00 per kW plus the following Energy Charge 
Demand Charge per kWh for all monthly billing demands for demands greater than 100 kW 	$5.70 per kW plus the following Energy Charge 
Energy Charge for all kWh 	$0.0627 per kWh 
 
The following provisions are applicable to ALL Schedules 
(R, SC, MC, LC) 	Amount 
Power cost adjustment. The monthly charges under this rate schedule shall be increased or decreased as necessary to reflect the application of a power cost adjustment calculated in accordance with Schedule PCA. 	
Tax adjustment. The above rate shall be subject to an increase or decrease in proportion to the amount of new taxes or increased taxes, levied or imposed or increased or decreased by law or articles which were not in effect on the effective date of the ordinance from which this schedule is derived, which the City may hereafter have to pay. 	
Distributed Generation Buy Back Rate. 	$0.03439 per kWh 
 
(Ord. No. O-2013-0108-004, § 1, 1-8-2013; Ord. No. O-2014-0408-002, § 2, 4-8-2014; Ord. No. O-2014-0527-002, § 1, 5-27-2014; Ord. of 4-22-2015, §§ 2(A), 6, 7; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, §§ 2A, 6, 7), 10-13-2015; Ord. No. O-2017-0328-001, § 2, 3-28-2017)  
Sec. 2-9. - Farmersville utilities average billing and payment plan. 
An average utility billing and payment option is available to qualifying residential customers, only, who desire to avoid monthly fluctuations in their utility billings due to seasonal changes; and, who desire to pay the average cost of their annual usage of utilities over a one-year period in 12 equal monthly payments. See Code section 74-95 for program details. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-0426-003, § 2, 5-10-2016)  
Sec. 2-10. - Average billing and payment plan for city utilities. 
An average utility billing and payment option is available to qualifying residential customers, only, who desire to avoid monthly fluctuations in their utility billings due to seasonal changes; and, who desire to pay the average cost of their annual usage of utilities over a one-year period in 12 equal monthly payments. See Code section 74-95 for program details. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-0510-002, § 2, 5-10-2016)  
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING AND INSPECTION 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Residential, commercial and miscellaneous building permit fees. 
BUILDING PERMITTING 
Pre-Permit Plan Review (Requires drawing with dimensions of original structure with location and dimensions of structure and/or addition) 	$400.00 minimal under 2,500 square feet. Residential projects over 2,500 square feet and all commercial projects will require to pay a $1,000.00 Retainer Fee to pay for engineering, attorney fees and other subcontracted costs, if necessary, as pass through fees. In the event costs exceed the initial $1,000.00 Retainer Fee, the applicant will be required to pay another $1,000.00 Retainer Fee until all costs have been paid. Any fees remaining from the Retainer Fee will be refunded to the applicant after completion of the Building Permit process. 
Pre-Permit Plan Review — Additions or alterations to residence 	$25.00 per room, minimum $400.00 
RESIDENTIAL PERMITTING 
Single Family — New Construction 	$675.00 
Multi Family — New Construction 	$350.00 per unit 
Additions or alterations to a residence 	$0.90 per sq. ft. 
Re-inspect (after initial inspection) 	$30.00 
Plumbing re-inspect 	$100.00 
COMMERCIAL PERMITTING 
Single Structure — New Construction 	$700.00 
Multiple unit — New Construction 	$350.00 per unit 
COMMERCIAL ADDITIONS OR ALTERATIONS 
(Based on Total Valuation of Project) 
Ordinance #2009-12 (08/11/09) 
$1.00 to $500.00 	$23.50 
$501.00 to $2,000.00 	$23.50 for the first $500.00 plus $3.05 for each additional $100.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.00 
$2,001.00 to $25,000.00 	$69.25 for the first $2,000.00 plus $14.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.00 
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 	$391.25 for the first $25,000.00 plus $10.10 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00 
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 	$643.75 for the first $50,000.00 plus $7.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00 
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00 	$993.75 for the first $100,000.00 plus $5.60 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00 
$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 	$3,233.75 for the first $500,000.00 plus $4.75 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00 
$1,000,001.00 and up 	$5,608.75 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $3.15 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof 
Re-inspect (after initial inspection) 	$50.00 
Plumbing re-inspect) 	$100.00 
MISCELLANEOUS PERMIT FEES 
Irrigation system permit 	$100.00 + re-inspect if applicable 
New fence permit 	$30.00 
Accessory Structure, over 150 (storage bldg, garage, etc) 	$60.00 + $0.15 per sq. ft. 
Accessory Structure, under 150 sq feet 	$60.00 
Open Air Metal Carports 	$30.00 
Driveway Curb Cuts (for renovations only) 	$30.00 
Swimming Pool — In ground 	$100.00 + fence, plumbing & electrical permits if applicable 
Swimming Pool — In Ground Plan Review 	$75.00 
Swimming Pool — Above ground 	$30.00 + fence, plumbing & electrical permits if applicable 
Spa/Hot Tub 	$30.00 
Certificate of Occupancy 	$194.50 
 
(Ord. No. O-2013-0312-001, § 5, 3-12-2013; Ord. No. O-2015-0324-001, § I, 3-24-2015; Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 9; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 9), 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 3-2. - Fire code plan review services; fire alarms and sprinkler systems. 
Amount 	Fee 
	
Up to $250,000.00 	$ 525.00 
$251,000.00 to $500,000.00 	$ 895.00 
$501,000.00 to $1,000,000.00 	$1,160.00 
$1,001,000.00 to $3,000,000.00 	$1,680.00 
$3,001,000.00 to $6,000,000.00 	$2,525.00 
$6,000,000.00 and up 	$2,525.00 
plus $.30 for each additional $1,000.00 of value 
  
Sec. 3-3. - Fire code inspection services; fire alarms and sprinkler systems. 
FIRE CODE INSPECTION SERVICES (Fire Alarms and Sprinkler Systems) 
Up to $250,000.00 	$790.00 
$251,000.00 to $500,000.00 	$1,100.00 
$501,000.00 to $1,000,000.00 	$1,420.00 
$1,001,000.00 to $3,000,000.00 	$2,000.00 
$3,001,000.00 to $6,000,000.00 	$3,000.00 
$6,000,000.00 and up 	$3,000.00 plus $0.30 for each additional $1,000.00 
 
Valuation is based on construction valuation for project 
(Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 9(a); Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 9a), 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 3-4. - Code enforcement inspection fees. 
INSPECTION
Mechanical, Plumbing & Gas Systems 
New Construction (including new additions to existing structure) Residential or Commercial 	$300.00 plus $0.02 per square foot. Covers 3 initial inspections — Rough, Top-out & Final. Additional inspections $100.00 each occurrence 
Remodel of existing structure (replacing existing lines, etc) Residential or Commercial 	$30.00 plus $0.02 per square foot of additional or altered structure Covers one inspection Additional inspections $30.00 each occurrence 
Backflow Inspections (new or existing) 	$30.00 per inspection or re-inspection 
INSPECTION
Electrical Systems and HVAC 
Residential, new construction 	$60.00 plus $0.03 per square foot 
Residential, Additions or Alterations 	$60.00 plus $0.03 per square foot of additional structure or altered area 
Residential re-inspections 	$30.00 
Commercial, new construction 	$100.00 plus $0.05 per square foot 
Commercial, Additions or Alterations 	$100.00 plus $0.05 per square foot of additional structure or altered area 
Commercial re-inspections 	$50.00 
 
(Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 10; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 10), 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 3-5. - Zoning and rezoning applications, specific use permits, and appeals to board of adjustment. 
APPLICATION OR PERMIT 
Zoning Application 	Actual cost of publication, actual cost of notifications + administrative fee based on time for processing 
Rezoning Applications; Specific Use Permit Applications; Appeals to Board of Adjustment 	Actual cost of publication, actual cost of notifications + administrative fee based on time for processing 
Administrative Service — Cost per hourly rate 	$45.00 
 
(Ord. No. O-2013-0312-001, § 1, 3-12-2013; Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 14; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 14), 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 3-6. - Subdivision application. 
APPLICATION 
Retainer Fee 	All plats will require the applicant to pay a $1,000.00 Retainer Fee to pay for engineering, attorney fees and other subcontracted costs, if necessary, as pass through fees. In the event costs exceed the initial $1,000.00 Retainer Fee, the applicant will be required to pay another $1,000.00 Retainer Fee until all costs have been paid. Any fees remaining from the Retainer Fee will be refunded to the applicant after completion of the Building Permit process. 
Preliminary Plat Application 	$400.00 plus $2.00 per lot in subdivision 
Final Plat Applications 	$400.00 plus $3.00 per lot in the subdivision or $7.00 per acre, whichever is greater 
Review of Plat Applications following initial application 	$200.00 
Simple Subdivision 	$250.00 plus $5.00 per lot 
 
(Ord. No. O-2013-0723-002, § 2, 7-23-2013; Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 15; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 15), 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 3-7. - Administrative fees. 
Administrative Service 	Fee 
Cost per hourly rate 	$45.00 
 
(Ord. No. O-2013-0312-001, § 4, 3-12-2013)  
Sec. 3-8. - Food establishment inspection and permit fees. 
Food Establishment Inspection and Permit Fees 
Food Establishment Permit—Grocery 	$400.00 
Food Establishment Permit—Restaurant 	$300.00 
Food Establishment Permit—Convenience Store 	$250.00 
Food Establishment Permit—To-Go 	$250.00 
Plan Review 	$200.00 
Mobile Food Establishment Permit 	$150.00 
Central Preparation Facility Permit 	$500.00 
Concession Stand 	$100.00 
Temporary Health Permit 	$75.00 
Farmers Market Temporary Permit 	$100.00 
Re-inspection 	$75.00 
 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1210-001, § 3, 12-10-2019)  
ARTICLE IV. - RENTALS; TOWING AND STORAGE; SIGNS 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Apparatus, tool, equipment, and material rentals. 
(a)  Apparatus. 
Unit of Measure (per item) 	Apparatus 	Price per Hour 
Engine 	Class A engine 	$520.00 
Aerial 	Aerial 	$520.00 
Rescue Unit 	Rescue (heavy) 	$620.00 
Brush Unit 	Brush Truck 	$420.00 
Command Unit 	Command car/truck 	$220.00 
PPV Fan 	PPV fan 	$55.00 
Generator 	Portable Generator 	$55.00 
Generator 	Generator 	$55.00 
Saw 	Chain Saw 	$45.00 
Pump 	Portable pump 	$95.00 
Pump 	Float pump 	$65.00 
 
(b)  Fire Equipment. 
Tool 	Price 	Unit of measurement 
Foam nozzle 	$55.00 	Per incident 
Foam eductor 	$50.00 	Per incident 
AFFF foam 	$40.00 	Per gallon 
Class A foam 	$25.00 	Per gallon 
Piercing nozzle 	$40.00 	Per incident 
MS fog nozzle 	$55.00 	Per incident 
M/S straight bore nozzle 	$30.00 	Per incident 
Salvage cover 	$28.00 	Each used 
SCBA pack 	$85.00 	Each used 
Hall runner 	$18.00 	Per incident 
Portable tank 	$75.00 	Per incident 
Water extinguisher 	$22.00 	Per incident 
Dry chemical extinguisher 	$45.00 	Per incident 
CO 2 extinguisher 	$45.00 	Per incident 
Scene lights 	$22.00 	Each used 
Water vests 	$30.00 	Each used 
Thermal imaging camera 	$75.00 	Per incident 
Heat detection gun 	$75.00 	Per incident 
Sawzall 	$55.00 	Per incident 
 
(c)  Hazardous material equipment. 
Supplies/Service 	Price 	Unit of Measurement 
Absorbent 	$17.00 	Per bag 
Absorbent booms 	$40.00 	Each used 
Topsol 	$35.00 	Each used 
Disposable coveralls 	$30.00 	Each used 
Neoprene gloves 	$20.00 	Each used 
Latex gloves 	$6.00 	Each used 
Overboots 	$25.00 	Each used 
Disposable goggles 	$15.00 	Each used 
Gas plug kit 	$50.00 	Each used 
Plug and dike 	$65.00 	Each used 
Drum liners 	$10.00 	Each used 
Barricade tape 	$22.00 	Each used 
Poly sheeting 	$55.00 	Each used 
Removal of hazardous material 	$150.00 	Per incident 
Disposal of hazardous material 	$150.00 	Per incident 
Gas multimeter 	$65.00 	Per incident 
CO 2 meter 	$65.00 	Per incident 
Terrazyme 	$70.00 	Each used 
Microblaze 	$10.00 	Per quart 
Microbllaze [Microblaze] 	$150.00 	Per five gallons 
 
(d)  Rescue equipment. 
Tool 	Price 	Unit of Measurement 
Spreaders 	$250.00 	Per incident 
Cutters 	$250.00 	Per incident 
Rams 	$250.00 	Per incident 
Air bags 	$250.00 	Per incident 
K-12 saw 	$55.00 	Per incident 
Target saw 	$55.00 	Per incident 
Ajax tool 	$25.00 	Per incident 
K-tool 	$25.00 	Per incident 
Windshield tool 	$15.00 	Per incident 
Rescue blanket 	$32.00 	Each used 
Rope 	$25.00 	Each used 
 
All items are to be billed on an hourly basis. The minimum usage charge for any item on the list is one hour, and for any additional hours or portion thereof, the charge will be prorated accordingly. 
(e)  Collision investigation fee. A collision investigation fee of $275.00 is to be charged in responses where no mitigation services, debris removal, or rescue services are performed. 
(Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 22; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 22), 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 4-2. - Facility rentals. 
FACILITY 
Onion Shed 	$50.00 per event plus $20.00 refundable deposit 
Civic Center 
Full rent and deposits are due at the time of the reservation.
Instructional or commercial service providers: fee negotiable based on percentage of revenue.
Deposits are not refundable if post-rental clean-up efforts are required 	$37.50 per hour up to 4 hours plus $25.00 refundable cleaning deposit. (Full rent and deposit is due at the time of reservation. — No Exceptions) 
	$300.00 for event lasting more than 4 hours plus $200.00 refundable cleaning deposit. (Full rent and deposit is due at the time of reservation. — No Exceptions) Deposits are not refundable if post-rental clean-up efforts are required. 
	Civic organizations rent the Civic Center for free; however, they are responsible for any additional costs associated with post-rental clean-up efforts paid for by the City should they be necessary. 
Spain Athletic Complex 	Applicable to all non-Little League or FISD events 
$250.00 Deposit: All fees must be paid at the time the reservation is made or at least two weeks prior to the reserved date 	Refundable if inspection by City Manager determines that the fields and restrooms are clean and in good working order. 
Hourly Rate 	Night Time with lights — $18.75 per hour per field 
Tournament Fees: 	$40.00 per team, per each day of the tournament 
($40.00 × 8 teams × 2 days = $640.00) 
Plus $250.00 refundable deposit 
Non-Tournament Events: 	Fields #1 and/or #2: 
$150.00 per field, per day; Plus $250.00 refundable deposit 
All Other Fields: $100.00 per day per field; Plus $250.00 refundable deposit 
 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0612-001, § 2, 6-12-2012; Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 16; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 16), 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 4-3. - Towing and storage fees. 
Service 
Vehicle Towing and impoundment 	$132.50 
Daily storage fee 	$15.00 
 
(Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 21; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 21), 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 4-4. - Sign permit fees. 
PERMIT
Based on Square Footage of Sign 
0 — 16 square feet 	$25.00 
17 — 64 square feet 	$50.00 
65 — 100 square feet 	$75.00 
101 — 200 square feet 	$100.00 
Appeal fee 	$25.00 
Investigation fee 	Equal to permit fee 
Impound fee 	Equal to permit fee 
 
(Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 12; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 12), 10-13-2015)  
ARTICLE V. - EXCAVATION; MOVING; BURNING 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Excavation or cutting of street permit. 
EXCAVATION PERMIT 
Any or cutting of street 	$200.00 
 
(Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 11; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 11), 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 5-2. - Moving building permit. 
PERMIT 
Moving of buildings from, into, or within City 	$50.00 
Certificate of Occupancy 	$194.50 
 
(Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 13; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 13), 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 5-3. - Burn permits. 
BURN PERMIT 
Burn Permits — City does not allow burning within the Corporate Limits of the City of Farmersville 	No permits are issued. 
 
(Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 18; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 18), 10-13-2015)  
ARTICLE VI. - BUSINESS, COMMERCE, AND GOVERNMENT 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Business and commerce permits and licenses. 
Service 
Permit application for peddling, soliciting, itinerant merchants 	$50.00 for initial applicant; $10.00 for each additional covered person except for non-profit organizations (5.101.1, B) 
Garage Sale Permit 	$7.00 each (only 4 per year) 
Annual license application for Sexually Oriented Business 	$250.00 (5.105.5) 
Billiard Table and coin operated gaming machines license 	25% of State occupation tax (currently set at $60.00), annually (5.108.11 A) 
Release of sealed coin operated gaming machines 	$5.00 (5.108.11B) 
Application for circus license 	$50.00 (6.109.5) 
 
(Ord. No. O-2013-1008-002, § 3, 10-8-2013; Ord. No. O-2014-1014-001, § 3, 10-14-2014; Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 20; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 20), 10-13-2015)  
ARTICLE VII. - MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Miscellaneous fees. 
SERVICES 
Credit Card Transaction Fees 	$0.00 
Subdivision Ordinance 	$10.00 
Private Sewer Facilities Ordinance 	$10.00 
Zoning Ordinance 	$10.00 
Letter size document (8.5" × 11" or smaller) 	$0.10 black and white $0.50 color 
Legal size document (8.5" × 14") 	$0.20 black and white $1.00 color 
Large size document (11" × 17") 	$0.50 black and white $2.50 color 
Copies for Medicare or Social Security purposes 	No charge for senior citizens 
Maps 	200% of the current reproduction cost 
Insufficient Funds Checks 	$25.00 
Certified Copies 	$2.00 per document or portion of document 
Copy for Public Information Requests 	$2.00 for first page of each document and $0.10 per page thereafter 
Copy or fax of customer's personal document(s) 	$1.25 per side 
Sale of rock per bucket (limit of 3 front end load buckets per resident per month) 	$50.00 
Sale of sand per bucket (limit of 3 front end load buckets per resident per month) 	$30.00 
Administrative Service — Cost per hourly rate 	$45.00 
 
(Ord. No. O-2012-0424-002, § 1, 4-24-2012; Ord. No. O-2012-0612-001, § 3, 6-12-2012; Ord. of 4-22-2015, § 19; Ord. No. O-2015-1013-001, § 1(Exh. A, § 19), 10-13-2015) 
